


















































June 26, 1987 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 26, 1987 
 

777 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present a petition to the Assembly from several hundred 
residents of Saskatchewan whose names I will not seek to read. 
These petitioners are urging the government to retain the 
children’s dental program, and not to destroy it. These 
petitioners are from a number of communities, including 
Raymore, Semans, Saskatoon, Regina, Nipawin, and Dalmeny. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly from several hundred 
Saskatchewan residents. These petitioners are urging that the 
children’s dental plan be retained, and not destroyed. These 
petitioners are from several communities, including Moose Jaw, 
Fort Qu’Appelle, Saskatoon, Rosthern, Paradise Hill, 
Lloydminster, and Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I rise 
also pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly 
from several hundred residents of Saskatchewan. The petition 
urges the Saskatchewan government not to eliminate the 
Saskatchewan dental health plan in this province. The petition 
says that the plan was an outstanding initiative in preventive 
health care, and the petition urges that the plan be reinstated, 
and that all workers who were fired under the plan be re-hired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I present these petitions from the communities of 
Regina, Saskatoon, Kamsack, Birch Hills, North Battleford, and 
Osler. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11 of the 
Rules (and Procedures) of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, I rise to present a petition, solemnly signed by 
hundreds of people, with regard to the Saskatchewan dental 
plan and asking the government to reconsider its position. The 
people that signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Outlook, Lumsden, Saskatoon, Swift Current, 
Regina, Cupar, and Pilot Butte. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition on behalf of several 
hundred Saskatchewan residents who urge that the dental plan 
be retained, and not destroyed. These petitioners are from a 
number of communities, including Regina, Earl Grey, Southey, 
Duval, Bulyea, Govan, Craven, Semans, and Regina. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly by residents of 
Saskatchewan, urging that the children’s dental program be 
retained, and not be destroyed. These petitioners are from 
Wilkie, Weyburn, Saskatoon, Regina, Kindersley, Pense, Prince 
Albert, Saskatoon, Tribune, Weyburn, Regina, Estevan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, wish to rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly with 
respect to the dental plan, the children’s dental plan. This 
petition is also signed by several hundred Saskatchewan people, 
urging the government to retain the dental plan, and it’s signed 
by petitioners from Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Kelvington, 
Preeceville, Indian Head, and Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to this Assembly from 
several hundred very concerned residents of Saskatchewan, and 
these petitioners are urging that the children’s dental plan be 
retained and not destroyed. These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are 
from the communities of Weyburn, Regina, White City, and 
Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present to the legislature a petition 
concerning the children’s dental program. These petitioners are 
urging the government that the dental plan not be destroyed, but 
it be retained. These petitioners are from several communities 
in Saskatchewan. They are from Milestone, Regina, Moose 
Jaw, and Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly from several hundred 
residents of Saskatchewan, urging that the children’s dental 
plan be retained. These petitioners are from several 
communities, including Willowbrook, Stoughton, Truax, Fort 
Qu’Appelle, and Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly from 
several hundreds of people, residents of Saskatchewan. These 
petitioners are urging that the children’s dental plan be 
reinstated, and not destroyed. These petitioners are from several 
communities, including Balcarres, Weyburn, Raymore, Cut 
Knife, Regina, Quinton, Prince Albert, Christopher Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

778 
 

present a petition to the Assembly from several hundred 
residents of Saskatchewan. These petitioners are urging that the 
children’s dental plan be retained, and not destroyed. These 
petitioners are from several communities, including Regina, 
Melville, Wynyard, Esterhazy, Kamsack, Clavet, Sedley, 
Whitewood, Moosomin, Kipling, Lumsden, Gray, Southey, 
Markinch, Weyburn, Wolseley, Yorkton, Milestone, Buchanan, 
Ituna, Riceton, and Cupar, among others, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to this Legislative Assembly from several 
hundred residents of Saskatchewan. These petitioners are 
urging that the children’s dental plan be retained, and not 
destroyed, and that children should continue to have access to 
dental services in Saskatchewan schools. These petitioners are 
from several communities, including Weyburn, and Pilot Butte, 
Regina, Lang, McLean, Qu’Appelle, Rouleau, Balgonie, Moose 
Jaw, Parkbeg, Mortlach, Pasqua, Fort Qu’Appelle, Yellow 
Grass, Chaplin, Yorkton, Melville, Gray, Ogema, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly from several 
hundred residents of Saskatchewan. These petitioners are 
urging that the children’s dental plan be retained, and not 
destroyed. These petitioners are from several communities, 
including Lumsden, Fort Qu’Appelle, Kelliher, Regina, 
Weyburn, Albertville, and others. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise also pursuant 
to rule 11, and I’ve been asked to present a petition in the 
House today to the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
and legislature assembled. The petition of the undersigned 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 
that it is not in the public interest for the Government of 
Saskatchewan to eliminate the school-based Saskatchewan 
dental plan; that this program was a very good program that 
resulted in a great improvement in the dental health of 
Saskatchewan’s youth; that Saskatchewan dental plan should be 
reinstated; that the dismissed workers should be rehired, and the 
children should continue to have access to dental services in 
Saskatchewan schools. Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray 
that your hon. Assembly may be pleased to urge the 
government of Saskatchewan to keep the school-based dental 
plan, and as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been signed by several hundred residents 
from Fort Qu’Appelle, Southey, Cupar, Dysart, Regina, 
Melfort, and Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also am 
pleased to rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to the 
Assembly from several hundred residents of  

Saskatchewan. These petitioners are urging that the children’s 
dental plan be retained, and not destroyed. 
 
These petitioners are from several communities, including 
Davidson, Lang, Midale, Oungre, White City, Yorkton, Francis, 
Sedley, Lake Alma, Willowbrook, Theodore, Buchanan, 
Churchbridge, Regina, Yellow Grass, Sheho, Tuffnel, Rama, 
Foam Lake, Weyburn, Goodwater, Wynyard, Edenwold, 
Watson, Regina Beach, Prince Albert, Saltcoats, Pilot Butte, 
Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present a petition to this Assembly, a petition that 
asks this Assembly and of the government of this province to 
reinstate the Saskatchewan dental plan, to reinstate the workers 
that have been dismissed – working for that dental plan – in 
order that the children of this province should continue to have 
access to dental services in Saskatchewan schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from, among other places, 
residents from Wilcox, from Gray, from Milestone, from 
Pangman, from Maple Creek, from Estevan, and from Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, am proud to 
rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly 
from several hundred residents of Saskatchewan. These 
petitions also urge that the children’s dental plan be retained, 
and not destroyed. 
 
These petitions are from several Saskatchewan communities 
including Nipawin, White City, Cupar, Craven, Regina, and 
Lumsden. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly from 700 residents of 
Saskatchewan. These petitioners are urging that the children’s 
dental plan be retained and not destroyed. These petitioners are 
from several communities. They come from Moosomin, 
Rocanville, North Battleford, Saskatoon, Kamsack, Moose Jaw, 
Prince Albert, Macdowall, Shellbrook, and Cudworth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly from several 
hundred residents of Saskatchewan. These petitions are urging 
that the children’s dental plan be retained, and not destroyed. 
These petitioners are from several communities including 
Weyburn, Lang, Regina, Pilot Butte, Prince Albert, Kelvington, 
Preeceville, Rosthern, Waldheim, Moose Jaw, Melville, and 
Goodeve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise pursuant to  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

779 
 

rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly from several 
hundred Saskatchewan residents. These petitioners are urging 
that the children’s dental program be retained, and not 
destroyed. They make the point that this program was a very 
good program that resulted in a great improvement in the dental 
health of Saskatchewan’s youth. These petitioners come from 
several communities, Mr. Speaker, including Saskatoon, 
Regina, Prince Albert, Allan, Lloydminster, Weyburn, Riceton, 
Moose Jaw, and Pilot Butte. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to present the last of the 
more than 15,000 petitioners’ names – names that have been 
collected over the last 10 days. These petitions urge that the 
Government of Saskatchewan reinstate the dental plan and 
reinstate the 411 dismissed workers. They come from Pilot 
Butte, Fort Qu’Appelle, Lebret, Balgonie, McLean, Lipton, 
Rosthern, Hague, Kerrobert, Milestone, Humboldt, Lanigan, 
Allan, Lloydminster, Weyburn, and Saskatoon. And I also 
understand, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Thunder Creek 
has some more petitions and we don’t have them, and I would 
ask him to introduce his petitions as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pride 
that I stand here today to introduce the more than 100 members 
of the children’s dental plan who are seated in the Speaker’s 
gallery and the gallery behind me. These are some of the more 
than 411 dental workers who were dismissed by the provincial 
government when the plan was eliminated. The people of 
Saskatchewan owe you an enormous debt of gratitude for your 
work. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — It has been your commitment and your 
professionalism that has allowed Saskatchewan people to have 
the very best dental plan in North America and the world. 
 
The children of Saskatchewan are proud of you, we are proud of 
you, and we thank you for your service to the people of this 
province, and I would ask you all to stand so that we could 
thank you for your service and welcome you to the legislature 
today. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to join my colleague from 
Saskatoon Nutana in welcoming the dental assistants who are 
here, and the dental therapists. I do not think in the time that I 
have been in the legislature, the 12 years I’ve been in the 
legislature, that I have seen as many names presented. I think 
this is certainly a modern record. 
 
I also want to welcome to the Assembly, 10 students from the 
Regina Plains Community college who are here with their 
teacher, Ken Konoff. I trust you will find the proceedings 
instructive. I look forward to meeting with you for a brief 
period of time at the end of question period.  

I urge all members to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pickering: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure this morning to you, and through you to all the 
members of the Assembly, 17 grade 5 and 6 students seated in 
the east gallery. They are accompanied here today by their 
teacher, Wally Hauk, chaperons, Ed and Arlene Howse, and 
their bus driver, Earl Williams. 
 
I would hope that they find question period entertaining, 
perhaps informational and educational. And I look forward to 
meeting with them at 11 o’clock for pictures and refreshments. I 
would like all members to join with me in welcoming the 
students from Pangman. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with other 
members of the Assembly this morning in recognizing and 
paying special tribute to the dental therapists and assistants who 
are gathered in our galleries. And may I particularly, Mr. 
Speaker, draw your attention and that of other members of the 
House to those members of that group from the constituency of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who have provided exemplary service 
to the people of that constituency for many years. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
this Assembly, a former member of the House. He served in this 
House from 1944 through to 1956 as a member of the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation). He is well-known 
for his work in establishing grid road system in Saskatchewan. 
He is now 78 years old, and lives in the constituency of Regina 
Victoria, and maintains an avid interest in politics. Please join 
with me, Mr. Speaker, and members of the House, in 
welcoming Niles Buchanan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, as the member of the legislature 
now who presently represents that portion of Saskatchewan, or 
a good chunk of it, that used to be the Notukeu-Willow Bunch 
constituency, I would certainly want to join with the member 
who just spoke to welcome Mr. Buchanan to the Assembly 
today, and to say that we are so delighted to see him back with 
us in such fine health, and we wish him many, many more 
years. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Reinstatement of Children’s Dental Plan 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — My question was going to be to the Premier, 
or it was going to be to the Minister of Health, but they weren’t 
brave enough to come here and face . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 26, 1987 

780 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — So my question is to the Deputy Premier. 
Deputy Premier, you have just received over 15,408 signatures 
from the people of this province – people who want the dental 
plan reinstated. These signatures are in addition to the more 
than 6,300 signatures that were presented to the Minister of 
Health, and he didn’t have enough jam to come out and get 
them from the dental therapists. 
 
I want to know: will you now listen, listen to the people of this 
province who are telling you very clearly that they want this 
plan back and they want these women reinstated? Will you 
listen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, let me indicate to the 
Assembly and to all gathered here, as having been the Minister 
of Health in this province for the last four and a half years, I 
feel that we have put together one of the best health care 
systems in this country. 
 
As we move ahead, Mr. Speaker, and face some of the 
economic problems that are here in this country, we have to 
make some changes. And those changes are not made 
flippantly, and they’re not made without due consideration and 
thought. I listen with interest to the petitions, and I understand 
from the addresses that were read off they’re from considerable 
number of areas in Saskatchewan. 
 
I did notice though, that in many of the cases, that the members 
opposite were saying that the dental plan was destroyed. Mr. 
Speaker, that is simply not correct. There is a change, Mr. 
Speaker, there is a change in the dental plan. And that is a 
change from a school-based plan to one in dental offices. That 
was done, Mr. Speaker, because there was considerable savings 
to be brought about by that. But I want to assure the people of 
Saskatchewan that their children in the age group of five to 13 
will be receiving the same benefits and the same coverage on 
the dental plan as they previously. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Acting Health minister, 
you know that’s not true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Rather than fire 411 workers, most of whom 
are women, rather than blame children and blame workers for 
your deficit problems, why don’t you start cutting the more than 
$10 million that your government spends on political aides and 
political hacks who give you bad advice and are responsible for 
the deficit? Why don’t you start cutting those people instead of 
these people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the dental 
service to children in the province of Saskatchewan is a 
political argument at all. And also, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
that anyone is blaming the children. I heard the member 
opposite say, why are you blaming the children. No one is 
blaming the children. I’ll reinstate what I said earlier: that the 
benefits to the children in the age group of  

five to 13 years of age will be the same as it has previously 
been – one of the best in Canada. 
 
Now she says that’s not correct. I tell you, that is correct. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to indicate to you that those benefits are some 
of the best in this country. 
 
I want to assure the people, the people who may be watching 
today, that I think there is a deliberate attempt to try and 
mislead in saying that the dental plan is destroyed. That simply 
is not correct. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — The Minister of Health has told the press that 
this is part of deficit reduction. But this wasn’t the only reason 
that they wanted to privatize the children’s dental plan. You 
wanted to move it over to dentists. The minister says, and I 
quote: “One very important aspect to the decision is the . . . ” 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. The member is 
on her second supplementary. While I know that members 
would like to use quotations, I’ve given this considerable 
thought and, I believe, in the best interests of the House, I’ll 
have to rule that we don’t use quotations in our supplementaries 
because they tend to get too long, and sometimes they become a 
new question. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Study after study has shown that our dental 
plan is the best in the world. I would ask you to tell me, and tell 
the members of this Assembly, what do you mean by 
“appropriate delivery system”? What do you mean? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, as I said previously, Mr. Speaker, 
that my understanding is that the benefits of the coverage that 
will go to that age group – the target age group which is five to 
13 – will be the same services that have been provided before. 
 
The other thing is that in northern Saskatchewan, where there 
isn’t the access to professional dentists that there is in other 
parts of the province, that the school dental plan will be retained 
there. So I must say, in the best of my understanding, is that the 
dental plan for that group of people, from five to 13, is exactly 
the same plan, only it is delivered different. 
 
Rather than a school-based program, it is delivered through 
professional dentists. That is the difference that’s taking place. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, I must mention again is not destroying 
it; that is change. Nobody questions that there’s change taking 
place. There will be more changes that take place in this world 
as we go on. Certainly it has been done with great concern, and 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Next question. 
 

Statements by the Premier Regarding the Dental Plan 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also 
to the Acting Minister of Health. In answer to a question from 
me on Monday of this week, the Premier suggested at least 
twice in his answer, that the work done  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

781 
 

through the years by Saskatchewan dental assistants and 
therapists, was somehow unprofessional and substandard. 
 
Every study . . . every study, Mr. Speaker, every assessment of 
the Saskatchewan dental plan has concluded exactly the 
opposite, including the study that I hold in my hand, conducted 
by independent university faculties of dentistry, which says the 
quality and the coverage of the Saskatchewan dental plan is 
impressive. 
 
And my question is this: why has the Premier attempted to 
demean the dental therapists and assistants of this province with 
that slur on their reputation, that they were somehow 
unprofessional? And will the Acting Minister of Health now 
withdraw that innuendo and admit that the Premier was wrong 
to cast that slur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the 
member from Assiniboia is trying to read in some accusations 
and some connotations to the statement. I don’t think there’s 
been anyone saying that the service was not good service. 
 
I think what we’re looking at is the cost of delivering service. 
And as we look at the delivery of services, not only in health 
but in government services as we move ahead into the 1990s, as 
sure as I stand in this Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, there will 
be change. And change always brings about some insecurity, 
there brings about some insecurity, Mr. Speaker. I understand 
that; I think everyone does. But let me assure you that the dental 
health care of the students of Saskatchewan is the primary 
concern of this government. The coverage is exactly the same 
as it was before, only delivered in a different manner. 
 
As I was going to say previously, we have concern for the 
people who are delivering the service before, and there has been 
plans put into place to try to have as many as possible hired, 
and also retraining policies that are being developed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, the government has said that 
they had to make some hard choices and that their choice was 
between providing good dental care or the fight against AIDS 
(Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) and drug abuse. 
They say that they can’t have both, that it’s got to be one or the 
other. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the minister can tell us why it 
was that narrow choice? Why didn’t you choose, for example, 
between the dental plan and the freebie election give-aways to 
subsidize the private Jacuzzis? That program is costing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. I’m not sure how 
the member’s making a supplementary out of this, number one. 
And number two, it’s getting to be too long, so if he has one, 
please put it. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will. What you are 
spending in relation to the home program per month could pay 
for the dental costs for two years. Why didn’t you make that 
choice instead of saying that the dental plan had to go? 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, again the member is 
trying to mislead. The dental plan hasn’t gone. There will be a 
dental plan in Saskatchewan. There will be children having 
their teeth fixed in Saskatchewan in that target group. He 
questions about the AIDS, and the drug and alcohol. 
 
It’s true, Mr. Speaker, the 14 to 17 age group are not in the plan 
any more because we felt, as a government listening to the 
people of Saskatchewan, that their concern, Mr. Speaker, was 
more worried about the serious impact of drugs and alcohol 
upon that age group than upon the dental services. Because of 
the good plan we’ve had over the years, most of those people – 
and I give congratulations to the people who run the plan and 
work there – have had those people realize the benefit of good 
dental health. 
 
But the problem out there – and if you dispute that, I wonder 
who you’re listening to – the problem out there, Mr. Speaker, 
with our adolescents – and you could ask any teacher across this 
province, and they will tell you drugs and alcohol is a serious 
problem in Saskatchewan . . . 
 

Consultations Regarding Changes to Dental Plan 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Acting Minister of Health. And in his answer to the previous 
questions, he indicated that the purpose in making what he is 
pleased to call “changes” in the dental plan was to get the most 
efficient and effective method of delivery – obviously thinking 
about how to save money. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when you announced the changes in the 
children’s dental plan in June, had you consulted with the 
people involved, in order that they might know what was 
happening, and in order that the maximum savings could be 
achieved? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think the hon. member will realize that 
it would be folly for me to say what consultation my other 
minister had taken place. I can’t . . . In fairness, and I think the 
member opposite would realize that, that I can’t answer that 
part of the question. Certainly, and I think he realizes that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think he realizes that we have made a 
change, and I think the member opposite is the type of member 
that would understand that, and that that change is that the 
delivery method is different. There is considerable savings in 
the different delivery method. But as to the consultation, to the 
member opposite, I cannot answer for that because I’m not 
privy to the consultation that my colleague had. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I ask 
you, sir, or one of your colleagues who may know, whether you 
deny that this decision was made in haste, and whether you 
deny that as a result of this hasty  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

782 
 

decision, you’re stuck with a 410,000 bill for printed pamphlets 
which are no longer useful; that drugs and other supplies worth 
more than $350,000 have been ordered to be destroyed, and that 
school clinics . . . clinics in schools were under construction, in 
schools like Clavet, up to the very day you made your 
announcement? Are those not true? And is not that evidence 
that you are acting in haste and wasting the public’s money, not 
saving it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly I can assure you that it was 
not a decision made in haste. There was considerable discussion 
about it. But I want to point out to you that I will take notice as 
to the drugs or the cost of pamphlets. I’m not aware if that had 
taken place or not. I will have my colleague . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The minister has 
taken notice. He cannot continue on to try to answer the 
question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure whether to direct 
this question to the Acting Minister of Health or to the Deputy 
Premier, but I think I’ll direct it to the Deputy Premier as the 
person who is in charge, if I may put it that way, for the 
operations overall of the government in the absence of the 
Premier. And what I want to ask the Deputy Premier is this: 
does he concur in and support the Acting Minister of Health’s 
explanation a few moments ago in question period that the main 
rationale for doing away with the dental technician’s program is 
because there was a greater concern communicated to the 
government with respect to teenage and youth abuse of drugs 
and alcohol? Is that the main reason? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly . . . again, in all due respect to 
the member opposite, the dental plan has not been taken away. 
It’s been changed. And you know, I must come back to you 
when you say it’s taken away. You know as well as I do that it 
isn’t. There has been a change. There’s been a change in 
delivery method, and there’s been a change in the number of 
people that are covered, and that is the 14- to 17-year-old group. 
And certainly, certainly, if you are listening to groups across the 
Saskatchewan, if you’re listening to high school administrators, 
to guidance counsellors, to PRIDE (Parent Resources Institute 
for Drug Education Inc.), to all these concerned groups, they 
will indicate to you that drugs and alcohol is certainly a very 
serious problem in the 14- to 17-year-old group in this province. 
And if you want to debate that, I will stand in this House for 
hours with you, sir, and debate that topic. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. I gather from 
the minister’s answer that the main reason for doing away with 
the dental technicians’ program has been because the 
government chose . . . or determined that there was a greater 
priority in another area, namely alcohol, drug abuse. If that 
being the case, that being the answer which we have just heard 
now and which, may I add for a moment, is absolutely illogical 
and nonsensical to say the least – but that being the case, my 
question to the Acting Minister of health is this: can you explain 
why it is that the Premier, outside of the legislature yesterday,  

speaking in Saskatoon, purported to give another totally 
different rationale for doing away with the dental technician’s 
program? And I direct you to the article on page A8 of the 
Star-Phoenix, which says, “Parents’ demands cause the changes 
in dental plan.” And in particular, “Parents want their . . . ” 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. Order. Order. 
 
I have ruled earlier on that we are going to stay away from 
quotes in supplementaries. And it’s difficult to say which 
quotes we will allow and which we won’t, even though it may 
be part of the supplementary. But we cannot make exceptions in 
supplementaries, and I’ve ruled that we will not have quotes, 
and for the best interests of the House. And I ask the members 
to please try to abide by that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Of course I abide by your ruling. I will ask 
the minister a new question. The new question that I have is as 
follows. Yesterday in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, the Premier 
of this government said the following: 
 

Parents want their children’s teeth tended to by a dentist 
and not a dentist assistant, says Premier Grant Devine, in 
explaining recent changes to the province’s dental plan. 

 
My question to you is this, sir: how does that statement square 
with the one that you just made a few moments ago that the 
main reason is alcohol abuse of teenagers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, either the 
member on the other side is not listening or does not care to 
listen to the reply. I indicated that the change to the dental plan 
with the 14- to 17-year-old group, why they were eliminated 
from the plan, is that parents across this country are indicating 
that a priority is treatment centres like we’re building at 
Whitespruce at Yorkton – the first in Canada. The first 
adolescent drug and alcohol treatment centre in Canada is at 
Whitespruce outside of Yorkton. And that is why the change is 
taking place in the adolescent part of the dental plan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, new question. In the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix article that I referred to just a few 
moments ago, the Premier says the following: 
 

Many parents let me know that they would rather have 
their children go to a dentist than they would have an 
assistant deal with the teeth in the school. 

 
My question to you, sir, or to the Deputy Premier, is this: will 
you undertake on behalf of the government to table to this 
legislature the numbers of parents who have communicated 
with either the Premier’s office or the Minister of Health, or any 
other minister of this government, to substantiate that 
statement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, first and foremost, I have no 
knowledge of what the Premier said in Saskatoon  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

783 
 

other than what the member opposite is reporting, and we know 
what the reporting techniques sometimes are. So I am not in a 
position to react to something within the paper. 
 
But certainly, Mr. Speaker, and it just shows . . . I just want to 
illustrate this one point. I heard the member from Moose Jaw 
North the other day say, we want to return . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. If the comment that the minister 
wishes to make is directly on the question . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I heard the member say, we want to 
return to ’82. And this just indicates . . . When I hear the 
member from Riversdale, who is supposedly in tune and maybe 
hoping to lead a party sometime, indicating that he doesn’t 
understand . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order! 
Order. Order. Order, please. 
 

Agreement between Government and College of Dental 
Surgeons 

 
Mr. Romanow: — A new question to the Acting Minister of 
Health. The Acting Minister of Health says that the member 
from Riversdale may want to go back to 1982. I want to tell the 
Hon. Acting Minister of Health that as far as the dental 
technician program is concerned and the way medicare was, I 
definitely want to go back to 1982! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now you have refused already, Mr. Acting 
Minister of Health, to table the names of the parents and the 
submissions that you have received with respect to this plan. I 
ask you another question. You claim . . . your government 
claims that you signed, with the College of Dental surgeons, an 
agreement which will result in savings to taxpayers and that up 
to 150 jobs for the 411 dental plan employees that you have 
thrown out of work will be protected. That is the agreement you 
say you have. I ask the Acting Minister of Health, or the deputy 
Premier, simple yes or no: will you table that agreement, 
showing those savings and those numbers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to hear the 
member from Riversdale want to go back to ’82 in health care. 
With going back to ’82, there would be no chiropody program; 
there would be no new re-hab . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. 
 
We seem to have a misunderstanding in the House, and perhaps 
if we all took notes on both sides of the House of what’s 
happening, we wouldn’t have questions of the minister – 
whether or not he’s on the topic, and just exactly what the 
question was saying. 
 
Now in this particular instance, we did hear . . . First of all, the 
minister in a previous answer had mentioned about  

going back to ’82, and we did hear, in the preamble to the 
question, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale also refer to 
it. And these are the problems that occur when questions are put 
. . . if they become a little bit too wide ranging, then ministers 
become too wide ranging and go on too long. 
 
So I think that both sides of the House, ministers and those 
asking the questions, should try to adhere to the rules and we 
wouldn’t have these problems. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m sure no one in Saskatchewan wants to 
go back to the moratorium in nursing homes in ’82. However, 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite indicated that, would we be 
tabling the agreement? I would have to take notice of that and 
ask my colleague . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if the 
agreement, if I don’t have the agreement . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 

Dismissal Procedures re Dental Assistants 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you about what 
is really the most appalling aspect of this whole sorry affair. It’s 
the way you went about dismissing dedicated employees who 
had dedicated their lives to this superb public health program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — More than one worker called me and 
complained about the concentration camp atmosphere which 
hung over the June 11 staff meetings in which people were 
herded into hotel meetings to be told, en masse, that their 
careers were over. 
 
How do you justify that sort of inhumane, uncaring treatment of 
dedicated public employees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 
lay-offs in the dental program, or as it relates to any of the 
lay-offs in fact that we’ve had to do throughout the Public 
Service Commission, our objectives always have been to do it 
in as reasonable and fair and compassionate and humane 
manner as possible. That was . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please; order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That was the objective here, Mr. 
Speaker, as well, for the Department of Health. It’s a given that 
this is never easy, Mr. Speaker; this is always difficult. It’s not a 
task that anyone enjoys. There are a number of methods, I 
suppose, one could employ, but we’ve relied on professional 
advice as far as how to best accomplish this, how to help the 
displaced persons find new employment, counselling – those 
kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as it relates to the dental therapists specifically – because 
we are concerned about them and their future careers – we have 
trebled the number of training spaces available, Mr. Speaker, in 
our hygienist program to perhaps accommodate some of those 
therapists to find  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

784 
 

new employment as hygienists. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Before orders of the day, since next 
Wednesday, July 1, is a holiday in Canada, and since last night 
at adjournment all parties on the floor of the Chamber here 
agreed that we should have a Friday routine on Tuesday to 
accommodate members to the extent that we can to be at home 
for that Wednesday holiday, I, by leave of the Assembly, 
seconded by the Minister of Justice, move: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3 of the Rules and Procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, this 
Assembly shall on Tuesday, June 30, 1987 meet from 10 
o’clock a.m. until 1 o’clock p.m., and that when this 
Assembly adjourns on Tuesday, June 30, 1987, it do stand 
adjourned until Thursday, July 2, 1987. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 9 

 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce the 
officials that are here today: my deputy minister, Peter van Es, 
sitting beside me here; Rick Knoll, the director of 
administration and communications; Randy Sentis, director of 
mines pollution control branch; then in the back row, Bert 
Sheasby, executive director of public safety; Bob Walker, 
director of environmental assessment; Larry Lechner, director 
of air and land protection; and Don Fast, director of the water 
quality branch. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in opening my estimates today, I would like to 
make a few remarks. I believe that these remarks should be 
reasonably brief, but I want to touch on a number of things that 
are happening that may be beneficial to the House to have on 
the record, and beneficial to the critic in the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to first of all commend the Premier 
and the Minister of Finance for all their hard work on the 
budget, and on setting the direction that is necessary for the 
province of Saskatchewan at this time. 
 
The Premier is a man of vision, a person who is deeply 
committed to the future of this province and to the people here. 
He is concerned about Saskatchewan’s economy, so he stresses 
diversification. He is concerned about the agricultural sector 
and the problems farmers face today, so he stresses necessary 
farm assistance programs. The Premier is concerned about those 
people who are less fortunate, so he stresses protection through 
health care, social service programs, and for senior citizens. Mr. 
Chairman, all of these areas relate to the environment and  

to the things that people in our province are doing, and things 
that they enjoy. 
 
Environmental protection is the fastest-growing issue in the 
minds of the Canadian public. Recent opinion polls are 
evidence of this. This is reflective of the growing importance 
that many people throughout Canada, and in fact the world, are 
attaching to our collective need to better understand our 
environment – how to keep it a clean environment, healthy and 
productive for the people in Saskatchewan to live. I stress the 
fact that this is a collective need, for only through the mutual 
understanding and co-operative effort of governments, industry, 
non-governmental organizations, and the public at large can we 
hope to deal successfully with the many environmental issues 
which challenge us today and which will continue to face us in 
the future. 
 
Our government takes the responsibility of our environmental 
protection and public safety very seriously. When we are 
approached with major developments in the province, our 
government insists that the environment must be protected in all 
cases, whether it’s a heavy oil upgrader in Regina, a bacon plant 
in North Battleford, or a new paper mill in Prince Albert. 
 
As a Saskatchewan farmer for over 30 years, I know the value 
of a strong and healthy environment in the production of crops 
and livestock. My son and I do not take our land for granted. 
We know it is a valuable resource and must be protected for the 
future use of this generation and generations to come. This is 
the kind of attitude that our government has relating to the 
environment and to our resources – protection for present and 
future use. 
 
An area of key concern to our government is that of chemical 
use, and disposal in an environmentally safe manner. I’d like to 
comment on two programs we initiated which have proven to 
be very successful. The pesticide container disposal program 
was implemented in 1983 to collect discarded pesticide 
containers and associated residues that could damage our 
environment. 
 
Since that time about 85 per cent of the rural municipalities in 
the province have established collection sites. Last year alone 
over 670,000 containers were crushed, recovering almost 100 
barrels of residue. The reduction of potential risk to the 
environment, water supply, or land fill areas from chemical 
residue, is quite significant. 
 
The second program is the institutional chemical collection 
program. The storage and disposal of old surplus or deteriorated 
chemicals, has become a burden to many of our public 
institutions, especially schools and hospitals. 
 
In order to relieve this burden our government established a 
two-year, province-wide program to collect and dispose of 
unwanted, hazardous chemicals stored in the laboratories of 
these institutions. Certain chemicals are treated directly by 
department staff, others are shipped out of the province by a 
special chemical firm. 
 
Besides this we also provide advice to institutions  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

785 
 

concerning laboratory management and proper disposal of 
chemicals. We know that public and municipal concerns over 
the use, transportation, and storage of toxic chemicals has 
continued to grow with increasing industrial activity. 
 
In response, the toxic chemicals management program has been 
established to develop and administer the hazardous substance 
regulations under the Environmental Management and 
Protection Act. 
 
The program will also provide information to the public 
regarding chemical safety and will undertake environmental 
studies aimed at assessing the impacts of chemicals on the 
environment. 
 
A $200,000 annual grant is also provided to the Toxicology 
Research Centre at the University of Saskatchewan to provide 
financial assistance for their operational costs. This enables the 
centre to co-ordinate provincial resources for toxicology 
research on effects of toxic substances on human health and the 
environment. 
 
After becoming Minister of Environment last year, one of the 
first items I began dealing with was that of hazardous waste. 
Our department is currently investigating all the options 
available to us, and how we should deal with this issue. In the 
forefront is our active involvement in the programs established 
by the Canadian council of Resource and Environment 
Ministers. 
 
We’re also in the process of developing regulations to deal with 
hazardous wastes. The regulations will be compatible in 
providing for the management of industrial and hazardous 
waste presently regulated under the transportation of dangerous 
goods and its regulations. 
 
(1100) 
 
Concerning acid rain, we recently released a report which 
indicates that there is no evidence to believe that there is an acid 
rain problem in Saskatchewan. The levels of sulphate and 
nitrate in precipitation are still quite low. Studies have shown 
that there appears to be little acid rain effect in the southern part 
of the province. However, the pre-Cambrian shield of northern 
Saskatchewan seems to be quite sensitive to acid rain. Here the 
threat is also greater since several large sources of acid rain are 
located in neighbouring provinces, and virtually opposite in the 
Saskatchewan shield area. We will continue to monitor the 
situation, at the same time participate with the other western 
provinces in co-operating to obtain necessary information in 
order to control acid rain. 
 
Water quality management is one of the key issues my 
department currently deals with, and I expect it to continue to 
be a priority matter. The department is carrying out 
comprehensive studies on major water bodies and watersheds. 
In the last year over 60,000 tests were completed on samples 
from surface waters – drinking water and industrial and 
municipal waste water. The surface-water sampling includes 
ongoing sampling at sites on our major rivers and lakes. 
 
Detailed studies have been collected on the North 
Saskatchewan River, and work is in progress on the South  

Saskatchewan and also on Lake Diefenbaker. A major review of 
Saskatchewan’s water pollution control and waterworks 
regulations has been completed and are to be enacted in the near 
future. These regulations are expected to increase the minimum 
requirements for sewage treatment, to strengthen requirements 
for the disinfection of drinking water, and to establish the basis 
for setting drinking water quality standards. 
 
Saskatchewan is also dedicated to protecting the quality of its 
air. The Air Pollution Control Act is being revised and will be 
renamed the clean air Act. This revision will facilitate a greater 
focus on client needs, to streamline the licensing process, to fill 
legislative gaps, and to clarify various aspects of the existing 
legislation. 
 
The revised Act will remove the exemption which allows 
industries in operation prior to January of 1976 to operate 
without a permit. It will also allow for long-term benefits and 
incorporate a control order mechanism to ensure operational 
changes can be made during the term of the permits. We will be 
introducing this legislation in this session. 
 
Now let me say a few words about the environmental impact 
assessment process. Over the last two decades, assessment 
processes have been instituted in numerous jurisdictions in a 
concerted effort to prevent undesirable environmental effects 
from occurring. The purpose of environmental impact 
assessments, as I see it, is to facilitate environmentally sensitive 
development decisions. 
 
Over the past year, numerous proposals for new development in 
Saskatchewan were reviewed by the department, judged to be 
environmentally acceptable, and given departmental clearance 
to proceed, provided applicable permits and licences were 
obtained. However, a dozen such proposals were deemed to 
require closer technical and public scrutiny under provisions of 
the assessment Act and are currently in various stages of the 
assessment process. 
 
Comprehensive reviews of impact statements associated with 
these proposals will ensure that, before ministerial approval is 
granted, the developments are environmentally sound and able 
to proceed in an environmentally sensible manner. Both senior 
department officials and I plan to be more active in the coming 
year in promoting the benefits of environmental impact 
assessments, so that people of Saskatchewan do not find 
themselves burdened in the future with unnecessary and 
avoidable costs of environmentally unsound development 
decisions. 
 
In conclusion, let me reiterate once more that our government is 
very concerned about protection . . . protecting the people of 
Saskatchewan, our environment, and our wildlife. With these 
comments, Mr. Chairman, I invite the questions from the 
members of the opposition. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, like the minister, I have a few brief comments to 
make regarding the performance of his government, his 
  



 
June 26, 1987 

786 
 

administration, and his own department over the past several 
years, since we have had an opportunity to scrutinize what he, 
as the Minister of Environment, and what his department has 
been doing, or I should say has failed to do, over the last little 
while. 
 
It gives me great pleasure to be able to do this. It gives me a 
certain pride to be asked to represent our party and our caucus 
in developing the questions and developing our party’s attitude 
towards these environmental estimates. And I look forward, 
indeed, to being able to act on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan in scrutinizing the activities of the minister and 
of his department. 
 
Because, Mr. Chairman, unlike the minister, I believe that our 
party and I believe that the people of Saskatchewan have a 
different view and have a different estimation of the role played 
by his government, and of the role played by himself as 
minister in, in fact, protecting the environmental interests of the 
people of this province – either the short term or over the long 
term. 
 
And, specifically, in regards to some of those areas and duties 
which he has recently acquired – and I speak here specifically 
of the public safety duties – I think that as we go through these 
estimates, the people of this province will see that the fine 
words and the fine rhetoric of the minister are nothing more 
than that. Fine words, fine writer, but in reality when it comes 
down to the hard and cold reality of the facts and figures of 
what his department and what his government has done, that the 
people of this province will see there, in black and white in 
these Estimates, that that is all it is – just so much rhetoric. Just 
so much rhetoric and not much reality. 
 
Because I think, Mr. Chairman, if we’d look at the history, if 
we look at the history of the environmental protection afforded 
to the people of this province by the government opposite, I 
think you will see a history of betrayal, a history of betrayal of 
the environmental protection which the people of this province 
were afforded prior to 1982. 
 
And we can see that, we can see that, Mr. Chairman, in both the 
amount of money expended and also in the number of people 
employed by that department. The amount of money expended 
and the number of people employed by that department since 
1981-82 has shrunk drastically. It has shrunk drastically despite 
the fact that the department has taken on added responsibilities. 
 
I would submit, Mr. Chairman, that what we have heard from 
the minister here is nothing more, nothing more than some 
political and partisan rhetoric from a minister who himself is 
nothing more than a minister, as part of a series of ministers, 
with no real ongoing concerns for the environment. 
 
Despite the fine protestations to the contrary, when it comes to 
the actions of a government, real concern is shown by 
expenditure. Real concern is shown by action. Real concern is 
shown by the promulgation of new laws which in fact extend, 
as opposed to retract, protection for the citizens of this 
province. 
 
I would submit, Mr. Chairman, that the facts and statistics 
outlined in the estimates speak very clearly, speak very  

loudly for themselves; that these facts and statistics reveal that 
this government has been negligent, has been negligent in a 
while number of areas regarding the environment, and that, in 
fact, the Department of the Environment . . . And here I speak 
of the political Department of the Environment, as opposed to 
those fine civil servants who have carried on under most trying 
and difficult circumstances. So when I refer to the department 
and the minister, I am not referring – I want to make it clear – 
I’m not referring to any particular official, but I am, in fact, 
referring to the policies of that government and of that minister. 
 
And as I said, the civil servants who work in the Department of 
the Environment have been carrying on under trying 
circumstances in the light of budget reductions, in the light of 
increasing work-loads, and in the light of a certain blurring of 
departmental responsibilities, given what has happened with the 
additional duties put onto the department itself. 
 
As I said, Mr. Chairman, I believe that the department has been 
negligent, I believe that the minister, I should say, has been 
negligent in his duties, and that we shall show, and endeavour 
to show over the period of this estimates, that that is not an 
empty statement, but that in fact it is a statement of fact. 
 
Because we have seen negligence develop by this department in 
the area of environmental and public safety. And I believe 
there’s a reason for it. And again, these things will be developed 
further on as the questioning proceeds apace. This negligence, 
this lack of sensitivity, and this lack of forthrightness with the 
public stems from three major causes. 
 
First of all, it stems from a lack of understanding, a lack of 
understanding by the minister as to the real fundamental 
importance of the issues dealt with by his department. These are 
not ordinary issues. These are not ordinary issues. These are the 
life-blood issues of this province. For without clean air, without 
good soil, and without safe water, this province . . . and without 
an adequate supply of safe water, this province will shrivel up 
and die — literally shrivel up and die. 
 
I don’t believe, Mr. Chairman, that the minister . . . and I don’t 
believe that the minister by his actions has shown that he 
understands fully the fundamental, underlying importance of 
these issues that are dealt with by his department. 
 
Secondly, I believe that the negligence shown by his 
department stems from a lack of priority – a lack of priority 
given to his department by the government. 
 
We have seen a consistent pattern since 1982 by that 
government opposite, by the government of the minister. And I 
certainly a not going to try to blame the minister for action take 
prior to his election in 1986. As we all know, he was former 
Speaker of this House and, in fact, has just been appointed 
Minister of the Environment. So I’m not going to put all the 
blame on that ministers’ shoulders. I think that the government 
as a whole has to shoulder that blame. And that blame is this, is 
that it consistently underfunded and shrunk funding for the  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

787 
 

department, and that, in fact shows a lack of priority given to 
environmental issues by the government opposite. 
 
Those facts and figures will show that in fact, Mr. Minister, that 
your department has taken on less and less importance in the 
minds of your own government, that in fact environmental 
issues have become less and less in the priority to the 
government opposite. So your negligence results in that lack of 
priority. 
 
Thirdly, the negligence of your department, I believe and I 
would submit, stems from a desire by your government to 
utilize the resources of your department for nothing more than 
partisan political purposes at the expense of the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I want to say, Mr. Minister, as we go 
through these estimates, that statement will ring more and more 
true, and you will see the truth of that statement. 
 
You and your government have turned environment into 
nothing more than a political tool to enhance the political 
projects of your government – not to protect the interests of 
Saskatchewan, not to protect the long term interests of all the 
people in this part of the Northern Hemisphere, but in fact for 
narrow, partisan political issues. And we will show that, I 
believe, as the estimate process goes along. 
 
(1115) 
 
And what’s all this negligence led to? Well, Mr. Minister, I 
submit, and that we will prove – because we’ve got the facts 
and figures to prove it—that your negligence has led to a 
degradation of the environment, that in fact it has led to a 
lessening of the quality of life and, in the broad sense, enjoyed 
by the people of this province. And I just want to list a few. I 
just want to list a few of the areas in that degradation that’s 
taken place. 
 
We look to south-east Saskatchewan. We see a growing 
ecological crisis throughout south-east Saskatchewan caused, 
among other things, by your refusal and your department’s 
refusal to step in to take issue with the Department of Energy in 
policing the oil industry in this province and allowing the oil 
industry in this province to time after time pollute the land – the 
very land that we live on – through things like salt water breaks, 
through things like so-called ecology pits, through things like 
oil spills, and your refusal to in fact demand that the 
Department of Energy go ahead and utilize the resources that 
exist down in south-east Saskatchewan to help clean up the 
mess created by the oil industry. 
 
We look to south-east Saskatchewan and we see plans under 
way to drain marshlands. And I am told by conservation and 
wildlife groups in this province that 40,000 acres of wetlands 
are going to be drained in south-east Saskatchewan as part of 
Shand-Rafferty. Forty thousand acres are going to be drained, 
and yet do we hear one peep out of you or your department? 
When it is a fact Saskatchewan – half the wetlands in 
Saskatchewan have been drained over the last few number of 
years and in fact that we’ve had the Ramsar convention here in 
Saskatchewan, a convention dedicated to the preservation of 
wetlands. And we see your government and your department 
refusing to deal  

with that problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve seen a degradation of the environment in 
northern Saskatchewan. We’ve seen a degradation of the 
environment caused by your refusal to carry out the laws that 
exist, the laws that exist in the environmental assessment 
process regarding uranium mining and milling, regarding the 
storage of uranium tailings. And we will get into that further as 
estimates proceed. 
 
We see a degradation of the environment in this province by 
your refusal to develop a comprehensive strategy in respect to 
even minimum planning, even minimum planning for 
long-range water conservation wetlands development. We see a 
degradation of the environment in Saskatchewan by your 
refusal to develop ecologically sound farming and soil 
conservation practices, something which should be at the very 
heart of the Department of the Environment’s job, something 
which strikes home to each and every person in Saskatchewan. 
And yet what do we hear from your department? Not a word. 
 
Mr. Minister, we see a degradation of the environment in 
Saskatchewan by your refusal to extend protection to 
Saskatchewan citizens in regards to the production, storage, 
distribution, and use of hazardous substances. And we will deal 
with that matter much more fully as estimates go along. 
 
Despite what you said in your opening statements, 
Saskatchewan people are less protected now from hazardous 
substances than they were four years ago, five years, or six 
years ago. The record will speak for itself, Mr. Minister, as we 
go along. 
 
We’ve seen a degradation of the environment due to your 
failure to help municipalities in regard to the sewage treatment, 
water treatment, and refuse disposal problems that fall within 
the purview of your department. We’ve seen a degradation of 
the environment by your failure to protect the northern 
environment from the effects of acid rain. And here, Mr. 
Minister, I want to take direct issue with the conclusions drawn 
by the acid rain study. I think, when we get onto that topic 
further on in estimates, you will see a difference in water 
quality between northern Saskatchewan and southern 
Saskatchewan. And what we will even further see is the 
long-term trend, something which you, sir, do not seem to be 
overly concerned about. 
 
We’ve seen a degradation of the environment in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Minister, by your refusal to put Saskatchewan front and 
centre as a leader in the environmental protection movement on 
a global basis. Your government had an opportunity to be 
number one. Your government had an opportunity to follow in 
the footsteps of our predecessors here in this place prior to 
1982, in which environment as a priority of the government was 
growing, in which environment was beginning to get the 
recognition that it now has as an issue on a global basis. Instead 
of increasing the priority of the environment, we’ve seen 
nothing more than a history of a downgrading of the 
environment. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1987 

788 
 

And finally, Mr. Minister, I want to say this: that we have seen 
a degradation of public safety. We’ve seen a degradation of 
public safety by your government because you have failed to 
provide adequate standards and inspections in certain public 
safety duties, those duties which have been recently assigned to 
your department. And as we go through estimates, perhaps the 
most striking part of the estimates of your department revolves 
around this issue. Perhaps the essence of the low priority you 
give to the well-being and safety of people in Saskatchewan is 
shown by your refusal to provide adequate funding for the 
standards and inspections that deal directly with the lives of 
everyday people in everyday situations. 
 
I believe, Mr. Minister – and like I said before, I don’t blame it 
all on yourself – I think you and your government’s record is 
this: it’s one of failure to meet even the minimum standards, 
even the minimum standards which were set prior to 1982 for 
environment and environmental and public safety protection. 
 
And I submit that in saying that, I believe that you personally 
do not have a grip on your department. I believe that you do not 
have a grip on the issues of the day. I believe that you have let 
your government downgrade environmental protection and 
public safety. I believe that you have used the department for 
your own narrow, partisan, political purposes, and we will show 
that . . . We will show that as clear as a bell, let me tell you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
You have failed to meet even the minimum standards . . . even 
the minimum standard, the standards which the people of 
Saskatchewan had come to expect prior to 1982. So I suppose it 
may be somewhat Utopian to talk about what you could have 
done. But maybe it is Utopian. Maybe we’re all just dreamers. 
Maybe we’re all just living in the future, as opposed to living in 
the antediluvian past in which you and your government have 
been. 
 
But I don’t think so. I think, with a little imagination and a little 
priority given to your department by your government, that a lot 
could have been accomplished in environment here in 
Saskatchewan. If you had not been blinkered, if you had not 
been blinded by your free market ideology, your slavish 
devotion to the market-place, you could have accomplished a 
lot in this province, sir. 
 
For example, you could have used the department to develop a 
long . . . a program, both long term and short range, to shift 
present production, distribution, and consumption practices 
carried on in this policy in all areas of the economy. You could 
have begun to shift direction to an ecologically sustainable 
basis, to an ecology and an environment which says there are 
certain things we can do, there are certain things we can’t do, 
and if we want to have quality life in the future, we have begun 
to have to . . . have to begin to grapple with those issues and to 
begin to grapple with them now. 
 
For example, you could have utilized present resources 
available to your department to begin to tackle some of the 
social ills that beset us . . . some of the social ills like 
unemployment, like high social welfare rates, rates of the  

number of people who are on social welfare in this province, 
particularly among young people. You know, it wouldn’t have 
taken much . . . It would not have taken much imagination for 
you, sir, to press for the development of an ecology core, to say 
that we have, to young people in this province, that we have 
environmental problems that we as a government want to clean 
up, and that we as a government are going to put some priority 
to. 
 
And whether it’s cleaning up uranium tailings in northern 
Saskatchewan, which would provide jobs for young 
Northerners, or whether it’s tree planting in southern 
Saskatchewan to begin to enhance soil conservation practices, 
you could have done that. You could have done that, but your 
department didn’t have, your department didn’t have the 
long-term protection of the environment as a priority. 
 
Mr. Minister, you could have used your influence in cabinet, 
such as exists, to develop a massive job creation project 
revolving around energy conservation, from the research to the 
practical applications stage. As you know, Saskatchewan is one 
of those areas of the world in which we are lucky and fortunate 
enough to receive high amounts of energy from the sun. 
 
You talk, you and your government talk about developing 
research, developing high tech, moving ahead into the future. 
Why haven’t you, why haven’t you moved ahead in this issue? 
Why haven’t you moved ahead and done things like . . . Well, 
let’s look at solar research. Why haven’t you made 
Saskatchewan number one in solar research? It’s a natural. It’s a 
natural, for not only does it save energy, it also creates jobs. It’s 
ecologically sustainable and, more importantly, will provide 
long-term economic opportunities to the people of this 
province. 
 
Doesn’t take much imagination. You’ve got lots and lots of 
resources in your department. You’ve got highly skilled people; 
you’ve got people with imagination. Why haven’t you used 
them? Why haven’t you used them? 
 
You could have helped, Mr. Minister, some of the cash flow 
problems down on the farm. You could have used your 
department to help some of those cash flow problems. 
 
For example, why hasn’t you and your department pushed 
forward power generation as they have in California, as they 
have in New Mexico, as they have in Washington, as they have 
in Oregon? Why haven’t you and your department pushed 
forward the generation of power by utilizing wind power 
technologies? 
 
Used to be in this province that we all saw a windmill. A wind 
mill on every farmstead in this province. A windmill which was 
used to pump water, which was used to help, in fact, on-farm 
problems. Well, you know, the technology exits, although I 
don’t know if you understand that, but the technology does exist 
here, where we could have similar type of windmills which will 
generate electrical power to be used both on the farm, but more 
importantly, which could be used to sell to Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation, which could be  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

789 
 

hooked into the provincial power grid. 
 
(1130) 
 
The technology exists; the technology is in place, as I said 
before, in California. The technology is in place and is at work 
in California, in New Mexico, and Oregon, and Washington. 
You could have done that if you’d had the foresight and the 
imagination, if you had said we’re not going to just meet the 
minimum standards, but we’re going to be number one in 
Canada. You didn’t, your government didn’t take it as a 
priority, and so you didn’t even meet the minimum standards, I 
submit. 
 
You know, and you didn’t, Mr. Minister, because you 
personally, you personally don’t see a role for government in 
the economy. You personally don’t see a role for government. 
Deep down you don’t see a role for government protecting 
people in Saskatchewan, in the environment, in environmental 
and public safety issues. 
 
You’re caught in the past, you and the rest of all you free 
enterprisers over there. You’re all caught back in the 1700s 
along with Adam Smith, and Dave Ricardo, and Michael 
Walker, and the Fraser Institute, and all you antediluvian 
thinkers who try to dress up the essential tenets of a rising 
capitalism as something new. Well let me tell you, that 
ideology, when it’s translated in a practice in your own 
department – when it translates into your own department – 
doesn’t even meet the minimum standards that people in 
Saskatchewan require. 
 
Well that was a partisan comment, Mr. Minister. I think you’d 
admit that that was a partisan comment. What can we do? Well 
first of all, one of the things that we can do is make the whole 
question of environment and ecology and public safety a 
non-partisan issue. We can do that. We can work in 
co-operation if we approach the long-term problems of the 
environment m a point of view which says – and it’s not hard; 
it’s not difficult to comprehend – from the point of view that 
says each and every citizen in this province has an equal stake 
in the future of our air, of our land and, most of all, of our water 
quality and our water resources, which I submit is 
Saskatchewan’s most precious resource. 
 
If we approach it from that point of view, I believe that all 
members of the House, and I believe all people in 
Saskatchewan can work together. We can work together if we 
make the environment, we make public safety the starting point, 
the foundation upon which other major economic decisions are 
made. 
 
So what I’m suggesting to you, Mr. Minister, is your 
responsibility to push forward in cabinet, and I will help you in 
that – I offer to help you in that – that if you say that underlying 
all decisions that affect the economy and affect people in this 
province, that we’re going to put the environment, that we’re 
going to put public safety first, I think we can develop some 
co-operation on that. 
 
But you know, I don’t think you want the co-operation. And I 
think your own record in the past proves that. As you know 
very well, Mr. Minister, when I was first elected and was 
appointed critic to the environment, I wrote you and said: I 
want to work together with you. I want to  

co-operate with you to raise the profile of environmental issues 
across this province, because I don’t care whether it’s a 
Conservative farmer from Carievale, who’s getting poisoned by 
spray, or whether it’s an NDP worker here who is working in 
one of the warehouses in Saskatchewan that in fact bottles that 
spray, bottles that chemical, they’re both getting poisoned. And 
the poison doesn’t care whether they’re NDP or whether they’re 
Conservative. And that’s’ the point of view that I approach it 
from. And I believe that there’s a responsibility upon us as 
legislators to protect both that farmer and the workers, people of 
this province. 
 
But I wrote you and said, I want to co-operate with you, and in 
doing so I’d like a briefing by members of your department. 
And you know this is true. You know this is true. I said, I want 
a briefing so I can help you carry out the questions of 
environmental concern to this people of the province to raise 
those as an issue. And what did I get from yourself, sir? I got a 
turn-down – a flat no. I got turned down, a flat no. Because you 
didn’t want to co-operate with us. You didn’t want to 
co-operate because you wanted to use the department for your 
own narrow, partisan, political purposes. You didn’t want to 
co-operate with the opposition in protecting the people of 
Saskatchewan and in protecting Saskatchewan’s environment. 
Your record stands and speaks clearly on that. You don’t want 
to co-operate. You don’t want to co-operate, Mr. Minister, 
because you think the environment is nothing more than a 
narrow, partisan, political issue upon which you hope to be able 
to score some points on the opposition. 
 
Okay, but if that’s what you want, let me tell you – if that’s 
what you want, Mr. Minister, that’s what you’re going to get. 
That’s what you’re going to get, because the environment, if 
you approach it from that point of view, will become a political 
hot potato. It’ll become the kind of political hot potato that the 
people of this province are going to see you juggling over the 
next little while. Let me tell you that. They’re going to see you 
juggling, because we have a list of environmental issues that we 
want to talk about that you and your department haven’t 
addressed, or you’ve addressed poorly, or that you haven’t, in 
fact, made any substantial progress – in fact have done the 
reverse, gone backward on. And we’re going to be talking bout 
those over the next little while, Mr. Minister. 
 
Having said that, I want to take some note of some of your 
comments in regards to . . . well I guess in regards to trying to 
defend what is your own, and your government’s own personal 
and sorry record in terms of the environment. What I was 
listening to in your comments, Mr. Minister and what was 
noticeable, was noticeable by its absence, was noticeable by its 
absence, was any underlying philosophy, any underlying 
philosophy of how you as a minister approach the questions and 
the issues of the environment. 
 
So what I’d like as a first question, Mr. Minister, what I’d like 
to ask you is this: will you please expound to the House your 
own personal philosophy of what to you –of what to yourself is 
your responsibility as Minister of the Environment? Let me put 
it another way. Do you see your role as Minister of the 
Environment strictly in terms of the rules and regulations as laid 
out in the various Act, or in  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

790 
 

fact do you see yourself as a Minister of Environment having 
other functions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The hon. member has had a very wide 
ranging address, and once in a while he touched the Department 
of Environment. But many times you’re a long, long ways off 
the subject. 
 
Let me start by telling you that the quality of the environment, 
since we’ve been government, has actually improved. And I 
could read you a nice article from the Leader-Post of a study 
that was done that shows that Saskatchewan stands, not at the 
bottom of the list, but second on the list, following only 
Ontario. We were in third place prior to this year. We have 
moved up to second place. The province of Manitoba has been 
10th place, and continues to be 10th place, so I don’t think that 
you can entirely say that the environment is going all to pieces. 
 
The hon. member raises the wetland drainage with the Shand 
and Rafferty. There’s been no wetland drainage at this point, 
but we do have 1,800 pages to evaluate in an environmental 
impact statement that came in. That is going through process in 
my department. There’s been no decision to let the 
Shand/Rafferty projects go ahead at this point. And so to make 
the wild statement that all this drainage has occurred is nothing 
more than that – just simply a wild statement. 
 
You talked about the uranium industry and the lack of 
environmental assessment. The environmental assessments 
have been in force throughout the uranium industry. And if you 
were referring to the very recent project at Cluff Lake, where 
they have added a piece to their mill and are now reprocessing 
leach tails, I think that that was not considered to be a 
development under the Act, according to the terms of the Act, 
and a court case that was held verified that that was not a 
development under the Act. So the member, again, is off the 
subject a ways. 
 
You touched public safety and are making wild accusations. Let 
me assure you that the backlog in 1981 was almost exactly the 
same numbers that we still face today. I don’t say that that’s 
great and that we should continually have that size of backlog. 
We are moving in areas and, I think, some of the things that I 
can give you today will likely indicate to you directions that we 
will move. But we are making changes in the public safety area 
that I believe will address many of those concerns. 
 
You indicated that we needed to do something to protect the air. 
I indicated to you in my opening remarks that a clean air Act 
will be introduced in this session. And I believe that Act is 
going to have an impact on the way that businesses operate in 
this province to protect the air within the province. It won’t 
only pick up the existing . . . the new businesses that are coming 
on stream, but it will go back and pick up the older businesses 
who have been polluting. So I believe that’s an important move, 
and you will see it when the Act comes in; and I hope to have it 
in in a very short time. 
 
I wouldn’t like to get into the windmill business quite as far as 
the hon. member is indicating. It’s not part of the  

environment. When I was a much younger man, the power on 
my farm was generated by windmills. I was most appreciative 
when Sask Power put a power line through and we could have a 
dependable power source. The member is quite a lot younger 
than I am and perhaps has very little background information on 
what he speaks about, but that is not one of the items that is 
really under Environment, so I think I’ll leave it there. 
 
If the member would like to get on to specific questions on any 
issues, I would be glad to deal with them. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, just in regards to some of the 
statements that you’ve just made, regarding that environmental 
quality report card, I wonder, would you please give us the 
grade that was given to Saskatchewan in that report that you 
just referred to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— We were classified second of the provinces 
of Canada. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I didn’t ask what the position was. 
I asked you: what grade was given to Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— There is no specific grade listed. There are 
percentages – that’s the only thing I could give you – and we 
come in at 61 per cent. The only one higher is Ontario. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, you referred to a news report that 
came from the Leader-Post, and if I believe my recollection is 
right, Saskatchewan was given a grade; not just a percentage, 
but was given a grade. Would I be wrong in saying that the 
grade given to Saskatchewan was C minus? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The grade given to Saskatchewan is C 
minus. It’s still second of all the provinces of Canada. It would 
be nice to be an A, I agree with you. I’ve only been minister for 
a short time, so we’re heading that way. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, thank you very much. I think you 
have admitted the very first thing I said in my comment was 
that it’s not all your fault. In fact, that it’s the fault of the 
previous ministers before you, and that you’re just one in a 
series of ministers who’ve been put into the portfolio and who 
have not been given sufficient funds to put Saskatchewan in 
number one place when it comes to the environment. 
 
Now I’m glad to see that you admitted that C minus is a pretty 
damn poor grade when it comes to the environment in 
Saskatchewan, and that your government has to take the 
responsibility for that grade. I’m also pleased to hear, Mr. 
Minister, that you intend to do something about it. But those are 
fine words, and your intentions—the road to hell is paved with 
good intentions. Things are done when they’re given money. 
Your department can achieve its objectives when you’re given 
money, and that’s not what’s happened. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you’ve talked about the C minus given 
Saskatchewan, and that was the grade given it, and that you’re 
not very proud of that fact. I’m glad to se that. I’m very glad to 
see that. It shows that you’ve got a realistic attitude to what’s 
happening here in the province  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

791 
 

and that you agree with us that there’s the environmental 
degradation. 
 
I want to turn to just another thing you mentioned in your reply. 
That’s the question of the environmental assessment process as 
regards to Shand and Rafferty. You said, now, that the 
environmental impact statement has been received by your 
department. I wonder if you will now table that statement for 
the legislature to peruse. 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— That’s not the customary process, but there 
will be a tabling of the environmental . . . I shouldn’t say 
tabling; there will be a releasing of the environmental impact 
statement for public review, and there will also be an 
opportunity for public hearings on the assessment for the 
Rafferty and Alameda project. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now am I to take it that the environmental 
impact statement given to you by the . . . now were you given 
the statement, first of all, by the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation? Is that the originator of that impact statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— No, the study is done by the Souris Basin 
Development Authority and it is through that group that that 
particular assessment is brought forward. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So the study – let’s get this clear – the study is 
coming directly from the Souris valley basin authority. Will the 
study that you release for public consumption, will that study be 
the same study that was given to your department by the Souris 
valley basin authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— Yes, I’m advised that it is the same 
statement that goes forward for public review. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — When you say same statement, Mr. Minister, are 
we to conclude that that includes all the technical data and all 
the back-up studies which went into, in fact, producing the 
environmental impact statement? Will we receive each and 
every report that was used to draw up the environmental impact 
statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— Yes, all 1,800 pages of that – 1,800 and 
some-odd pages of that particular assessment – will be made 
available for public review. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, Mr. Minister, let’s pursue this line of 
thought for a minute. Were there, in the production of the 
environmental impact statement regarding this project, were 
there technical reports prepared by firms or engineering groups 
or by other government departments, or by anybody else 
outside the Souris valley basin authority, which were used to 
determine the final 1,800 pages of the report – were there those 
other reports? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I think that the hon. member has to realize 
something here, and maybe you’re not aware of it. 
Environmental assessments are not done by the department; 
they’re done by the proponent. So the Souris Basin 
Development Authority used expert people throughout the 
province to come in with that statement.  

We have no input on the areas that they may use while they’re 
doing their statement; they draw from as many experts as they 
can. 
 
So I would say that the consulting firms that were used would 
go out and use many different resources that are available, and 
then they develop the overall assessment statement that’s 
presented to us. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re saying to me and to 
the House that the reports which are used to develop 
environmental impact statements which is presented by the 
proponent, and I’m quite aware of the process, that the back-up 
technical reports which were used in fact to shape that overall 
statement, your department doesn’t peruse, your department 
doesn’t ask for, and your department doesn’t check the 
technical data which forms the basis of the EIS (environmental 
impact statement). 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— In the review process, the department acts 
for any back-up information that they may need. And they 
aren’t always tabled at the time that the statement comes into us 
but they are available to my staff as they worked through that 
assessment process. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, in order to be able to give to the 
people of the province all the information – all the information 
regarding the development of Shand, Rafferty-Alameda, will 
you undertake to guarantee to this House that each and every 
document, including the terms of reference, be tabled in this 
House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— All the pertinent information is included 
within the report itself. If there’s anything that the department 
needs beyond that, then they go out and ask for it. But 
traditionally, it’s all incorporated and it’s available when that 
report is tabled. Now I don’t know if you’ve ever looked at 
1,800 pages in one report, but if you don’t think that’s enough 
pages, I’m sure they would develop more. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, having had the opportunity to 
peruse the Carter Report on Taxation – let me tell you, I’ve 
seen some length reports – 1,800 pages is not that much, given 
the fact that your government plans to spend 120, or I guess it’s 
130 million now if you use 1987 dollars. So the size of the 
report shouldn’t be too daunting to anybody. 
 
What is concerning me is that you’re saying that we are not 
going to get access to the back-up technical reports done by 
consultants, whether inside or outside government, that went to 
act as the basis for the environmental impact statement. Is that 
what you’re saying, Mr. Minister? That you will not release and 
will not table (a) the terms of reference; (b) the report itself; (c) 
all those technical and similar reports that were used in the 
production of the environmental impact statement. Is that what 
you’re telling us? That you won’t – that you will not provide us 
with all that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— No, I am not telling you that at all. What I 
am telling you is that all of the reports that are used are 
referenced within the assessment report. Those then become 
public and available, mostly in libraries and places of that 
nature. But they are available to you, and if  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

792 
 

you want them, I don’t see any problem getting them. So, no, 
the information is readily available when that assessment is 
tabled. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, will you undertake to table that 
report now including what you said. I take to be that that 
includes all supporting documentation. Will you table that now, 
this time, to the House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I told the hon. member, that’s not the 
process, is to table it now. What will happen is that the 
assessment process goes through the Department of 
Environment first. And then it’s made available for the public. 
And at that time you’ll have access to any of that information. 
But, no, it won’t be tabled now. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, I’m surprised, I’m shocked, and I’m 
appalled at what I just heard. Are you saying that we in the 
legislature, we who have the responsibility of giving to your 
government the authority to spend $130 million of taxpayers’ 
money in the Estevan constituency, that we’re not going to be 
able to get – get to be able to review the material upon which 
the financial decision was made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The hon. member is trying to put words in 
my mouth. I told you that it’s going to go through the 
department, then it will be made available for the public, and 
you are one of the public. You can certainly get all of the 
information that you need. It has never been the practice in the 
history of Saskatchewan to table that kind of statements in the 
legislature, and it’s not going to start today. But that’s not 
meaning that it’s any different. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I’d like to ask the Minister of the Environment 
a question, and that is: when can we expect the environmental 
impact assessment on Rafferty to be released? When? When are 
you going to be releasing that to the public? Give me a date. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I can’t give the hon. member a date for 
release. It has only been in, just a matter of about 10 days since 
we received it. It’ll probably be in the fall some time, but I 
couldn’t even hope to give you a date, because they go through 
the review process within the department and then they have 
information that they need, so they go back to the Souris basin 
authority to get that information, and sometimes there are time 
lags. 
 
It’s a major project. It’s going to demand a lot of work. And we 
want to be sure that when we complete the review of that 
environmental impact statement, that we’ve done a thorough 
job. So to me the most urgent thing is not to have it out 
tomorrow, but to have it when the department has had time for a 
full review. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, we’re not talking about the 
environmental assessment statement that your department does 
now – clear on that. We want, and we believe that the people of 
Saskatchewan want to be able and to have the opportunity to 
peruse the environmental impact statement put into your 
department by the Souris Valley basin authority, and in 
addition, the other supporting documentation. The other 
supporting documentation include the terms of reference. 
Because that does not, Mr. Minister . . . And I would submit . . . 
Are you trying to say that somehow that inhibits the process  

within your department? Is that the rationale you’re trying to 
give us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— No, that’s not the rationale. You’ll get all of 
the pages that come in from the Souris Basin Development 
Authority, plus the recommendations from the department itself 
like what our department review and what they write. So you’ll 
actually get all of it at that time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I understand, I understand what you’re saying, 
Mr. Minister. It doesn’t seem to me that you’re giving a good 
reason why, and we’ll come back to that, I guess, a little later 
on. I just want to ask you a few more questions in regards to 
your response to my opening speech, or my remarks. 
 
That Cluff Lake, I was interested to hear your remarks on Cluff 
Lake and the lack of environmental assessment process which 
took place on this so-called extension of a normal development. 
I would differ on that. I think the people of Saskatchewan differ 
on that. I think we saw a redefinition and redesign of the tailing 
pit up there. 
 
Be that as it may, be that as it may, I was interested in your 
statement that the department was justified in making the 
decision not to hold an environmental assessment of the process 
because the court has somehow absolved you. Is that what your 
statement means, that the court case which preceded it has 
absolved the department from making that assessment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— No, that’s not what I said. We made the 
decision based on very good fact, on the legislation that gives 
us authority and the areas of authority that that legislation gives 
us. 
 
I personally visited Cluff Lake with the mines pollution staff to 
take a look at what was happening to Cluff Lake, and then gave 
the necessary permits to allow them to go ahead and process 
leach tails. I believe the process was followed exactly. What I 
did say was that the courts, in a court challenge after the fact, 
upheld the decision that the department had made. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay. You just said, Mr. Minister, that the court 
case that was heard, the court case was heard, upheld the 
department’s decision. Are you saying that the court, the court 
in its written decision, said that the department of the . . . 
cleared the Department of the Environment of any 
responsibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The Department of Environment is never 
trying to get cleared of responsibility. We take the 
responsibility very seriously, and I think the record speaks for 
itself in the uranium mining industry in the province. If you 
look at the end result at each mine, you’ll find that they are 
doing much better even than the requirements that the federal 
government would ask. And so I am indeed pleased with the 
process and the concern that the mining companies have shown 
for the environment in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1200) 
  



 
June 26, 1987 

793 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, are you familiar with the court 
decision? Have you read the court decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— Yes. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Can you tell the House on what legal basis was 
the challenge thrown out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The challenge that was made had no 
standing before the court; that’s the crux of it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — In other words, the court did not say in its 
decision that it was okay for the Department of the 
Environment not to do an environmental assessment. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The court doesn’t say either one way or the 
other. I think if you read the statement you would agree with 
what I’m saying. But it did not chastise the department because 
we gave the permission to go ahead. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I read the statement and that’s why I’m asking 
those questions. You, 10 minutes – not more than 10 minutes 
ago – said that the court . . . You said that the court absolved the 
Department of the Environment, reaffirmed the Department of 
the Environment’s decision. We’ll see in Hansard tomorrow, 
because you said that the courts reaffirmed the Department of 
the Environment’s decision not to proceed with an 
environmental assessment. That’s what the words . . . those 
were the words. You just stand now and say, the courts didn’t 
say one way or the other. Which is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The hon. member tries to turn the words 
around and use his own words, and that’s fine. We went 
through the normal process. We made all of the decisions based 
on the legislation that gives us the direction that we need. That 
was challenged in court after the reprocessing of the leach tails 
began and the courts said that the woman that was challenging 
had no right to the challenge that she was raising. The court 
case, if you read it . . . and I’m not going to read a whole court 
document here. You can read it. It’s public information. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — It is public and I have read it. I repeat – I have 
read it, which was why I raised the question and which was why 
I was surprised that you would try to use the court decision to 
somehow justify your decision not to go ahead with the 
environmental assessment. In fact, as you have just admitted, in 
fact you have just admitted the court did not justify that. 
Wouldn’t you say that the court did not justify your decision? 
That the court decision had nothing to do with your decision 
and that you made the decision independently and has not been 
backed up by a court, but in fact that the court challenge of the 
department’s decision not to go ahead with the environmental 
assessment was thrown out on a legal technicality in which the 
person, Maisie Shiell, was not given legal standings before, and 
that was the only reason. It had nothing to do whatsoever for 
your decision to go ahead – not to go ahead with the 
assessment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— In its consideration of the facts the court 
found no fault with the department. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, that’s not what the question  

was and that’s not what you said earlier on. We weren’t talking 
about the consideration of the facts that the court found no fault 
with the department. Did you consult with any legal authority, 
through the Department of Justice or any outside legal help, to 
get a legal opinion prior to making your decision not to go 
ahead with the environmental assessment study at Cluff Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I believe if the court reviews a case and 
they find no fault with our action, then it effectively gives 
approval to the action that you’ve taken. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Would you please read from the court document 
that portion which says you are . . . that the court gives approval 
to the Department of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— That isn’t what I said and it would not be in 
any report. What I said was if the court gives a ruling after a 
hearing and they make no assessment against the department, 
then they in effect give approval of what the department has 
done. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So it’s in effect given approval. It’s in effect 
given approval. It hasn’t given approval in substance, it hasn’t 
given approval in reality, but only in the mind of you, sir, has it 
given approval. 
 
There is nothing down anywhere in any document, either court 
or environmental or otherwise, which gives approval to your 
actions in not going ahead with the environmental assessment at 
Cluff Lake. So I think that we better be pretty clear on that. Is 
my statement correct that no court in this province has in fact 
ruled? Now I want you to listen carefully. No court in this 
province has in fact ruled on the department’s decision to carry 
on an environmental assessment, whether or not to do an 
environmental assessment at Cluff Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The court reviewed the facts, and in so 
doing they found no fault within the department’s action. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Is that stated anywhere? Does it state in any 
court document that this court finds the Department of 
Environment is absolved from, or is not responsible for, or has 
not done anything wrong, in terms of the process? Is it down in 
black and white, or are you just reading things into the decision 
that gave Maisie Shiell no standing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I’m not sure what the member is trying to 
get at here. But I wonder whether the hon. member is inferring 
that the judge of the court did not do his job when he gave his 
ruling. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I’m saying that the court made a 
decision. It said Maisie Shiell, when she made a challenge to 
what was occurring at Cluff Lake, had no standing before the 
court. That’s what the court document said. You, sir, are trying 
to imply or impugn – and you said directly that the court has 
absolved your department, has reaffirmed what your department 
did in not going ahead with the environmental assessment. It 
had nothing absolutely whatsoever to do with that court case. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I suppose we could stand and argue  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

794 
 

back and forth about what the meaning of the court ruling was, 
if that’s the whole purpose. But I see really very little purpose. 
I’ve given you my answers. If you don’t accept them, that’s 
your choice. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Which of the answers am I expected to believe? 
First of all you say that the court ruling absolved the 
department. The court ruling in fact said that the department did 
right in not doing an environmental assessment. That’s the first 
answer you gave. 
 
Then the second answer it is – it didn’t rule one way or the 
other. Which of those two answers are you giving? Which of 
those two am I to believe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The member puts words in my mouth. I 
think when the Hansard comes out, and I would ask you to 
review the Hansard, that I did not use the word “absolved.” I 
think that you’ll find that that was your word. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — We will review the Hansard, Mr. Minister. So 
we’ll wait till the Hansard comes out, but pursue this line of 
questioning a little later on. 
 
Earlier on I’d asked you about outlining some of your 
philosophy in regards to the Department of the Environment. 
And you failed to do that. So I’m going to ask you – I guess I 
have to – on each specific item as we go along. 
 
Because the environmental assessment study was not done by 
your department, what I submit is a new process, including for 
example the interjection of cyanide into the atmosphere and into 
the environment of that area. Because your department did not 
undertake that assessment, a private citizen, one Maisie Shiell, 
was forced to go to the court to seek redress. She asked the 
court to in fact put an interim injunction on the project at Cluff 
Lake until in fact the people of this province had an opportunity 
to look at the kind of process. 
 
The court, in its wisdom, following the law of this province, in 
citing numerous precedents, said that Maisie Shiell has no 
standing before the court. In other words, that a citizen of this 
province does not and is not allowed to challenge projects 
which may be environmentally damaging. What I want to know 
from you, Mr. Minister, is this: do you believe that people in 
Saskatchewan should have the right to make a court challenge 
to projects which they think are environmentally hazardous? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I don’t believe that it makes much 
difference what I believe. People have the option to do . . . what 
people have the option to do in court are the things spelled out 
by our laws within the province. If they meet those 
requirements, then by all means they go ahead. But what I think 
or what I might suggest would have really no weight in that 
setting. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I don’t believe what I just heard, Mr. Chairman. 
I don’t believe what I just heard. Here is a minister of the 
Crown saying: I don’t think my opinion matters. I don’t think 
what I believe matters in terms of dealing with issues in my 
department. I don’t believe you said that. I don’t believe you 
gave sufficient thought to  

what you just said, that you as a minister, your opinion doesn’t 
matter. Will you tell us, first of all, when it comes to 
environmental matters and it comes to citizens standing before 
the courts regarding environmental matters, whose opinion does 
count, if it’s not yours? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I think the hon. member tries to address 
more than one thing in one question. What I did say was that in 
our justice system they follow the laws of this province, and 
that whether or not I think a person has the right to go to court 
or not, really will have no significance. As it relates to 
environmental matters, yes, my opinion does make a difference. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — In regards to environmental matters, do you 
believe that all citizens of the province should have a right to go 
before the courts, to pursue and to object to – through legal 
means – projects which they determine may be environmentally 
hazardous? Do you believe that environmentally, within terms 
of the environment, that citizens have that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— When you go to the court you follow the 
laws of the court and the laws of the province and the opinions 
of individuals in society, and it doesn’t matter whether you’re a 
member of the legislature or anywhere else, you will still follow 
the rules and the laws of this province and of the courts of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, perhaps you would like to 
enlighten us as to where those laws come from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I know the member is new here, but I 
thought he might have understood that the process of the 
legislature is to make the laws of the province, and in that 
setting we all have some voice within this legislature. And once 
the laws are written, then the people of the province use those 
laws to access the court system when there is need. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, now I think maybe we’re getting on to 
something here. So you will admit that the laws are made by the 
legislature, that you, a member of the Executive Council of the 
legislature, have a certain determining influence as to what is 
the nature of those laws. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I think the kinds of questions the member is 
asking would be more properly asked in the Department of 
Justice estimates. We’re talking about the legal process. I don’t 
believe that that is my job as the Minister of the Environment, 
and so I would ask you to come back to environmental issues. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m referring directly to environmental issues. 
We raised the whole question of citizens’ standings before the 
court on an environmental issue, i.e., your refusal to carry on an 
environmental assessment at Cluff Lake. So we’re dealing with 
environmental issues. What we seem to be, is dealing with your 
refusal to admit that, in fact, you have some influence as to 
determining the laws which gives the citizen standing before the 
courts. 
 
Now as Minister of the Environment, will you say, will you 
admit that, yes, we in the legislature can change the  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

795 
 

laws which will give a citizen standing before the courts? Yes 
or No? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— As the member knows, the legislature has 
the authority to change laws, but we have no law before us at 
this time that anybody is suggesting that we change. And that’s 
why I say that it really doesn’t matter what I think, if we have a 
law here, of course, then my opinion and my input can have an 
effect. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — My question to the Minister of the 
Environment is that he knows full well that there are many U.S. 
states that make provision for citizens to have standing before 
the courts to question and to oppose developments and projects 
that will be environmentally damaging. He knows that. And he 
also knows that the reason why Maisie Shiell and many other 
citizens of this province are not able to get standing on projects 
is because the legislation in Saskatchewan is not in place to 
grant them standing before the courts. He knows that full well 
too. 
 
Now this is an important question with respect to northern 
issues in particular, because what we’re talking about here is a 
uranium mine where there are very few people who live in the 
area of the uranium mine – in the immediate vicinity of the 
uranium mine. There are about seven or eight people who 
would actually be immediately impacted by environmental 
damage from that mine in the short term. 
 
But in the long term, the environmental impact of that mine, 
and the environmental impact of the radioactive waste disposal 
that we’re talking about will impact all people of Saskatchewan 
in the long term. But the narrow provisions right now, with 
respect to standing, are such that any resident of southern 
Saskatchewan isn’t able to claim under the current provisions 
that the minister’s legislation provides for. A citizen in southern 
Saskatchewan isn’t able to prove to the courts that in the short 
term they will be impacted by that project. And that’s the 
reason they don’t have standing. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you is: do you know that 
many U.S. states make provision for standing before the courts 
for all citizens of the state to question and to oppose a project 
whose impact on the environment will be environmentally 
damaging? Will you now indicate to this legislature whether 
you’re prepared to change the legislation in Saskatchewan to 
allow the citizens of this province to have standing before the 
courts when questioning projects like the Cluff Lake uranium 
mine in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— It’s interesting that the hon. member should 
raise this issue. The hon. member was a member of the 
Government of Saskatchewan when his party were in power a 
few years ago, and the environmental impact assessment 
legislation was put in by that government. If there were some 
fault within the legislation, then at the time that you were a 
member of that government, you had opportunity to have 
influence. 
 
An Hon. Member: — My question to the minister was  

very straightforward . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like to remind the member from 
Saskatoon University that we still do go through the Chair at a 
time like this. As long as you have a back and forth kind of . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. All I’m trying to say 
is that we still have to have some decorum here, and I’m asking 
you to be recognized for the first time. Then if you want to have 
a series of questions, I will let you continue but for the first 
time. So I recognize the member from Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Sorry, I will make a point of going through 
you in the future. 
 
My question to the minister was very straightforward. I asked 
the minister: are you prepared at this point in time to follow the 
lead of many U.S. state legislatures and introduce provisions in 
environmental legislation for this province that would allow 
citizens of this province to have standing before the courts to 
raise questions and opposition to projects that may be 
environmentally damaging? Will you answer that question, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The member is introducing a new idea to 
the legislature. This is the first time it’s come forward. What I 
would do is go back to the department and have a look at the 
legislation and make some decisions to see whether or not there 
is a need for change. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, you said that it’s a new idea to 
this legislature. Are you aware of any other legislature in 
Canada that are dealing with this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— Not particularly aware of it, no. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I want to get this straight. You 
said, not that you’re aware. You’re not aware of any other 
legislation in Canada which deals with the question outstanding. 
I’ll ask you this then, sir: are you aware of the Bill which was 
recently passed – a private members’ Bill – which recently 
passed second reading in the Ontario legislature, supported by 
all parties, which gives to citizens the right of standing before 
the court, and more than that, more than that, provides funds 
from the province, provides funds from the province of Ontario, 
in order that citizens can launch those challenges. Are you 
aware of that Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— In the first question, the member said 
legislature. In the second one, you said legislation. Now I think 
you’re going to have to distinguish a little between the two. 
There is a difference. Yes, I am aware that that particular Bill 
was in the House in Ontario. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, and we’ll go back to Hansard on 
this again. In response to the question, in response to the 
question from the member from Saskatoon University, you told 
this House that you were not aware of any legislation or any 
ideas that would give citizens standings. In the very next 
question, in response to the very next question, you tell us that 
you are aware. 
 
I asked you, I asked you, I asked you if you knew of any  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

796 
 

piece of legislation in any legislatures in Canada that was 
introducing legislation of that type. You said no. Then I asked 
you, were you aware of the Bill in Ontario? And you say yes. 
Now which is it? Which one are you . . . (inaudible) . . . You’re 
not aware of it, or you are aware of it. Would you please tell us? 
Would you please tell us what you know? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— You were the first person to raise the 
question of the Ontario Bill that’s in the House. And I gave you 
my answer. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You gave two answers, Mr. Minister, with all 
respect, sir. Mr. Chairman, the minister gave two answers – two 
totally contradictory answers. 
 
On the one hand, he said he was not aware of any legislation, he 
was not aware of any legislation in any legislature in Canada, 
because that was the question. You were not aware of any 
legislation which deals with the question of standing. That was 
the question and you said you were not aware of any. Very 
short. You got up and said, no, I’m not aware, and you sat 
down. 
 
I asked you then, were you aware of the legislation in Ontario 
which dealt with the question of standing, and which also 
provided funding for people who wanted to challenge, who 
wanted to challenge the environmental projects. And you got to 
your feet and you said, oh yes, we’re aware of that. Which are 
you, sir? Where do you stand? Are you aware of legislation 
which deals withstanding? Or are you not aware of legislation, 
which deal withstanding? Would you please tell us: are you 
aware or are you not aware? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I indicated to the member I was aware of 
the piece of legislation in the Ontario legislature. I’m not aware 
of any other. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Fine. So you are aware of at least one piece of 
legislation. Then how does that jive, how does that jive with 
your . . . How does that jive with the answer to the question 
immediately before that which said, and your response which 
said, I’m not aware of any legislation. So now you’re saying 
that your first answer wasn’t correct. Am I to assume that your 
first answer was not correct on that issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The member is going over the same 
question several times. I’ve given you my answer. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now you said you are aware. You say you’re 
aware, you’re aware of the legislation before the Ontario 
legislature which gives people standing. Would you please tell 
the House . . . Would you please tell the House, who was the 
hon. member in Ontario which put forward that legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I believe that the hon. member should come 
back to the Environment estimates for Saskatchewan. I’m not 
dealing with Ontario, and I'm not going to give any more 
answers on Ontario. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — But we’re talking, Mr. Minister, we’re talking 
about . . . We are talking about the estimates in Saskatchewan, 
and, in fact, how rulings of your  

department have denied citizens in this province rights before 
the court – rights which are being granted to other ministers. 
 
You, in your opening statement, said, Mr. Minister, that you 
thought Saskatchewan was up there in either number one or 
number two in terms of the environment. You said in your 
statement, and you professed to have a grip on your department. 
You profess to have a grip on your department and a grip on the 
issues that are before you in terms of environmental issues. We 
are criticizing that; we are saying, no you don’t. 
 
And I believe that we’re starting to prove that you don’t have a 
grip on those issues. You don’t have a grip on one of the major 
issues before the environmental movement in North America, 
which is the question of legal standing. 
 
Now I want to know: have you read the Bill? You said you 
were aware of the Bill in Ontario. I want to know from you, sir, 
have you read that proposed piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I told the member that I’m not going to 
answer any more questions dealing with Ontario. But I can tell 
you this much, that the legislation that our department operates 
under is Saskatchewan legislation. It was put in place when the 
New Democratic Party was in the province. We’ve had no 
requests from anybody on that side of the House to tell us that 
they thought the legislation need amendment until now. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, let’s just talk about legislation 
which you and your party have dealt with or have proposed in 
terms of the environment. We’ll go back to this because you see 
to be very, very willing to talk about Manitoba. You and the 
rest of your government seem to be very, very willing to talk 
about Manitoba but it’s interesting you won’t talk about Ontario 
because you still have not answered my question. You still have 
not answered my question. 
 
Mr. Minister, the member from Maple Creek – the member 
from Maple Creek, when she sat in opposition, put forward 
what she called the “Magna Carta” of the Environment. She put 
forward what she said was the charter of rights for the 
Environment, to translate it into English. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we don’t see you introducing that kind 
of legislation now that you sit in government. We haven’t seen 
one initiative in that area. But you know one of the central 
tenets of the Magna Carta that the member from Maple Creek 
was putting forward contained the exact same type of thrust that 
the people in Ontario were putting forward. Do you agree – do 
you agree that the thrust to give individual standing before the 
courts contained in the private members’ Bill from the member 
from Maple Creek – do you agree that that thrust should be 
introduced in Saskatchewan, as it has been introduced in 
Ontario? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The private members’ Bill was introduced 
by the member, was not given much heed by the government of 
the day, which happened to be a New Democratic government. 
They wouldn’t allow it to go  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

797 
 

anywhere. If you really thought it was so great, perhaps it 
should have come forward at that time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, when we form the government 
after the next election, let me tell you there will be that and 
more. There will be that and more. But I am not yet, or any of 
my colleagues not yet, occupying the portfolio of Minister of 
the Environment. You, sir, are. You, sir, are occupying that 
portfolio. You, sir, are occupying that portfolio and you have 
taken no initiatives. 
 
But I want to get back to the specific question. You said to this 
House that you were familiar with the legislation put forward in 
Ontario, similar legislation that’s contained in that private 
members’ Bill. You said you were familiar with it. How are you 
familiar with it? Was it because you read the Bill? Was it 
because you read the Bill, or was it because you got the idea 
from the member from Maple Creek? How were you familiar 
with it? Did you read the Bill or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I don’t think that I have to account to 
anyone for what I read and what I don’t read, and how I 
understand or whether I do not understand what’s happening in 
Ontario. What I’m telling you is that I’m here to defend the 
estimates and the Department of Environment for 
Saskatchewan, and if the hon. member would like to ask any 
questions on that subject I’d be pleased to answer them. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, once again I think Hansard is 
going to show . . . it’s going to be enjoyable reading for the 
people of this province the next . . . here we have a minister 
who says I don’t have to be accountable. I don’t have to be 
accountable for what I know. I don’t have to be accountable for 
what I read. I don’t have to be accountable for the actions I 
take. I don’t have to tell the people of Saskatchewan on what 
basis I take action. That’s what you just said. 
 
(1230) 
 
You said, and I’m questioning your credibility, Mr. Minister, 
you said to this House that you were familiar with the 
legislation from Ontario. I asked you: who proposed the 
legislation? You didn’t know, or else you won’t tell us, or else 
you’re keeping all your vast esteems of knowledge to yourself. I 
asked you: were you familiar with the contents of that 
legislation? And you won’t know or else you won’t tell us 
because you want to keep that wealth of knowledge to yourself. 
 
I’m asking you now: you said you were familiar with that 
legislation. How are you familiar with it? Did you read it, or 
were you briefed by an officials from your department here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I told the hon. member that I was aware of 
the legislation, but that the legislation in Ontario is not part of 
these estimates, and I’ll leave it there. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You said, Mr. Minister, that you were aware 
with it. Now you’re aware of one or two ways. You either read 
it, or you didn’t You were either briefed by it or you didn’t. 
Let’s put it this way: were you briefed by any of  

your departmental officials on the legislation that has been put 
forward in Ontario that deals with the question of standing? 
Were you briefed? Because that deals directly with 
Saskatchewan’s estimates and the department . . . the activities 
of your departmental officials. Were you briefed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The department has given me no briefing. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Then I am to assume that you read it yourself. Is 
that a fair assumption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The hon. member can make any 
assumptions he wishes. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Please tell the House, Mr. Minister, how is it, if 
you didn’t read it and you weren’t briefed on it by any of your 
department officials, how are you aware of that legislation? 
How are you aware of that legislation if you didn’t read it and 
you weren’t briefed on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I didn’t make those statements. Simply, I 
told you that I don’t believe that the laws of Ontario are part of 
these estimates. I didn’t tell you I didn’t read it. I didn’t tell you 
I did. I told you I’m aware of it, and that’s as far as I’m going 
on it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — May be as far . . . that may be as far as you want 
to go. We’ll see whether or not that’s as far as you go. We’ll 
come back at it another way. We’ll come back at it another way 
at another time, because I know some other members want to 
enter the debate. I have a letter here, Mr. Minister, that I’m 
going to be handing to you and I want to read it into the record. 
It’s to: 
 

The Hon. Herb Swan, Minister of the Environment, 302 
Leg. Building, Regina. Saskatchewan, S4S 0B3. 
 
Dear Herb: (It says) For the purpose of environment 
estimates, could you forward to our caucus office the 
following materials. 
 
1. Two copies of each of the environmental impact 
assessment statements that have been filed with the 
Department of the Environment in the past three years 
since July 1, 1984. 
 
2. Two copies of the comments prepared by the staff of the 
Department of the Environment as they conducted a 
review of each of these assessments. 
 
3. Documentation on what decision, if any, has been made 
on each of the projects on which an assessment was 
conducted? Could you indicate in each case whether the 
proposed development was granted approval or rejected? 
In cases where approval was granted, could you indicate 
what conditions were attached to the approval? Could you 
also indicate on which projects a decision regarding 
approval has not yet been made? 

 
4. Two copies of each of the uranium mine lease  

  



 
June 26, 1987 

798 
 

agreements that your government has signed since 
assuming office in April of 1982. 
 
5. Two copies of each of the spill reports prepared 
following a reported spill at each of the uranium mines in 
Saskatchewan. Please provide these back to April of 1982. 
 
6. One copy of each of the other spill reports filed with, 
and prepared by, your department since July 1984. 
 
7. Two copies of a statement that provides a listing of all 
projects that were exempted from requiring environmental 
impact assessment by your department. Please indicate 
what the grounds were for exempting each of the 
developments that were exempted. 
 
8. One copy of all the documents submitted to the 
Department of Environment in Saskatchewan by the 
Department of Health in Ottawa on the safety of 2,4-D 
(the chemical 2,4-D). 
 
Yours sincerely (and it’s signed by myself). 

 
And that shall be delivered to your office post-haste. The 
member from Saskatoon University will take that over to you. 
 
I will defer now to . . . My colleague from The Battlefords has 
an engagement. He wants to have a few questions, so I’d ask 
that he be given leave to question. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, my 
question is in regard to the Gainers bacon plant in North 
Battleford. And I’m wondering if your department has done any 
inspections or studies, either prior to, during, or after 
construction, in regard to the Gainers operation in North 
Battleford. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I wonder if the hon. member would repeat 
the question. I just caught the end of it. I don’t think your 
microphone was on at the beginning. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, what my question is, is whether 
or not your department has done any inspections and/or studies 
of the Gainers bacon plant in North Battleford in regard to their 
operations or proposed operations there, either prior to, during, 
or after construction of the plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— Since we have environment and public 
safety both represented in the Department of Environment, I’m 
not sure which side the member would like the answers in. We 
have had, of course, the electrical and gas inspections that have 
been done during the course of construction and at the 
completion. Environmental work would be done, and it would 
be done by Gainers, not by us. So I’m not just sure what the 
member is looking for. Maybe if you could be more specific, 
we could try and do better. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m of course concerned 
with both sides, of the public safety and as  

well as the environmental. I don’t quite understand what you 
mean if there is environmental inspections or studies or reports 
to be done, that that would be the responsibility of Gainers. 
 
I would think, Mr. Minister, that it would be the responsibility 
of your department as to whether or not, that if there’s an 
environmental assessment necessary, was it done? If there is no 
environmental assessment necessary for the plant, I would like 
to know why it was not done. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— There was no environmental impact 
assessment done on Gainers itself, but that would be done by 
Gainers. And we have made no inspections up to this point on 
the emissions from that plant. They go into, I believe, the 
hospital lagoon there. And I don’t believe that there has been 
any assessment of that up to this point. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, I certainly think that it’s 
the department’s responsibility, and I could be wrong. I 
certainly don’t know the legislation as well as you do, so I 
would defer to your comments. But it seems to me that if 
there’s an environmental assessment necessary, then it should 
be the department that does it and not Gainers. 
 
And are you sure, Mr. Minister, that it’s the responsibility of 
Gainers and not the department to do environmental 
assessments of such things as the emissions or the waste 
coming out of the Gainers plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— When I refer to the assessments, that’s prior 
to construction. But beyond that, it is the responsibility of the 
department and the city to do the inspections. And we likely 
will be doing, but I don’t think we have up to this point. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Do you have some sort of time frame then, 
Mr. Minister, as to when there’ll be an environment impact 
done, or at least an inspection there? Because there are some 
problems, at least to complaints of individuals who live in the 
area of the Saskatchewan hospital. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I’m informed that the sewage effluent, 
when it goes into an existing system, as long as that system 
meets the requirements, they normally would not be tested by 
our department. 
 
Now there are tests made by the Department of health, and I’m 
not sure if that’s the ones that you’re concerned with within the 
plant. Like the Department of Health still has the health side of 
inspections. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — If we could go back just a bit, Mr. Minister. 
Did Gainers actually do an environmental impact assessment 
prior to construction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I’m advised that they didn’t. The city would 
likely have given the necessary permits for construction. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Did you say that they did not do an 
environment impact assessment? 
  



 
June 26, 1987 

799 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan:— That’s what I’m informed, yes. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think that they would be 
in contravention of existing legislation within the province of 
Saskatchewan at the current time. And I do not know how a 
municipal government, Mr. Minister, could exempt a company 
from obeying and honouring provincial legislation. I don’t 
understand how a municipal government would have that power 
delegated to them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The department say that they saw no 
evidence of environmental impact effect, and there were no 
calls from the public for an environmental impact assessment, 
and for that reason they were not done. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think the department has 
some responsibilities in that regard to have looked into the 
situation, and I maintain that you’re in contravention of existing 
legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I’m advised that it was done in accordance 
with the requirements of the Act. As you realize, I was not the 
minister at the time, but I’m advised by the officials that it was 
done and met all of the requirements of the Act. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, you told me that there 
wasn’t one done. Now you say that it was done in accordance 
with the legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— No, I didn’t say that there was an 
environmental impact assessment done. What I said was that 
the department reviewed what was happening. They didn’t 
deem it to be environmentally a problem, and they let it go 
ahead. It met the requirements under the Act. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, there is a problem that exists 
there now. You were correct in your earlier information that the 
waste product from the Gainers plant is pumped into a lagoon 
on the Saskatchewan hospital grounds, and that is property that 
is owned by the Crown. It’s owned by the government. The 
lagoon was there for quite a number of years and people live 
within the immediate area, and until the Gainers plant came 
along there was never a problem with stench and smell from the 
lagoon. And many people, whether it be an amateur or 
professional opinion, maintain that because of the brine that 
comes from the plant being pumped into the lagoon, it stops the 
bacteria action, and therefore allows a great stench to come off 
of that lagoon. 
 
And I’m wondering if, at this point, what recourse do those 
people have in terms of the property that they live on in regard 
to the smell that comes off of that lagoon that no longer existed, 
or didn’t exist prior to the brine being pumped into the system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The indication I have is that the department 
has been made aware very recently of odour problems from that 
lagoon. And they say that additional surface aerators are being 
considered for immediate control of the odours. So it is being 
looked at. I guess the solution isn’t final yet. 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, now you’re saying there is a 
problem. But the department didn’t see any problem before in 
doing an environmental assessment. I don't understand that. If 
there are problems now, and you’re admitting there’s going to 
be remedial action taken, and I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. 
But I think this is just a very small example. Not small to the 
people who have to live on those grounds, but a very small 
example of the department under your direction – and I 
appreciate you weren’t the minister at the time – under your 
direction should be doing environmental impact assessments on 
such operations. 
 
Why wasn’t it done? The two don’t go together. There is a 
problem now. Before the department could not see a problem 
enough to do the environmental impact analysis. 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The department advised me that prior to 
construction, they did not see the need for an environmental 
impact assessment to be done. But at this point, when there is a 
problem in the sewage area, the department say that they have 
recently been made aware of it, and they are looking at the 
aeration. 
 
So even if you had done the assessment, it may have been most 
difficult to have that decision that it was going to cause odours 
from the lagoon. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Is it not true that there was no environmental 
impact assessment done because you’re trying to exempt Peter 
Pocklington from those controls and regulations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The man that does the assessment review 
said that he wasn’t really worried about Peter Pocklington. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But were you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I wasn’t the minister at the time, as I told 
you. No, I think they looked at all of the environmental impacts 
that it would have, and reviewed under the Act to see whether it 
would require an environmental impact assessment, and there 
was no public demand for it. Therefore, it was not considered. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Is the only option available now to put 
aeration equipment into the lagoon – aerate the effluent that’s in 
there – to make it a little sweeter to the smell of people that 
have to live in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I don’t suppose that you can ever say that 
that’s the only option that’s available. That’s the option that’s 
being looked at and discussed with the city. If that didn’t meet 
the requirements, then you would likely have to do other things. 
But this is the initial feeling, that the . . . (inaudible) . . . will 
likely be needed to solve the problem. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, when do you expect this to 
proceed? When will the decision be made, if there is a  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

800 
 

decision made, towards aeration equipment? When can we 
expect it to be installed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I’m advised that they expect the decision 
will be made very soon. And if that’s the route they’re going to 
go, it will likely be installed this summer. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I would certainly hope that they’ll be 
installed this summer, because of course in the winter-time, 
with there being less heat around, it isn’t as much of a problem 
for people. 
 
There are many people who have lived there. There are some 
people that are in their retirement. There’s other people living 
there with children. It’s just a very awkward condition on a hot 
day, and the wind blowing from the right direction. They can’t 
barbecue in their yards. They can’t even stay in their houses. 
They can’t open a window or anything else because of the smell 
that’s come from that lagoon because of the brine being 
pumped into the lagoon system. 
 
I suppose, before I sit down, I would like to know that when the 
remedial action is taken to rectify this problem, who in fact will 
foot the bill for paying for the equipment or whatever other 
remedial action is taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I’m advised that the lagoon is presently on 
property managed by the Saskatchewan property corporation 
and therefore the decision of who would actually pay will have 
to be sorted out between them and Gainers. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, if there’d been an 
environmental impact assessment done – if there’d been one 
done prior to the construction of the plant – and it was 
discovered that the brine would cause a reaction with the 
bacteria in the lagoon, then who would’ve had to pay for that 
remedial action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I suppose the same answer would have to 
be given, that the property management corporation owns the 
property and owns the lagoon so they would’ve had to negotiate 
with Gainers to decide on the process of who would pay. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I just have one final question. I may come 
back to this later on during estimates, Mr. Minister, but I do 
appreciate that the department is going to take some action, and 
take action fairly soon on it. 
 
The other question I have affects the city of North Battleford in 
respect to the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, and in light of 
the fact that there’ve been severe cuts in the budget for the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation, I’m wondering if you could 
just detail, very briefly, as to how that’ll affect the North 
Battleford office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I can’t deal with the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation under this estimate. It’s in a different estimate. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
watched with, I guess, perplexity, the exchange between 
yourself and the member from North Battleford in regards to 
the actions of your officials in the department not  

carrying out the environmental . . . or requiring Peter 
Pocklington – let’s get this really precise – requiring Peter 
Pocklington and Gainers, not requiring them to prepare an 
environmental impact statement. 
 
Do you have in your possession, or is there within your 
department, reasoning – written reasoning – which would lead 
your officials to make that decision that you are not going to 
carry out the environmental impact, or not going to require 
Gainers to submit an environmental impact study. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I think perhaps I answered that question to 
the hon. member from The Battlefords. The whole process was 
looked at at the time, and there was no public outcry for an 
environmental impact assessment. The department felt that the 
project, according to The Environmental Assessment Act, did 
not require the assessment. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — That’s not the question, Mr. Minister, I asked 
you. I asked you: is there written documentation within your 
department, upon which the decision was based, not to require 
Peter Pocklington and Gainers Ltd. Not to submit an 
environmental impact statement? Do you have a written 
decision, or do you have written reasons for the department’s 
decision not to require them to submit a statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— I’m advised that under the Act and the 
sections that deal with the need for environmental impact 
assessments, that’s the area that was used to make the decision. 
The department are not sure that there would have been 
anything in written form except the Act itself. And they apply 
the criteria to the Act, and they felt that at that stage it didn’t 
apply. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well I wonder, Mr. Minister, somebody made a 
decision some time, somewhere in your department to get Peter 
Pocklington off the hook. Somebody in your department said, 
hey, we’re going to let Gainers get away with this; we’re not 
going to require Gainers to submit an environmental impact 
statement. Somebody made that decision. 
 
First of all, let me ask you this: the person that made that 
decision – was it the minister that immediately preceded you in 
your portfolio? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— The decision is always made by the 
minister. But it’s made on the advice of the people in the 
assessments branch of the department. So they advise the 
minister, and then the minister is the person of course that’s on 
the firing line and has to make that final decision. It was made 
with the advice of the department though. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I appreciate that answer, Mr. Minister. The 
minister that immediately preceded you made a decision to let 
Peter Pocklington and Gainers off the hook environmentally. 
The minister that immediately preceded you said, Peter 
Pocklington doesn’t have to submit an environmental impact 
statement to your department. Now the decision, or the advice 
to make that decision, came from within your department – 
came from within the environmental assessments branch. Is that 
correct? Right. Okay. Now, how was that advice  
  



 
June 26, 1987 

801 
 

transmitted? Was that transmitted in written form to the 
minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:— My department staff member says he 
cannot recall whether it was written or verbal, but he would go 
back to the department and check. So I would have to defer that 
answer. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 


