













































October 28, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 28, 1987 

 

 

3611 
 

 

AFTERNOON SITTING 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's my 

pleasure to introduce to the Assembly 13 students who are visiting 

from the Regina Plains Community College, I believe seated in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They're accompanied by their teacher, 

Sally Heeren. 

 

These are English as a Second Language students. There are, in 

the gallery, immigrants from Poland, China, Vietnam, 

Czechoslovakia, India, Ethiopia, and some people with us from 

Quebec. The person who wrote the note, and this is kind of 

humorous, the person who wrote the note — this note literally 

says: immigrants from Poland, China, Vietnam, Czechoslovakia, 

and Quebec. I was careful to change that, but my colleague from 

Elphinstone, I think, divined the way it was originally stated. 

 

I want all members to join me, I'm sure you'd enjoy joining me, in 

welcoming these students here to this Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Canadian National's Deliveries to Thunder Bay 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Acting Minister of Agriculture. It deals with the failure of the 

Mulroney government and his Crown corporation, CN (Canadian 

national), to meet the Canadian Wheat Board targeting for 

deliveries . . . of deliveries for Thunder Bay. 

 

I'm surprised that some of the PC back-benchers, when they were 

so anxious about deliveries a few weeks ago, have been silent on 

this issue. You will know, Mr. Minister, that during one recent 

week CN has missed its target of unloads at Thunder Bay by some 

42 per cent. Is the Government of Saskatchewan aware of this 

problem, and what action have you taken to convince the 

Mulroney government to get CN back on track? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well as you might know, Mr. Speaker, I 

have had some discussions with CN, but not about this particular 

problem. And yes, Mr. Speaker, we are aware of the difficulties 

that the hon. member sets out as it relates to deliveries to Thunder 

Bay. Naturally we are not happy with, I think you said, a 42 per 

cent missed target in unloads. 

 

While I personally haven't had responsibility for lobbying the 

federal government or CN to improve that record, I'm very sure 

that the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier, in his many, 

many discussions with the federal government relative to 

agricultural issues and transportation issues, has on many 

occasions raised that particular concern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 

will know that a few short months ago we have variable rates 

introduced to this province, all in the name of efficiency, to get the 

product to market. And now we have a little bit of a change with 

CN failing to meet its commitments set out by the Canadian 

Wheat Board. 

 

I ask you: what does your government plan to do to get the 

message to Ottawa? What specifically do you plan to do to get 

your message to Ottawa, right now, to ensure that these unloads 

get back up to where they're supposed to be, so that farmers can 

get rid of their grain at this much needed time? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I think all members know all members' 

positions on the question of variable rates. It's been debated in this 

House on more than one occasion, and it seems that everybody 

always comes up on the same side of that debate. Having said that, 

I don't know what variable rates has to do with the decline in the 

deliveries by CN. 

 

He says what specifically are we going to do to enhance the CN 

record. I might offer them a couple of suggestions. But I think to 

be serious for a moment, our Premier and Minister of Agriculture 

has on more than one occasion, as members know, raised these 

kinds of concerns with the federal government, and will continue 

to, and whether it's writing or phoning or visiting or travelling or 

meeting or lobbying or whatever, all of those things are done, and 

they will be continued by the Minister of Agriculture, the Premier, 

and this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

United States Trade Subsidies 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to, in the absence 

of the Premier and the Acting Minister of Agriculture, address my 

question to the member from Cannington — Souris-Cannington. 

Mr. Minister, in spite of the fact that a so-called Reagan-Mulroney 

trade deal has been signed, I want to . . . the United States 

continues to try to steal grain markets from Canada. 

 

And I ask you, are you aware of yet larger subsidized sales into 

our markets? Are you aware that this week the Americans 

announced a sale of 100,000 tonnes of winter wheat, 54,000 

tonnes of durum to Algeria, and further, more than $56,000 a 

tonne subsidy on each tonne? They also announced 100,000 

tonnes of spring wheat to the Philippines, announced that they 

have offered 1 million tonnes of wheat to Iraq, both with heavy, 

heavy subsidies. 

 

What are the farmers of Saskatchewan to interpret in this so-called 

Mulroney-Reagan trade deal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, he calls it the so-called 

Mulroney-Reagan trade deal. One of the components to that deal, 

if you like, was a commitment to work at elimination of all 

subsidies over some period. He  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3612 

 

 

says it ain't working. Well, Mr. Speaker, the agreement has yet to 

be ratified in the United States or Canada, so obviously, obviously 

. . . 

 

And the other thing that members opposite don't understand, Mr. 

Speaker, is that in the international market, no one has exclusivity 

to markets. There is competition in the international market. The 

competition is somewhat lopsided by the ability of people like 

United States and European Economic Community to put subsidy 

on top of subsidy on top of subsidy. But the particular program 

that he's talking about is called the export enhancement program, 

and it was around long before this bilateral accord was arrived at. 

And you know, we in Canada, for instance . . . members opposite 

are hollering: — get that deficiency payment out — and I think 

they should get that deficiency payment out. And if we told our 

farmers that that deficiency payment wasn't coming, how do you 

think they'd feel? Probably about the same as the American farmer 

would feel if the United States says, you will get no more 

assistance under the export enhancement program. 

 

So there's a lot of difficulty. It's not as simplistic as the member 

opposite says. Likewise, Mr. Speaker, in our major markets we 

have increased our sales to both China and the Soviet Union in 

1987 over 1986 by — in the case of China, a whole bunch — in 

the case of China, almost 100 per cent; in the case of the Soviet 

Union, over a million tonnes, Mr. Speaker. And I know that you 

don't want to hear this, but I thought the members opposite did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 

minister has not indeed read the so-called agreement of the 

Mulroney-Reagan administrations. I just want to indicate one 

section of the agreement which is being breached: "Each party has 

agreed to take into account the export interests of the other party in 

the use of any export subsidy on the agricultural goods exported to 

third countries." And that's what the trade deal says. 

 

What we have now, in spite of that, and in spite of the final details 

of agreeing to a trade package, you have the United States with the 

greatest amount of subsidy going into the other foreign markets. 

 

I ask you: how is that standing up in protecting the markets for 

western Canada farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, he's talking about taking 

into consideration the level of subsidization in respect for 

traditional markets and all of that kind of thing. Take them into 

consideration. And I'm not happy that U.S. is moving in some way 

into some of our smaller traditional markets, if those are smaller 

traditional markets. The Iraq deal of a million tonnes over some 

period is a traditional market of ours, and in fact we have a 

long-term agreement with Iraq. I'm not familiar with the terms of 

the agreement. But it may well be that this million tonnes, for all I 

know, is over and above our ongoing agreement with Iraq — it 

may well be. 

 

Now if you're suggesting that we should blow away deficiency 

payments in consideration of subsidies, if you're suggesting that 

we should blow away the Crow benefits in consideration of 

subsidies, I think you're wrong, and I think the people of western 

Canada will say that you're wrong. And I think that the people in 

western Canada simply want a fair shot to compete in those 

international markets, traditional or not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — A further supplement, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

are you aware that the president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 

Garf Stevenson, in effect says that it's a breach of faith for the . . . 

to talk about solutions to a trade problem and then to go on acting 

the way the U.S. is. That's the spokesman for the wheat pool. And 

you stand up in this House and defend Americans. When are you 

going to stand up for the Saskatchewan farmers, that's the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I take a great deal of delight 

and with some degree of conviction stand up for Canadian farmers 

at all times. What Garf Stevenson has said is not dissimilar to what 

the Hon. Joe Clark has said, and I've told him, if you were 

listening, I've told him that we were not happy that the Americans 

were getting into some of our traditional markets. 

 

I went on, Mr. Speaker, to try to explain to him that we have a 

great deal of difficulty as has been agreed to in the bilateral 

arrangement in just waxing all of the distortions in the market like 

that. It isn't going to happen like that. It can't, and it won't. 

 

We have, through discussions that our Premier has had with 

people like the Prime Minister of Australia, and the President of 

France, and people in United States and people here in Ottawa — 

we have a broad consensus that what has to happen in agriculture 

is that we have to step out of these subsidies. And when we do 

that, Mr. Speaker, and when we can compete in that undistorted 

international market, Canada will do very, very well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Investment in Pioneer Trust 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I was going to direct a 

question to the Minister of Finance, but I think it's better directed 

to the former minister of Finance, the Minister of Economic 

Development and Trade. Mr. Minister, my question deals with a 

very shocking admission that the officials of the Department of 

Finance made during testimony before the Public Accounts 

Committee yesterday. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Finance officials confirmed that in January of 

1985, long after it was common knowledge that Pioneer Trust was 

in serious financial difficulty, that $4 million worth of provincial 

government investment certificates on deposit at Pioneer Trust had 

matured. The investment managers, the professional investment 

managers, Mr. Minister, further said and recommended  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3613 

 

 

to you that the $4 million be removed from Pioneer Trust and 

invested elsewhere. But your office overruled them and directed 

them to leave the $4 million in Pioneer Trust. 

 

How, Mr. Minister, do you justify this kind of political 

interference in the investment of public funds, interference which 

caused the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to lose millions of dollars? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, during the time of the 

Pioneer Trust incident when Pioneer Trust was in a significant 

amount of trouble, I can advise the hon. member that at that point 

in time myself and Morley Meiklejohn were working very, very 

closely on this particular deal, and I do not recall that particular 

incident that you refer to, quite frankly. I will undertake to further 

investigate that and report it back to the House. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, a supplementary, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Minister, I quote from comments made by the 

officials of the Department of Finance yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker — Order, please. Order, please. The hon. member, 

I'm sure, can paraphrase the quote. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I agree, that's correct. Mr. 

Minister, the officials of the Department of Finance clearly said 

that they were directed to make the investment contrary to their 

recommendation. 

 

I ask you this: why could you find $4 million for Mr. Will Klein, 

an important fund raiser and supporter of the Conservative Party, 

but you can't find $4 million to maintain a decent children's dental 

plan in Saskatchewan which you are destroying with the budget 

that we're considering in this session? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I indicated to the hon. member that at that 

point in time I was taking advice and discussing those issues with 

Mr. Morley Meiklejohn. Mr. Morley Meiklejohn is well 

recognized, or was well recognized, in Saskatchewan and across 

the country, and I don't recall that particular type of incident. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member also tries to make somehow 

the view that the government lost $4 million on a particular 

investment, and I don't buy that either. 

 

And that's the type of information he's trying to lead, and that is 

not proper information. As a former Finance minister, he knows 

that there has been significant recovery on that particular . . . on 

any particular deposits at Pioneer Trust — significant recovery. 

 

And I think that the nature of his paraphrasing and the nature of 

his question is designed simply to mislead the public. And I think 

that is an unfortunate way for a former Finance minister to act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker, and I ask the minister only to check the latest report of 

the Provincial Auditor to confirm that in fact there was money lost 

under this investment that you directed be made. 

 

My new question, Mr. Minister, is as follows. During this period 

of the Pioneer . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, during this period of the Pioneer Trust fiasco, you 

had a special report on Pioneer Trust that was prepared by one Mr. 

Allan Wagar in January of 1985. And it was a report that your 

government used to decide whether or not to continue with your 

$30 million bail out of this trust company. The officials of the 

Department of Finance confirmed that this was a verbal report 

only and was provided the cabinet ministers only and not to 

officials of the Department of Finance. 

 

Didn't you think, Mr. Minister, that a $30 million decision 

required at least a written report that officials in the Department of 

Finance could consider and study for its accuracy? How can you 

justify this kind of shoddy performance when $30 million of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers' money is at question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, during this particular time 

that the hon. member is talking about — I'm taking it from 

memory — at that point in time, we dealt with this particular issue 

throughout the month of January. 

 

I can advise the hon. member that one Mr. Morley Meiklejohn 

was working with me on a . . . virtually on a daily basis. Morley 

Meiklejohn, again, is well recognized at that time. He has since 

retired from government. Morley Meiklejohn was intensely 

involved on the deciding and the recommendation of what we do 

with regard to Pioneer Trust. 

 

For the member opposite to somehow suggest that is not the case, 

or for the Provincial Auditor to somehow suggest that is not the 

case, is clearly misinformation and is clearly misleading. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

were it only the officials had made these decisions, I think the 

problem may not have been what it was. But the problem is that 

you made the decisions and the executive council made the 

decisions, and thus we are faced with the problem today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, my new question to 

you is about something that's happened more recently. All of these 

admissions that we have seen in the last two days with regard to 

Pioneer Trust show that during that period of time it is clear it was 

nothing short of amateur night on the prairies when it applied to 

your government. 

 

There was another admission made during these discussions 

yesterday in the committee, Mr. Minister,  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3614 

 

 

which made it clear that you still haven't learned from your 

mistakes, because it was revealed in the Public Accounts 

Committee that although the Consumer Affairs department knew 

in July of 1983 the serious difficulties of Pioneer Trust, it failed to 

tell the officials of the Department of Finance until November of 

1984. Now that, Mr. Minister, is the same kind of negligence and 

the same kind of incompetence which we saw in the collapse of 

the Principal Group of companies this year. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, why did you allow all of the 

shortcomings of your administration to continue so that now 

thousands more of Saskatchewan people have lost millions of 

dollars because of your inaction? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that the Consumer and 

Corporate Affairs were advised as to some concern about Pioneer 

Trust back in 1980, at such time as the member from Quill Lakes 

was the minister of Consumers Affairs and you were the minister 

of Finance. So I wonder if you're really being forward here, really 

being quite frankly straightforward with this particular issue. If 

you're criticizing me, you're also criticizing yourself and your best 

friend, the member from Quill Lakes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Investigation into Collapse of Alberta Trust Companies 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Justice. Yesterday in this House during the review of 

the Consumer Affairs estimates for that department, the minister 

had something to say about the RCMP investigation into the 

collapse of First Investors and Associated Investors, and I want to 

quote her comments to you and ask you a question. She said: 

  

. . . I believe the police had contacted approximately 350 

investors who had made allegations of misleading 

information and that type of thing. 

 

. . . I think the investigation has been completed, but you'd 

have to ask the Minister of Justice. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, have the RCMP completed the investigation? 

And if so, have decisions been made to lay possible charges? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the questions 

of the hon. member, I am advised that the RCMP have not 

concluded their investigation, and it would not be proper for the 

department or the Minister of Justice to comment on ongoing 

investigations. 

 

Now if the RCMP and the RCMP fraud squad is continuing their 

investigation, that means that they must be of the view that there's 

further information that they need before they could make a 

determination as to whether charges should be laid or should not 

be laid. And that is always, and should and must remain, in the 

purview of the RCMP, and they are the people that will  

make that decision. 

 

I think it would be very improper of me or of you to somehow ask 

them to speed it up or do it at a different course or report interimly 

as to what the evidence they have now is. And I think it's probably 

best to leave that to the RCMP. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Supplementary question, Mr. Minister, there are 

now 4,400 Saskatchewan depositors in this province who are very 

concerned about getting some information regarding the collapse 

of those companies. 

 

The investigation has been under way for a long time, and in 

British Columbia the government has already launched a civil 

action against the officials of the Principal Group, including the 

former president, Donald Cormie. And I want to know how it is 

that the British Columbia government can move so swiftly and the 

Saskatchewan government is going at a snail's pace if it's doing 

anything at all. How is that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the hon. member said that there were 

4,000 depositors. As the hon. member would know, that a 

depositor can be covered by CDIC (Canada Deposit Insurance 

Corporation) as opposed to an investor — now I don't know 

whether she's talking about investors or about depositors. 

 

Now there's clearly an investigation going on in Alberta which is 

the focal centre-piece of any investigation. Anything done in B.C. 

is going to be peripheral to that; any investigation going on by the 

RCMP is going to be peripheral to that. I think it's true to say, it's 

been said many times in this House by the Minister of Finance, by 

the Minister of Consumer Affairs, that the — you're going to get 

to the bottom of the issue through the investigation going on in 

Alberta, and that's where you're going to be able to call the 

information. That's where the corporate decisions were taken by 

the various companies, and I think you would agree to that. And 

that's where you're going to find the information. 

 

Now are we interested — you and I and everyone else — for the 

best interests of the investor or of the depositor to get to the 

bottom of the issue. And I think if we're interested in getting to the 

bottom of the issue, then we let that investigation in Alberta take 

its course. We will do what we can do here, and B.C., I suppose, 

will do what they can do. 

 

But the end of the day it's going to be the Alberta inquiry that 

determines what the issue is and where the mistakes were made, 

and I think we should let that run its course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Notaries Public Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3615 

 

 

move second reading of this Bill, The Notaries Public Amendment 

Act, 1987. 

 

This legislation, while not earth-shattering to the member from 

Moose Jaw, this legislation will eliminate the necessity for 

practising lawyers to make an initial application to become 

notaries public and will ensure that lawyers appointed as notaries 

public continue as long as the lawyer holds an annual certificate of 

practice issued by the Law Society of Saskatchewan. 

 

Almost every lawyer requires a notary public appointment in the 

course of his or her practice. This Act removes the requirement to 

apply for this necessary tool of practice. The appointment of 

lawyers as notary public will continue as long as they remain 

practising lawyers. Since this legislation is of a regulatory nature, 

and since lawyers are never denied any appointment as a notary 

public, it makes little sense to continue with that form of an 

application. As well, it has traditionally been the case in this 

province that lawyers maintain their notary public appointment 

unless suspended from practice or struck from the roll, as barrister 

and solicitor, kept by the law society. This will continue to be the 

case in the legislation. 

 

The amendment of the existing Act makes the appointment of a 

lawyer as notary public consistent with similar provisions in The 

Commissioners for Oaths Act, pursuant to which lawyers are 

automatically commissioners for oath and remain so as long as 

they are lawyers. 

 

In terms of eliminating the requirement to make an application to 

become a notary public, this change will result in our legislation 

being consistent with the statutes of Alberta, British Columbia and 

New Brunswick. As well it should be noted that in every province, 

appointment of lawyers as notary public continues as long as they 

are entitled to practise law in that province, unlike the 

appointments of other persons for a specific term. 

 

I might say to the hon. members, Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of 

legislation that has been recommended to the government by the 

Law Society of Saskatchewan. We felt that the recommendation 

of the Law Society had some merit, and then therefore are moving 

this legislation. With that I move second reading of An Act to 

amend The Notaries Public Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I have very strong feelings about this subject, 

and it had been my plan to speak at some length in support of the 

motion. But in the interests of economy of the time of the House, 

Mr. Speaker, I would simply say that I and my colleagues are 

going to support the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 55 — An Act to 

provide for the Division of Saskatchewan into Constituencies 

for the Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly be 

now read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to enter this 

debate on The Electoral Boundaries Commission Act, an Act 

which will scrap our existing Constituency Boundaries 

Commission Act, which has been on the books since 1972, and 

substitute for it an Act which is clearly inferior from the point of 

view of achieving the appropriate objectives which this legislature 

should have in enacting any Act which deals with the electoral 

boundaries. 

 

I want in this regard to go into a little bit of the background of this 

House and the electoral boundaries. And before 1972, Mr. 

Speaker, we didn't have any independent boundaries commission, 

no process for drawing constituency boundaries in a way which 

was fair and would be seen to be fair. 

 

The need for a fair and impartial way to draw boundaries was 

recognized in Canada during the 1960s. The federal government 

adopted an independent boundary commission approach, I would 

think about 1966, followed by Alberta and Manitoba. The then 

government of Saskatchewan, the Liberal government of Mr. 

Thatcher, did not follow that route. Instead they resorted to what 

can only be called an outrageous gerrymander to try to shore up 

their sagging political fortunes. And the gerrymander was 

outrageous. 

 

I speak, Mr. Speaker, of the gerrymander which preceded the 1971 

election. And I'll give you just a few examples. The member for 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden was one of the architects of that particular 

gerrymander, and he then was a public servant, a political 

appointee; he worked in the office of one of the ministers in the 

Thatcher government. And here are some of the things which were 

dealt with, and I will indicate to this House how they were dealt 

with, and the House and the people of Saskatchewan can decide 

whether or not they felt that this was fair. 

 

In Moose Jaw there were, all during the ’60s and the ’70s, and still 

basically true, about 20,000 electors. And in 1964, for the 1967 

election, the Liberal government of the day undertook to draw the 

boundaries of Moose Jaw into two seats. And they said there is no 

way that we can draw a boundary which gives about 10,000 

electors for each seat and have either one of them won by the 

Liberal Party. So they said well, fair enough, we'll draw the 

boundaries — 12,000 in one riding and 8,000 in another, and we 

may just win the 8,000 riding. But they miscalculated, Mr. 

Speaker, and both ridings were won in the 1967 election by the 

NDP, as it now is. 

 

So when they came to 1971, they said, there's nothing wrong with 

our idea, we just didn't have the courage of our convictions, so 

they drew the boundaries so that the two seats had — one 14,000 

and the other 6,000. And they achieved their result. They won the 

6,000 voter riding in 1971, and it was a considerable credit to the 

member for Qu'Appelle-Lumsden and the architects of  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3616 

 

 

that particular gerrymander. A credit to their skill at drawing 

boundaries, but no credit to their sense of political morality. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — In 1971 in Regina I was elected for the 

constituency of Regina Centre. A Liberal was elected in another 

constituency in Regina of Albert Park. Regina Centre had four and 

one-half times as many voters as Albert Park, in the same city. 

The Liberal who ran against me lost his deposit — lost it badly, 

but he had more votes than the Liberal winner in Albert Park or 

the Liberal winner in Whitmore Park. Albert Park and Whitmore 

Park were the two which were won by the Liberals with fewer 

votes than the Liberal who ran against me and lost his deposit, and 

lost it badly. 

 

Rural seats, side by side, were dealt with the same way. Whatever 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Please allow 

the Leader of the Opposition to make his remarks without 

interruptions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, rural seats were dealt with 

the same way — two side by side, the seat of Wadena and Last 

Mountain, and they are contiguous then and contiguous now. One 

had over 10,000 voters, and the other had just over 5,000 voters. 

This was some of the craftsmanship brought to bear on this 

particular gerrymander. 

 

And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that act offended the conscience of 

Saskatchewan people, and it attacked the fundamentals of 

democratic government. The fundamental principle of democratic 

government is: — one person, one vote, and as far as possible 

having everybody's vote count for the same amount. We're not 

talking about arithmetic exactitude, but we are talking about 

generally one person's vote equalling one other person's vote and 

no legal structures which make that impossible. 

 

We don't want super-citizens and sub-citizens. We don't want 

citizens plus and citizens minus. We want everyone to be treated 

alike when we come to casting our ballot and having it counted in 

choosing the government which is to govern us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, because of the enormities of the gerrymander, 

and because of, I think probably a growing general morality for 

which I take no more credit than anyone else, we introduced a 

Constituency Boundaries Commission Act in 1972 which I think 

did the job, and I don't know anyone who quarrels. And that is the 

current law. 

 

It does provide for two northern seats. I admit that, when strictly 

speaking they would only be entitled, perhaps, to one and one-half 

— and one might quarrel with that. There are some special 

circumstances in the North, four main ones: — the enormous 

distances and difficulties of travel and communication; the 

enormous area, encompassing half of the province; the rapid 

growth in population; and the large population compared with the  

number of votes, and that's not often appreciated in the North. 

They have not so many voters, but a lot of people. And when over 

half the population is under 16, you get many more people per 100 

voters than you get in a constituency like Regina Elphinstone. 

 

We're not suggesting that this legislature represents people; we 

represent voters. But in a sense, a northern member has to 

represent the youth of that constituency as well. But in any case, 

for two seats — moving it from one and a half, with those special 

circumstances, did not seem a violation of the general principle. 

 

Now the current law says this, the one we are going to repeal if 

this Bill is passed. It says: 

 

We will appoint an independent boundaries commission. We 

will ask them to draw boundaries on the basis of one person, 

one vote. They may take into account natural boundaries, but 

the principle is firm, of one person, one vote, and the 

variation shall not be greater than 15 per cent up or 15 per 

cent down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the basic principles of the Bill which we 

are now seeking to repeal. 

 

Now let's take a look at the Bill which has been put before us by 

the government opposite. The key to any such Bill, Mr. Speaker, is 

the commission, the boundaries commission. Now the Bill 

changes the law with respect to the boundaries commission. And 

the simple questions to be asked are why, for what purpose, and 

for whose benefit? 

 

Who is going to benefit by changing the way we get our 

independent boundaries commission? Certainly we now have an 

independent boundaries commission. It has operated, it has 

operated under two governments — our government and the 

government opposite. And, Mr. Speaker, you may know that it has 

as its chairperson, the existing commission has as its chairperson, 

Mr. Justice Hall; it has as one member, the Clerk, Mr. Barnhart; 

and it has as a third person, chief justice Culliton. 

 

The earlier commissions under this same law have had as their 

chairman other judges, Mr. Justice MacGuire, and others. They've 

had Mr. Barnhart, and they've had the president emeritus of the 

University of Saskatchewan, Mr. John Archer. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the commissions over more than 15 years now 

have been scrupulously fair, and nobody has suggested otherwise, 

certainly not the member for Souris-Cannington when he 

introduced this Bill. He would not have the temerity to suggest 

that these commissions under this Bill have been anything other 

than scrupulously fair. And I am sure he would say that the present 

commission which is now acting, Mr. Justice Hall and Mr. 

Barnhart and chief justice Culliton, would be equally and 

scrupulously fair. 

 

Now why then are we changing it? We've got a 15-year track 

record of scrupulous fairness, which everybody acknowledges. 

We've got a commission acting now which is scrupulously fair, 

and I haven't heard a word  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3617 

 

 

suggesting otherwise — not a word suggesting otherwise. And yet 

there's a Bill to change it. Why? We keep asking that same 

question. Who is going to benefit? Why are they proposing a 

change? Why are they proposing a change? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, every change made in this Bill with respect to 

an independent boundaries commission is a move backward. It 

makes the commission less independent and less impartial, and 

therefore strikes a blow at the underpinnings of democracy in this 

province. 

 

Let me check the changes proposed by this Bill one by one. This 

Bill proposes a commission where one member will be a judge — 

very much as it is now — and with that I have no quarrel. But 

where now the judge is the chairman under the Bill before us, the 

judge, that is the judge appointed by the Chief Justice of 

Saskatchewan, will not necessarily be the chairman. And I've 

heard no reason for that, no justification for it. 

 

I think it's important that the chairperson of the independent 

boundaries commission be seen to be scrupulously fair. I think we 

can agree that a judge appointed by the Chief Justice of 

Saskatchewan has the best chance of impressing upon the public 

mind his fairness and total impartiality, and yet the government 

opposite has decided to change that. And I ask why? And I 

certainly didn't hear why when the member for Souris-Cannington 

was introducing the Bill. 

 

(1445) 

 

There can be no reason for changing it unless there's some 

opportunity for partisan advantage. If anyone can suggest another 

credible reason, I hope he enters this debate and does so. 

 

We have as another member of this commission for 15 years, the 

Clerk, who is a member ex officio. Now this particular Clerk — 

and he's sitting before us, and I'm not saying anything about him 

that he doesn't know himself — was appointed by a legislature 

with a Liberal majority. He was appointed in the days of the 

Liberal legislature. He served with distinction for 11 years under 

our administration and now five years under a PC administration. 

I've no doubt that he has tugs and pulls with all three 

administrations, and on that I don't speculate. But he has been a 

member of every one of the independent boundaries commissions 

— every one that this province has had at the provincial level — 

and no one has suggested over this track record that this particular 

Clerk has been anything but impartial both in this House and when 

he was acting on the independent boundaries commission. 

 

Now that being the case, why should we change? This Clerk, as a 

matter of fact, has additional experience because, as I recall it, he 

served as a member of some of the federal boundaries 

commissions which were drawing federal boundaries in this 

province. 

 

And again, I have never heard anyone question his impartiality, 

his effort to get the fairest boundaries possible. And if members 

opposite have heard it, I wish they'd share it with me because I 

haven't. Now why change that? Why change it unless there is 

some seeking a  

political advantage? 

 

Now who are we going to get in its place? We are going to get the 

Chief Electoral Officer. And I noted the member for 

Souris-Cannington was suggesting that the Chief Electoral Officer 

is on some other boundaries commissions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a grave difference between the Chief 

Electoral Officer in Saskatchewan and, let us say, the Chief 

Electoral Officer in Alberta. In the latter province, he's an 

appointee of the legislature, such as our Clerk or such as our 

Provincial Auditor. In this province — perhaps it should be 

otherwise, but it isn't — the Chief Electoral Officer is a direct 

nominee of the cabinet, and no one suggests that he is impartial. 

 

As a matter of fact, I think the current Chief Electoral Officer 

would consider that I was insulting him if I suggested that he was 

impartial, that he wasn't fully committed to the Progressive 

Conservative Party, the Progressive Conservative leader, and the 

interests of that party. I think he'd be upset. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I think he'd be right to be upset 

because he's never pretended to be anything else but a nominee of 

the Progressive Conservative Party, dealing on their behalf. He's 

an order in council appointment. He doesn't pretend to be 

independent and ask for any protection from the Public Service 

Commission. He doesn't pretend to be anything but a nominee of 

the Progressive Conservative Party, serving their interests. And 

now he is made a member of the independent boundaries 

commission, and unquestionably that appointment makes the 

commission less independent than it previously was. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, who was the third member? Mr. Speaker, 

under the current law the third member is appointed by Mr. 

Speaker in consultation with the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

And such have been the character and capacity of the people who 

have served as Speaker that, in the past right up to the current 

time, we have had people nominated whose impartiality and 

qualifications could not be vote-safed, could not be attacked. 

We've had, as I say, the president, John Archer of the University 

of Regina. We now have retired chief justice Culliton, and I have 

never heard anyone attack either the competence or the 

impartiality of either of those people. 

 

That's how the current system works. Now why would we want to 

change that? No reason has been advanced, and no reason can be 

speculated upon except someone seeking partisan political 

advantage. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am somehow asked to believe that a 

provincial court judge who is an appointee of the government 

opposite, selected by the chief judge of the provincial court, who is 

equally an appointee of the government opposite, will be able to 

attain the same stature of impartiality in the public mind as chief 

justice Culliton, who is the present person chosen by the current  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3618 

 

 

method. 

 

Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, simply to state that proposition is to 

refute it. We've got good people on the provincial court, although I 

suspect that nobody opposite could name a quarter of them. We've 

got good people, and I'm not denying that. But I think I do not 

malign them when I say that not one of them has the stature in the 

public mind of chief justice Culliton when it comes to being a 

person who knows what politics is all about and can act fairly and 

impartially. 

 

And yet this change is being made. It is proposed that we appoint 

a provincial court judge, selected by the chief judge of the 

provincial court, Chief Judge Carey, the man who, as I recall it, a 

few months ago, not many months ago, was the executive assistant 

of the current Minister of Finance — special adviser — who, I 

remind members opposite, was one of the architects of the 1971 

gerrymander. 

 

Now that person who . . . and he would not deny it; he occupied a 

political appointment. Nothing wrong with being a political 

appointee — only something wrong with it when you then claim 

that you're totally impartial and unbiased. 

 

And we now have that person as chief judge, and I have no doubt 

that over time he will do a good job as chief judge. I just say that 

right now, fresh from leaving the office of the current Minister of 

Finance, he should not undertake obligations which are clearly 

political in nature, and that is what selecting someone for an 

independent boundaries commission amounts to. And I say that 

the government opposite is acting unfairly so far as Chief Judge 

Carey is concerned when they put him that position. And that is 

not good enough. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we review this by saying that we will have an 

independent boundaries commission which will clearly be less 

independent. The judge will be the same, but trading — if I may 

put it that way — the Clerk of this legislature, who has a track 

record of impartiality and who has served governments of three 

political persuasions, for an acknowledged political appointee, the 

chief Electoral Officer, and trading people who are appointed by 

Mr. Speaker of the character of President Archer and chief justice 

Culliton for someone appointed by Chief Judge Carey, fresh out of 

the Minister of Finance's office, does not enhance, but in fact 

reduces the impartiality of the commission and the perceived 

impartiality in the public mind, and that's bad for democracy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think no one could look at 

this without feeling that the new commission must be a far cry 

from the ones we've had in the past. It may well produce 

something fair, but what we're talking about is, when we're talking 

about constituency boundaries commissions and the reputation 

which gerrymanders bear n the minds of people, generally, but 

certainly in the minds of people of Saskatchewan. It's desperately 

important that that commission not only be fair but be seen to be 

fair. 

 

Under the current Bill that has happened — and no one will dare 

deny that. Under the new Bill every step is backward. Every step 

has either no purpose or the purpose of giving partisan political 

advantage and, therefore, that particular provision of the Bill ought 

to be rejected by every member of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to another 

major aspect of the Bill, and that is the redistribution rules, Mr. 

Speaker, the redistribution rules in the old Act were fairly simple. 

They said: — of the north-half of the province make two seats; of 

the south-half of the province divide up all the seats as closely as 

you can in accordance with the population — period. There were 

some certain limitations to the number of seats, somewhere 

between 55 and 65. 

 

Now this new Bill changes things in two material ways. By and 

large it leaves the North untouched, and for the reasons that I've 

earlier indicated, we have no quarrel with that. But, Mr. Speaker, 

having regard to the figures which are about, and based upon the 

last election when the average rural seat had approximately 9,700 

electors and the average urban seat had approximately 10,950, so 

9.700 to 11,000. And based on the provisions of the Act which say 

that rural seats shall be selected on a different basis than urban 

seats, it provides as a matter of law that voters in urban seats shall 

have a vote . . . their votes count for less than voters in rural seats. 

 

Super-citizens and sub-citizens are built into this Act by law, and 

however that may seem . . . however unfair that may seem to the 

independent boundaries commission, they are not able to do 

anything about it because the law provides that that unfairness 

shall be built in. 

 

The second major change has to do with the extent to which one 

seat can vary in size from another. We used to have a . . . the 

current law is that one seat could vary plus 15 or minus 15 from 

the average or the norm or the quotient, to use the words which are 

frequently used. 

 

Let me just restate that by saying that if one took all of the . . . if 

you want to divide the southern half of the province into 62 seats, 

you added up all the voters, divided it into 62, got an average 

figure which, let's say, was 10,000, and the number of voters could 

not vary at the time of the redistribution by more than minus 15 

per cent of 10,000, or plus 15 of 10,000 — which makes a 30 per 

cent spread, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill changes that figure from 15 per cent to 25 

per cent. It will allow, therefore, one seat in Regina to be 50 per 

cent larger than another seat in Regina. it will allow a rural seat to 

be 50 per cent larger than another rural seat. And having regard to 

the skew built in by law, it will allow a Regina seat to be probably 

75 to 80 per cent larger than the smallest rural seat — very nearly 

two to one to start, very nearly two to one to start with, making the 

rural seats smaller than the urban seats. 

 

And all of us know, and particularly does the member for, let us 

say, Eastview or Mayfair know, the rural seats tend  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3619 

 

 

to go down in population; the urban seats tend to grow. And over a 

period of eight or 10 years, the length of a redistribution, you get a 

very substantial skew, a very substantial distortion. 

 

The member for Mayfair would represent close to three times as 

many voters as, let us say, the member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And that's not fair — that's not fair. His 

voters are just as good as my voters, and he represents about twice 

as many voters as I, and I don't think that's fair. I know that we 

can't cure all those things because they happen over time, but we 

should not start out — we should not start out — with an 

unfairness built in when we know that over time it's going to get 

more and more unfair. And that's what this Bill does, and for that 

reason it is grossly unfair. 

 

(1500) 

 

What particularly disturbs me is the fact that it would permit one 

rural seat to be 50 per cent bigger than another rural seat. And let's 

hear the argument for that. Let's hear the argument for saying that 

a Melfort seat should be 50 per cent larger than a Kinistino seat. I 

just don't feel that that has any justification — not any — and I 

don't know why it's built into the Bill. 

 

There was nothing wrong with the earlier . . . It was bad enough, 

in a sense, at 30 per cent, but you can't have arithmetic precision 

here. But to make it 50 per cent for openers, at the start, is bad; it is 

unfair to those voters, and as I say again, Mr. Speaker, opens up 

the door for partisan political advantage. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I further believe that rural people are not 

asking for any special status. The people in Maple Creek and 

Shellbrook don't think they're any better than the people of Swift 

Current and Prince Albert. They're asking for an equal shake, 

that's all, and that's what they should have — no less, but no more. 

 

Certainly the present rules have not discriminated against rural 

people. Nobody can say that the existing Boundaries Commission 

Act has discriminated against rural people — certainly nobody in 

the House opposite who, by and large, represent rural constituents 

and, by and large, were elected with many fewer votes per 

member opposite than the members on this side of the House. 

 

But we didn't complain. That's how the system worked. And it did 

over-represent rural areas and under-represent urban areas, and we 

recognized that that's what came about when you started on an 

even keel and over time people moved into the cities. 

 

And we didn't complain, because even on election night when our 

party had more votes but fewer seats, I indicated, well, that's how 

the rules are and we'll not quarrel. All we can hope for is that the 

next redistribution will be fair and that we will have an 

opportunity to redress the balance, if in fact we get more votes 

than the other party. 

 

That should be as it . . . that should be the opportunity available to 

any member of this House or any political  

party. But members opposite are not satisfied with the will of the 

people. Members opposite are not satisfied to give the public an 

opportunity to choose on the basis of majority rule. They want to 

skew the rules, they want to put in rules which will start out with 

having one sat being able to be 75 or 80 per cent fewer electors 

than another seat, and in a situation where that number will grow 

and grow so that we might well have seats which . . . many seats 

which have half the number of voters as many other seats. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, in not tolerable. That is inconsistent with 

anybody's view of what a legislature should be or what 

representative democracy should be. 

 

I just want to use one short quote from the Canadian Parliamentary 

Review, and it's not significant except it's a simple statement of 

what we're trying to do when we're talking about the principles of 

redistribution. And I'll paraphrase it: The fundamental principle of 

representative government was equal representation for an equal 

number of people since legislators represented people — not 

farms, not cities, not economic interests but people. 

 

Now I wonder if members opposite accept that. Do they accept 

that? And if they do, if they do, can they defend this Bill? If they 

do, can they defend this Bill? And if they do, I hope they'll get up 

and defend it, because my bet is they won't. My bet is they will sit 

in their seats, vote for this Bill, which they know is unfair, but will 

not have the courage to stand up and say why they believe that this 

Bill ought to be passed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I will not prolong my 

remarks . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Fred Dewhurst remembers you, Al. 

 

Mr. Speaker — Order, please. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I will ignore the references to the former 

Speaker, at whose funeral I gave the eulogy. I know him well and 

knew him well, had respect for him. And under that Speaker, we 

had people appointed to a Constituency Boundaries Commission, 

which was unquestionably fair and which no member opposite 

will dare stand up and say was not fair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I close my remarks by 

repeating that we have an independent boundaries commission. 

Nobody has attacked any . . . We have the Bill now, the 

independent boundaries commission Act. No one has attacked any 

commission appointed under that Bill, and nobody can with any 

credibility. Nobody has attacked any boundary map that that 

commission produced, and nobody can with any credibility. If 

anyone quarrels with the result of the last election on the basis of 

constituencies which were too large or too small, all I can say is 

that the Act permitted the government opposite to have a 

redistribution before the last election and they didn't do so. 

 

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3620 

 

 

Nobody can attack any of the boundary maps drawn by that 

commission as being unfair, and nobody has. Nobody has attacked 

the composition of the existing boundaries commission — that's 

Mr. Justice Hall, the Clerk, and chief justice Culliton — and 

nobody will. They just want to abolish them even without 

suggesting that they can find anything nearly as fair. Nobody can 

say that any political party has fared badly under the existing Bill 

except the New Democratic Party. Yet we did not quarrel, and as I 

indicated, we did not. 

 

No — every single change by this Bill will make the commission 

less independent and less impartial. And every single change will 

make the boundaries less fair, less in accordance with the basic 

principle of one elector, one vote; less in accordance with the 

principle of equal citizenship — no citizen plus, no citizen minus. 

All changes are made to open the door to partisan political 

advantage, and I'd like to know what other justification can be 

offered for them. 

 

I say to this House, Saskatchewan people have an innate sense of 

fairness. When they detect that you are trying to rig the next 

election by tampering with their rights of citizenship, they will 

deal with you in the same way that they dealt with the last 

government that attempted to tamper with the people's rights to 

citizenship. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — That government was swept from office 

and very nearly off the political map of Saskatchewan, as the 

member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg can attest. 

 

This Bill is unjustified, unnecessary and unfair. And I will vote 

against it, Mr. Speaker, and what's more important, the public will 

vote against the government which tries to set itself above the 

rights of citizens to elect their government based upon one citizen, 

one vote. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I have one or two other comments to 

make, so I will beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 33 — An Act 

respecting Veterinarians be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a few concerns 

about this Bill, many questions. 

 

First of all, one concern is the scope of the practice as it relates to 

The Veterinarians Act. As you will know, in many professions the 

scope of the Act is not as defined as it is in this one. The scope of 

the practice of veterinarians is significantly broader than many 

other professional groups. The scope of this Act includes 

diagnostic  

treatment of disease, injury or disorder of any animals, includes 

administration of drugs and appliances for the prevention and 

treatment of injury or disease. 

 

Now something that concerns me is: will this override the rights of 

farmers to administer drugs to their own animals, or to other 

people's animals, as has been the practice in the past? Are we 

going to see further control by the veterinarians association in that 

aspect? 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, something else that concerns me is 

reproductive management. Under this Bill, I believe it gives new 

powers to the area of animal reproduction in such areas as 

management of estrosynchronization, super-ovulation, the 

collection and the evaluation and processing of embryos. 

 

Now in this area, Mr. Speaker, in the area of reproductive 

management, I ask, you know, questions like: who will eventually 

control the embryo reproduction, the selection, and the placement? 

Other concerns along that line are, what about genetic diversity? 

Will we maintain our genetic diversity, or will it be simply at the 

discretion of the association? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other questions like, what are the 

implications in giving veterinarians exclusive control in this 

uncertain area? We have a situation where we must maintain the 

highest level of genetics and availability to all farmers, and so we 

must ensure that this Act will not allow the total control and 

manipulation by one group. 

 

We have seen the proposed Act come down and these questions 

are coming to my mind. We also have to look at the animal 

husbandry as it relates to farmers and the veterinarians. 

 

As I say, in the practice there are many questions that are coming 

up. And another one of those questions, Mr. Speaker, is whether or 

not the government, in its bringing forward of this Bill, have 

contacted the farm community. You know, has there been contact 

with the Wheat Pool, livestock association, the SARMs 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), farmers' 

union, all those being controlled or being affected by this, or was it 

simply at the wish of one group. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, through the process of this Bill, I will have these 

and many more questions to ask as the Bill moves forward. Thank 

you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1515) 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 46 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left here I 

have Henry Zilm, president of Sask Crop Insurance; behind Henry 

is Jim Walters, vice-president of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance in 

charge of  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3621 

 

 

administration; and behind him is Merv Ross, manager of research 

division, Sask Crop. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm pleased to be able 

to rise today and question the minister in the area of crop 

insurance. Mr. Chairman, you will know that crop insurance is a 

very vital part of the agricultural economy today because it gives 

some stability to the farmer who otherwise would not have the 

security of some cash inflow at times of lost crops. 

 

I think the whole point of crop insurance program should be 

geared at providing a program that is the best possible for the 

farmers at this point in time. That means that we have to provide a 

program that has built into it such things as security of income as it 

relates to grain, and not simply security of production. We have to 

have a program that provides for the farmer efficient procedures in 

the calculation deficiencies as far as farmers . . . as it relates to 

their families, if they're a family group, fairness in adjustments, 

fairness in . . . We have to give the farmer some leeway as to his 

credibility. 

 

We have situations where we have fathers and sons and daughters 

farming close together, where they all have crop insurance, and 

where they must have the credibility to be honest with the 

corporation so that their reports that they send in are basically 

taken by the corporation at face value. I know there are a number 

of situations where farmers have been questioned as to the 

reasons, questioned as to why they should have the insurance. I get 

questions from constituents and other people who say, why is my 

crop insurance being questioned? My availability to the program 

— why is it being questioned? And I think that's a very good 

question because I think that all people should have access to this 

program equally. 

 

And also, I know there was many problems with the move to 

Melville. I know the problems created when you lose 

approximately 48 people out of a department of about 56 and try 

to replace them with a new computer system. All these problems 

came to the fore last year when farmers' payments were very, very 

far behind. 

 

Many of them were throwing their arms up in the air and saying, 

look, I need the cash, I have to get my payments made, and I have 

payments to make at the bank for farm machinery and other 

things, and I have to have that cash, and it wasn't there. So I think 

the corporation has to provide that type of service quickly and 

efficiently. 

 

And I'll give one example, Mr. Chairman. The stored grain reports 

came out about the date when they were supposed to be submitted. 

Now this put a lot of confusion out in the country. And yes, I 

know that that the stored grain report was allowed to go on for one 

more week, but the point was that the corporation, I think, could 

have done it much quicker and much more efficiently and not put 

that doubt in the minds of the farmer as to whether or not he was 

going to be penalized or what the situation was for a stored grain 

report. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I ask you if you would give me some  

indication as to why the stored grain reports this time round were 

so late, what confusion was caused by that, and if the practice will 

continue in the future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In answer to the 

member from Humboldt's question in regard — I'll start at his last 

question first — in regards to stored grain reports coming out later 

than would fit the needs of the farmer, we recognize that, as he 

mentioned, and we did do some things to allow the farmers to 

have some extra time. 

 

One of the reasons that they were late is that in some cases there 

were some reseeding benefits . . . or reseeding done in the 

province. There was quite a bit of late crop seeded, and a lot of our 

reports did not come in until after June 25 which you've required 

to submit it in. And there's a very short period of time in there, and 

we needed the seeded acreage reports in before we would report 

out the stored grain reports. 

 

Now we looked at it and said, we can make some changes. That's 

the way it's been done for the last 25 years, but we said we can 

make some changes, we believe, for next year to correct that 

situation. And we're looking at sending out our stored grain reports 

when we send out the seeded acreage reports. So they'll come out 

together. And then when you send it in — we're going to ask you 

to send it in about the end of June. I know you may sell some 

grain after that, but if it's necessary to check, we can certainly get 

your permit book from the elevator and ask you to send in a copy 

of it. So if there's a need to check . . . 

 

You mentioned the move to Melville. Well certainly, when you 

have a move, it does take up some time to get relocated. I'm not 

sure that that would be any excuse from our part to say whether 

the stored grain reports would be late or not. There's a whole series 

of things. 

 

I think the way we've been doing it over a number of years needs 

to be changed and can be improved upon, as any program can. 

And the other thing that really had an effect on the . . . it was that 

we had a very early fall this year, as you know. Some of the 

harvesting started late July and early August. That's unusually 

early, and that really put some extra strain on the system. 

 

You mentioned one other thing bout guaranteed income for 

farmers through crop insurance, and as you know, the western 

grains stabilization program was brought in quite a few years ago 

to do exactly that. When you had a low income year, that sort of 

fell into place and picked up to make up for the difference. 

 

You mentioned about contracts where fathers and sons and 

daughters and that had . . . called multiple contracts, and you said 

that maybe they should be available to all farmers and they 

shouldn't be questioned. Well, as you know, and you're a farmer 

out there, you know that there is, in cases, abuses of the system. 

And if you don't have some kind of a check system where you 

think there may or may not be, or you think there may be some 

problems . . . It is abused at times. There is a spot check system in 

there. 

 

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3622 

 

 

So some farmers were asked about it and if it was up front and 

right . . . in 99 per cent of the cases it was approved and let go 

through. There was a few cases we found where we believe the 

system was being abused, where they were going to quarter 

section type of coverage, not the overall coverage as the program 

was originally brought in to do. 

 

So those are the reasons we did the spot checks on them and why 

we asked so many questions. And when you have a $1.5 billion 

insurance company, you don't have any inspectors — in fact we 

have one part-time inspector — that's about the only way you can 

handle a situation like that. And as you know, some years we pay 

out as high as $385 million in insurance benefits, and I believe 

when you have that kind of pay-outs, that kind of insurance 

responsibility, you have to at least check where you believe there 

may be some cause of concern in regards to the abuse of the 

system. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we have to, I think, be sure. 

And I have had many complaints from my office saying that I 

can't get a contract because my son has a contract and they want to 

put it on his; or, I can't get a contract because somebody in my 

family has a contract or someone else in my family has a contract. 

 

Now I think when it comes to abuse of the system, I know if any 

farmer wants to abuse that crop insurance system, he can. It's 

basically a system that's run on the honesty of the farmer involved 

in the contract. And when I get people calling me saying, I don't 

have a payment; I need a payment; when I get people saying, I 

can't get my contract through, and of course we have to go to work 

on that, I don't think the farmers are . . . that's building a trust 

between the corporation and the farmer. 

 

I think in order for a corporation to build itself, and my fear is that 

many people, and I know many people are questioning whether 

they're going to keep on carrying crop insurance because they say, 

look, it's just not worth it for me — and I say, well wait a minute, 

you know, it's a good insurance program as long as it's run 

properly. And they say, well yes, but if I'm being stymied in my 

attempts to get my contract and to get paid on losses, they say, you 

know, what's the point. 

 

Also the coverage, I believe, is too low because I know in my area 

and in other areas I could go basically all year on summer fallow 

without rain and still not be covered. And they're saying that's not 

right, and I know that the formula provides for that figure. 

However the point here is that unless we have a corporation that is 

willing to bend and grow with the times as far as production goes, 

we're not going to build on that. And that's what scares me. 

 

The farmers are saying, look, why should I keep this? And I'm in 

agreement with their reasoning of why they should keep it, but I'm 

not in agreement that they should drop it. 

 

So what I ask you is: what will the Crop Insurance Corporation be 

doing to ensure that the production value . . . or the production 

formula fits different areas of the province, as it doesn't fit many 

areas right now? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Just so you . . . Just to clarify in regards to 

the eligibility for those who wish to take out multiple contracts 

where there was a farmer and son or daughter involved. 

 

Some of the requirements that we asked for was that they have a 

current Canadian Wheat Board permit book; that they store their 

production at least in separate granaries on the farm — if it's more 

than one farmer in a yard, the grain be stored separately; that they 

make all management decisions in regards to the farming 

operation — in other words, they are running the farm; and the 

other part that they must be the actual operator of the farm to be 

eligible for crop insurance. That's some of the criteria that we 

asked for. 

 

What we had our folks out in the areas do — like the district 

officer, area officers — we asked the clerk or the manager there, 

when they come through for either new contracts, in some cases 

current existing contracts, in their view, was there abuse of the 

system in regards to were . . . they were just putting the poor land 

on one contract and the good land on another contract and 

covering for hail, or vice versa. 

 

We asked them to make the decision out in the field, not at the 

head office. If they felt there was some reasonable amount of 

concern, then it was forwarded to head office and we had 

somebody go out and check it out. There was, I believe, about 700 

last year that come to our attention. Some we got, some we did 

check out. Because of the time of the year, we just allowed the rest 

of them to go through. We didn't even check the last group of 

them except the real ones that we thought there was really a 

concern about. 

 

But I want to make absolutely clear that no one that applied for 

Sask Crop Insurance coverage was denied. They may have been 

asked to put it with the father or the son or the daughter's 

insurance, because if they were all farming together and they were 

sort of trying to split it off, in some cases they were leasing land 

back from banks or from the Farm Credit Corporation or from 

other farmers, and were just wanting to set that off by itself — 

some of it had been cropped on a continuous basis. It was sort of 

poor quality land. They didn't want to put it in with their overall 

coverage, and this crop insurance, as you know, is all-risk overall 

coverage, and that's the way it's set up. That's the legislation, and 

that's how it's provided. 

 

So the other thing that I want to mention, that we do have about 

49,000 contracts out there. I believe that's about the most that 

we've ever had and . . . the other question you asked me was in 

regards to how you figure the average quota out there and the 

price, or the average coverage per acre — it's a 15-year average. 

It's taken over a 15-year average in that area, and whatever that 

average is — if it's 22 bushels or 20 bushels, whatever it is — and 

the price is based on this year; for 1988 it'll be based on 1987's 

current price. And that's set all across Canada, it's not just set here 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, do you believe that the production 

formula now used causes the coverage in any areas to be less than 

the average coverage of that area? 

 

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3623 

 

 

Now I'm asking that because you will know that we have, through 

production and management techniques and fertilizing, we are 

now producing crops on stubble that are producing just as much as 

crops on summer fallow, and yet the coverage on stubble is much 

less. This is one thing that I'm saying, that people are saying out 

there, look, why should I carry this when I know it's not going to 

cover me? 

 

So do you agree that the actual production number is down 

compared to the actual average production, and that, in certain 

areas of this province? I know it's that way in my area. But do you 

agree with that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We recognized that a couple or three years 

ago, or about four years ago I believe, and we brought in what 

they called individual coverage. And if you want to . . . Because 

you are that type of farmer and you want to cover it for your actual 

yields over, I believe, it's a ten-year average, was it . . .(inaudible 

interjection). . . over a ten-year average, and that's for your farm 

— your farming operation, you can do that, up to 80 per cent of 

the coverage . . . or 80 per cent of your production. But it does cost 

you more. It's cost-shared, the premium, federal government, and 

yourself, and it does cost more because you have a higher 

coverage, a higher dollar value coverage. 

 

We have about 1,000 of those in the province that have decided to 

do it that way because they felt they produced more than what the 

average yield of that area was, and that's because they do use 

fertilizer, they do use maybe more sprays and have different 

farming techniques. But there is available to those farmers who 

want to cover for a greater coverage than is being covered under 

the average yield coverage, to go individual coverage. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Yes but, Mr. Minister, the individual coverage, 

as you said, is very costly, and 1,000 farmers out of the numbers 

of contracts that crop insurance has is very small. And the point 

made here is that there are a substantial number of farmers out 

there who do not carry individual coverage because it simply just 

isn't worth it. The last bit of coverage of that extra value of your 

crop is very, very expensive, so they just throw up their hands and 

say, sure but we have individual coverage. But very few will take 

it. 

 

And the point remains — the point remains that the corporation, I 

do not believe, has addressed the problem of low coverage. As I 

said, with all the techniques that we have now and a decent 

amount of rainfall . . . you know, the average is up here, and the 

crop insurance formula keeps the bushels down here. 

 

And so I repeat my point: the point is, people are saying, look, it's 

not worth it. And until it is worth it for people to have the 

coverage, then they're going to question whether or not they 

should keep it. And I say to you now, the majority of people out 

there are carrying their crop insurance simply for the hail benefit. 

 

So again, I ask: what will you be doing — cast away individual 

coverage, because I don't think it's doing the job — what will you 

be doing to ensure that the production formula relates to the actual 

average  

production in the areas over the last five years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well as the member knows, it's a federal 

government farmer insurance plan that was put in some 26-odd 

years, ago. It's put in place as an overall type of protection, and I'm 

sure that many farmers would like to . . . there's ways of improving 

it. But to improve it, the cost goes up. And when you change an 

overall policy, then you also have to go back and probably change 

an agreement with the federal government in regards to how it 

would have to be done. 

 

Just to clarify, if you were on average coverage in an area and you 

had no claims for eight years, you would actually be up to 87 and 

one-half per cent of the average coverage of that area without 

going on individual coverage. So there is some extra coverage for 

those who don't happen to have a lot of claims. And if you're a 

good farmer and getting the high yields, you may well fit into that 

category. 

 

So we have some farmers that have . . . that are at that level. In fact 

there's a great number of farmers at that level where they haven't 

had any claim for the last eight years, and therefore they have now 

moved up into the 87 and a half per cent of their average yield 

coverage. So they in fact would be covered better. 

 

To go back a little bit, if you go to individual coverage — just to 

touch on that a bit again — you cover yourself for about 14 per 

cent more. That's what the average is around that we've found out. 

And it costs you about 10 to 20 per cent cost shared with the 

federal government, so that's a 5 to 10 per cent it costs you extra to 

go to individual coverage. And the farmer has looked at it and 

said, for the extra 10 per cent or 14 per cent it is at total, I don't 

know if I'm going to, maybe I'll just stay where I am. So that's one 

of the reasons there hasn't been a lot go into it. 

 

And in a lot of cases the farmer has found out that over a period of 

10 years on his farm that average is not too far out in his area, 

even if he is a really good farmer. That average yield is not too far 

out, for one reason or another. So that's the other reason that they 

haven't went to individual coverage because, in fact, that average 

is pretty fair. And that average is done each year. So I mean, it's 

based each year. So the 15-year average is 4 per cent each year 

into that. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — I would suggest that the 15-year average is a bit 

long, but we'll leave that as it may be. Mr. Minister, have you 

given any consideration to the spot loss coverage being extended 

to insects or wildlife; and would you just outline your present 

program on that, and what you plan to be doing in the future with 

regard to spot loss? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we do have some spot 

loss now within crop insurance. We have reseeding benefits which 

is certainly on a spot-loss basis. We have fire and we have hail 

that's been brought in over the last few years. 

 

We've been looking at two other areas that is sort of a controllable 

type of a situation. One is water-fowl for spot-loss damage as an 

insurable portion of crop insurance, and wildlife is another one. 

We haven't  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3624 

 

 

pursued it further than to talk to both provinces on each side of us, 

Manitoba and Saskatchewan. 

 

We've got some meetings scheduled, I believe next month, 

meeting with Alberta and Manitoba, and we've asked the federal 

government to come to the meetings. We don't know what's going 

to come, or where that's going to go. We'd like to have a 

concurrence from both provinces on each side of us to go ahead 

with it. 

 

I would think if the three western provinces agree, then we'll take 

it to the federal government and urge them to include it as two 

more spot losses that farmers do incur out there that they really 

have no control over. Wildlife is one of them, and the other one is 

water-fowl that certainly lands all over this province. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Well I think that's a very important area because 

I know in the past there's been great concern over the wildlife 

damage, water-fowl and others. 

 

Mr. Minister, another area of great concern to me is the fact that 

crop insurance is based on production, and I've made this point 

before, but I would like to make it again. We have a situation 

where the productive value often does not reach the actual dollar 

value of the crop — what the crop should reach, because of the 

grade. And that happened last year with mustard and some 

rapeseed whereby the production was maybe 40 bushels to the 

acre but, because it was graded as sample, the value of that 

product was lower than what that person would have got if he 

would have collected crop insurance on it. 

 

And I think it's very important, as in any insurance program, that 

when I insure something, that I have to know what the value of 

that is — not what the production is. So I think we have to have a 

situation where the value, a dollar value will also be placed on the 

insured person as well as the production. 

 

So we have a situation where, if the production was a certain level 

at a certain grade, that dollar value should also be insured, so that 

we won't see a situation where next time we come around to 

farmers with sample mustard they're going to turn the wind up in 

the combine and blow it all out the back end because they'll get 

more money collecting crop insurance. And that's an abuse of the 

system, and that's what we want to get away from. 

 

We want to have an insurance program that farmers can say, yes, 

it's okay. I don't have to think of ways to get around the program. 

All I have to do is, if the dollar value of my production doesn't 

meet what crop insurance will pay me, then I don't have to worry 

because it's there. But right now that's not the case. 

 

Are you making representation to Ottawa and other provinces with 

regard to this matter? And will you be pushing them to add a 

dollar value on the crop? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that would certainly 

take a different view of what crop insurance . . . It would go from 

a production value to an income-based value or an income value 

insurance policy, which I really don't know how you would 

monitor to . . . It's sort of a guaranteed income is what he's asking 

for for farmers that  

produce whatever number of bushels per acre. I don't know, but it 

seems to me that I could invite a terrible pile of problems out 

there, where marginal land is being farmed, and whatever else. 

 

But without going into that, just to clarify the difference. What we 

do have in place now, that is the federal legislation in regards to 

how a grade — if it's graded . . . all our prices or all our insurance 

is based on a number of bushels on, say, use the idea of mustard 

— and which grows in your area — or canola. It's based on no. 1 

mustard or no. 1 canola, and it's prorated on a factor to the same 

price, or prorated by a price to the grade. 

 

In other words, if you had a no. 1 canola, it was a sample. The 

sample's worth . . . The present price of sample is worth $2 and 

canola at no. 1 is worth 5, it's prorated on that $3, so your bushels 

of sample rate, and it may only rate out at 10 bushels or five 

bushels or whatever, because the dollar value would bring the 

number of bushels down prorating it. 

 

(1545) 

 

The same applies to all the other crops that are insured. Wheat is 

based on the price of no. 2 spring red wheat. That's what your 

insurance is based on, that's what the price is based on; and it's 

prorated the same way. If you go to Canada feed from no. 2, 

there's a factor in there that allows for the . . . to pick up the 

difference in number of bushels. So it allows the farmer that same 

dollar coverage as he originally started out with in the production 

line. 

 

But to go to, say, to go to a different kind of an income guarantee, 

like I said earlier, western grains stabilization is the only fund that 

I am aware of that does that, where we have a low grain price over 

a period of years and this kicks in. I believe it's paid out 

substantially in the last couple of years and then probably this year 

again, and maybe continuing on until that level starts to change. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Well I don't see that it would be a great problem, 

Mr. Minister, and it would also shore up the image of the crop 

insurance corporation in the eyes of the farmer, because the way it 

is right now, he's not guaranteed that price for his produce. And I 

know the stabilization plan is geared towards that, but the point is, 

this insurance program is not filling his need right now with 

respect to the case I just put forward. 

 

And it also runs over into wheat. When wheat freezes and the 

grade goes way down to feed, we have a situation where the dollar 

value is less than the coverage that crop insurance would have 

given that person. 

 

So I don't see all these problems that you're talking about, and I 

don't think that the corporation should be sitting back saying, well 

we can't do this because it may cause us some problems. I think 

what the corporation should be doing is handling these situations 

so that the farmer gets the best possible coverage. And if he's not 

getting the best possible coverage, you know what's going to 

happen; he's going to think twice about carrying the insurance. 

 

And really what they're saying to me is it's not insurance  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3625 

 

 

in the normal sense of the word. 

 

So I disagree with all the problems that you say are going to be 

created. And I would like you to outline your view of some of 

those problems, because I think this is a pretty important question 

for many farmers in the light of the financial hardships that they're 

seeing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, you know, I realize what the member 

is saying, and maybe there should be another program out there in 

regards to guaranteed income for farmers. But there's no way that 

the crop insurance was ever set up to look after a drop in world 

grain or commodity prices. It was set up to guarantee that the 

bushels produced by the farmer would be there, that the number of 

bushels guaranteed would be there. 

 

So in other words, if you're guaranteed for 30 bushels an acre, or 

26, or whatever the case is, that's what we're saying we're 

guaranteeing — so the production guaranteed. And it's based on 

the yield; that yield coverage is based on today's prices. So you 

take those two and put them together is what crop insurance is all 

about. 

 

I know that farmers are facing a real tough time out there, and 

certainly the price of our product that we receive and we haul to 

the elevator . . . And I am a farmer. I can honestly tell you . . . In 

fact, I hauled out 4,000 bushels on the weekend. I can tell you the 

price we get is certainly not very relevant to our costs. 

 

But crop insurance was based . . . and the program is to guarantee 

a production, not to guarantee an income. And if there is some 

way that we can work that program in by bringing in individual 

coverage or bringing in forage coverage or bringing in some other 

avenues — a spot loss that has been brought in for reseeding, for 

fire, for hail, for water-fowl, if that's possible, or wildlife damage 

— those all would help because those are spot losses that they 

would incur, that they had no control over. 

 

So those kinds of things we can do, and we should be doing it. 

And if we can make two things — if we can make more coverage 

out there for the farmer to cover him for any other losses that he 

may incur that aren't really normal, and if we can give good 

service out there and get our payments out promptly, which we're 

working towards, and hopefully next year will be a really . . . out 

there right on time — those are the kinds of things that we can do 

that will save him dollars over the long term. 

 

Because if he has to wait . . . I know it's always been the policy 

that it takes a long time to get it out. I don't really agree with that, 

and you'll see some real changes over the next year in regards to 

getting our payments out, getting them out very promptly. And 

we've got a really fine system up now in Melville. It's changed; 

we've really put it into place, ready for 1988. And those are the 

kind of things we can do, that will be very, very important to the 

farmer out there. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I wasn't asking for crop insurance 

to be a solution to the world grain price problem. All I was asking 

is that why isn't there a minimum price set on that 160 acres, or 

whatever the  

case may be in question, in to ensure that the farmer will get X 

number of dollars even if his production is above what the crop 

insurance covers? But we have to put a minimum price on that 

product so that he can ensure that he's going to get a return for that 

portion of land. 

 

And I don't know one farmer, Mr. Minister, who farms for crop 

insurance. And if they're farming for crop insurance, they don't 

farm very long. but the point is, we have to have in place, and crop 

insurance has to mould itself to the times, and I know that it's a 

long process to do but I think the corporation and the government 

now has to begin by making some of these changes. Because if we 

don't make some of these changes, the farmers out there . . . and 

believe me, I know they're questioning the role of crop insurance 

in their whole farming management decision making. Because 

they say, I have to pay this amount of money for crop insurance, 

and if it's not doing the job that I have to have it do, then I may as 

well not have it. 

 

So I say to you: crop insurance has to mould itself to the times and 

grow with the times, and one of those growing procedures would 

be to have a minimum dollar value so that the farmer can be 

assured . . . And you can call it a guaranteed income if you want. 

all I'm saying is that the way the system is working right now, it 

doesn't give him that optimum protection for that piece of land. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't want to get too 

far away from what the crop insurance role is, but the member 

says that we need a guaranteed income and, you know, that's true. 

The farmer does have to have a value for his product. I guess that's 

the idea. You can't guarantee a farmer X number of dollars 

income, if he's a good farmer or a poor farmer or whatever the 

case may be. But I believe he needs a reasonable income for his 

product. 

 

As you know, they've been trying to subsidize our price of grains 

in many different ways, and I'm not going to go into them because 

any farmer is aware of all the different ways we've tried to do that 

to keep the price of grains up, or the returns from what we're 

producing up to a reasonable level. 

 

But in regards to guaranteed income, like I said earlier, the western 

grains stabilization is the only plan that's in place. And if you bring 

in a new guaranteed income plan, that isn't crop insurance . . . 

wasn't crop insurance role when it was brought in 25- or 26-odd 

years ago, and it hasn't been the role over the time. If the price of 

our wheat was $5 a bushel, not only would our crop insurance be 

greater, because you'd have . . . but also the farmers would have a 

lot better income and certainly we wouldn't have the farm debt we 

have out there today. But, you know, I don't know what else to say 

except to say that the crop insurance is there to guarantee 

production yield, and is not there to guarantee income yield. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Okay, Mr. Minister, we'll leave that as it may. I 

just wish that I could convince you and the government that there 

is a problem in the minds of the farmers with crop insurance 

covering and meeting their needs. I mean I could go on, too, about 

the coverage on individual quarters of land, farmers farming 10 

miles  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3626 

 

 

away from their home farm and having to group all the production 

— average all their production. And I think that's a real problem. 

Many farmers think that too. 

 

I know there's lots of problems with having individual quarter 

coverage or individual section coverage, but at the same time I 

think we have to be addressing these problems, because if we don't 

address the problems we're going to see crop insurance going 

downhill. And I think now that times are tough, I know that many 

farmers are really having second thoughts about whether they're 

going to continue their contracts. 

 

So I would just ask you, the government, to look forward in the 

direction — don't just keep going on and on and on — but look 

forward and see what the needs of the farmers are and respond to 

those needs. And by responding to them giving farmers a better 

sense of security on their farm and knowing that this insurance 

program is going to meet their needs. 

 

I'd like to turn now, Mr. Chairman, to the crop insurance 

headquarters in Melville. I understand there were two new 

positions created at Melville. And I would ask you for the job 

descriptions of those positions and what functions those positions 

are fulfilling now that weren't fulfilled before? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I was just making sure there, the member 

from Humboldt, to be sure I give you correct information here. 

 

There is actually one new position. A lot of positions change 

names and change titles when you move and the reorganization 

was there, but the number of management positions — there only 

really has been one new one added, that's the manager of human 

resources. 

 

And we felt with the 32 offices around the province, 

300-and-some-odd crop insurance adjusters, almost a total of over 

almost 500 people that work for crop insurance, that they should 

have somebody they can go to if they have a problem that they can 

talk to, that they can . . . Many positions have to be advertised and 

filled, and we were trying to do it internally from one department 

to the other. It doesn't really fit well. We like to be able to work 

through a regular channel, and we felt that it was about time we 

had somebody there that sort of looked after the overall human 

resources of the department, or of the Crown. 

 

We have, just to be sure you understand what we got, we got two 

vice-presidents, one is in charge of the finance and administration 

— that's all our money and all the administration around the 

province. The other one is in charge of the entire field operations, 

the offices, the adjusters, and those type. We also have . . . Oh, we 

have Merv Ross who's manager of research and looks into the 

different — such as the programs we're bringing into place, and all 

new programming and that, and anything to do with the operation 

in regards to anything bettering, or changes in the programs that 

exist. And then we have Mr. Zilm here, who's president of the 

corporation, which we've always had — a position there. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Has there been any change to your chief  

adjuster position? And I'll just ask another question: I would like 

to know the numbers of adjusters that you had in 1986, and the 

number of adjusters that you plan to field next year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — While we're looking up the other 

information for you, could you tell me what you mean by chief 

adjuster, or that? I'm just not sure what the question . . . what you 

. . . who you're referring to. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Okay, who is in charge then of readjustments, 

and who has the final say on adjustments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I'm not quite sure that you're asking, the 

officials don't either. But if you're asking, who would make the 

final adjustment out there — whoever is sent out as the adjuster 

from that area, who is selected by the clerk or the district manager, 

whichever the case may be, if there is a dispute usually then two 

adjusters are sent out to talk to that farmer and to come to resolve 

of the issue. 

 

And we always have . . . when you have 49,000 contracts out there 

you're bound to have a few problems. But that's how it's resolved. 

When it gets back to head office it's more the overall 

administration. I don't believe . . . the only way that you would get 

to head office is — or that . . . You'd go before the board if you 

felt that you were unfairly adjusted; you could appear before the 

board and the board would hear your case and they would make a 

ruling on it. They're all farmers and they make their own 

independent ruling, and the corporation goes by their ruling. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Item 1 agreed. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — I believe we're waiting for more information on 

that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We don't have the exact number but in 1987 

from '86, the fall of '86 or '87, we had during the winter about 50 

to 60 retirements that were over the age of 65, and during the 

summer about that many number has now been rehired. So we 

would have approximately the same number and that would be in 

the neighbourhood of 300. Now I can get you the exact figures if 

you want and send it to you later. I have no problem with that 

. . .(inaudible interjection). . . Most of them. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — So in other words you don't see any reduction in 

the number of adjusters for next year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No, Mr. Chairman. In fact we are looking at 

another thing where we may even be bringing a few more on. 

We're looking at some other alternatives. So, no, I don't see any 

number of reductions for next year at all. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have just three or 

four questions that I'd like to direct to the minister. And if I could 

begin, I'd like to go back to a point that he was discussing with the 

member for Humboldt having to do with the adjustment factor 

that's involved in the formula when the quality of the crop yield 

drops  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3627 

 

 

below that number 1 level. The minister indicated that there is of 

course that adjustment factor built into the formula that is 

supposed to compensate for those conditions that unfortunately 

occur when the actual quality of the crop harvested suddenly 

drops. And the minister will know that we had a particular 

problem with that situation last year with the protracted wet 

harvest conditions. The yields in many areas were particularly 

good, maybe even above the average, but the quality of that crop 

was particularly bad because of the very wet protracted harvest 

weather. 

 

And I wonder if the minister feels that the adjustment factor 

presently written into the formula is sufficient to realistically deal 

with the kind of situation that we had last fall. 

 

I know many farmers raised the point with me that they knew the 

adjustment factor was there. They acknowledged that it was in the 

formula to try to compensate for this kind of a situation. But in 

their judgement, it did not realistically compensate for the 

situation when, for example, a crop that at the beginning of harvest 

looked like number one, because of the weather by the end 

harvest, ended up being a three or worse. And the drop in value 

was obviously very dramatic and the adjustment factor in the 

formula did not nearly compensate for that drop in quality. Again 

it's something that was camouflaged by the yield because the yield 

in many cases was up, but the quality was down. 

 

I wonder if the minister could address that point and indicate 

whether or not, number one, he thinks the existing adjustment 

factor in the formula is realistic and accurate; and number two, is 

he giving any consideration to trying to achieve a change in that 

factor to make it more generous and to more adequately take into 

account the kind of circumstance that occurred last fall. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well first, in answer to the member's 

question, we realized last year . . . I'll have to go back just a wee 

bit. Previously the price that was set per bushel for crop insurance 

on the insurance plan was set one year previous, and that was 

pretty constant to the price of grain. In fact it was even going up a 

little bit. So it was set to the previous year at $4.08. Last year the 

price fell to almost $3 a bushel, 3.13. So what happened was there 

was almost $1 a bushel there that sort of got lost. 

 

And when we came in and based it on the market price difference 

— and that's how the formula's set up, based on the market price 

difference — we found that . . . No, we based it on a three-year 

average, is how the program was set up last year. So we went back 

and said the last three years, and the difference between them is 

how the factor was based in. So we said, well, that the dollar and 

then this three-year averaging didn't make the factor very fair at 

all. It really threw it all out. 

 

So what we said, all right, we're going to do two things. One, we'll 

set the price as close to being realistic as we can because the 

insurance premiums are paid on that price; and second, we'll base 

it on this year actual market price. So that's what we've done, and 

it will make that factor a little better. 

 

What it doesn't cover is where it's damp and tough and that, and 

some of those considerations which run into some of your area 

down there, and some all across the eastern part of the province. 

And that's something that we'll take a look at. I think we've sort of 

corrected some of that other problem. 

 

And the other things is, as the price of grain falls, it's really . . . it's 

worse, because it becomes of a less value because the market price 

of grain. If grain ever starts to go up, it will be a benefit to the 

farmer. It turns around under the existing formula. I guess it was 

set to sort of . . . as an overall formula that was set quite a few 

years ago. And it's a good one; I think it's worked quite well. But 

there may be some adjustments need to be made to it. 

 

I think you raised a valid point — two: one in how the difference 

seems not . . . the factor doesn't really relate directly to the 

difference in the price because of the way it was set, and I think 

we're trying to adjust that; and the other, the damp and tough 

grain. And that's something we could take a look at. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I thank you very much for that 

answer, and I know there'll be many farmers in 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and I presume elsewhere in the province, 

that will be looking forward to your review of this situation, and 

hopefully some improvements will be forthcoming down the way. 

Most hopefully, we won't run into another fall like last one that 

was a physical disaster in many areas. But inevitably it will occur 

again sometime, somewhere, and I hope by then that the program 

is fully geared to cope with it. 

 

Mr. Minister, you were previously discussing the situation of 

multiple contracts within crop insurance and the difficulties that 

that presents, both from the point of view of the corporation and 

from the point of view of the farmer clients of the corporations. 

Just so that I have the arithmetic straight . . . I believe you 

mentioned a figure earlier. Could you indicate, roughly speaking, 

how many contracts of the corporation would be in a "dispute" 

category because you suspect they might fall into that multiple 

coverage or multiple contract situation. How many are out there 

right now that your officials would be watching, and do you 

regard that as a serious problem from the point of view of the 

corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I don't have the exact numbers, but there 

was about 700 and, I believe, 81 was the number that we 

questioned one way or another. It was questioned by the clerk out 

there in the district office. 

 

The officials tell me they believe all are resolved basically to the 

satisfaction of the corporation ad/or the farmer, one way or 

another, except about 50. There's still 50 that we have some 

problems with, and I believe you have a couple in your area down 

there. We still have about 50 or so out there that we haven't 

resolved. We plan to sit down with them during the winter 

months. We've been sending somebody directly out to sit down 

with the farmer and say, all right, you show us that this is right, 

and we'll deal with it. 

 

You asked if it's a serious problem. It is a serious problem if 

somebody's trying to beat the system or trying to, in fact,  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3628 

 

 

farm for crop insurance or set . . . like I was mentioning earlier, 

take the really poor land and put it on one contract, and then you 

always collect on crop insurance, or swinging it around, they 

rotate it around. And there's many ways they can use the system. 

 

We know that we don't have — nobody out there really —one 

person that sort of monitors the whole province and 49,000 

contracts. So we rely on our adjusters. If they see, or they think 

maybe a serious abuse of the system, or in fact if the clerk of that 

or the district manager identifies one that's been coming in year 

over year and they sort of keep . . . We had one farmer and two 

sons that had 13 contracts, and it became very obvious what they 

were doing. So there is some abuses out there. 

 

And we had one other farmer where they were . . . one . . . they 

were both growing canola, a father and a son. One had 40 bushels 

to the acre, and the other had well below crop insurance, and they 

were collecting crop insurance. And you're aware we caught them 

taking truck loads out, and so forth. 

 

Yes, there is some abuse. And when that happens, that is serious. 

That is fraud, and we don't want that to happen. Every other 

farmer in the province pays for that if that happens because again, 

we as taxpayers pay for it. So we don't want that to happen. 

 

We're monitoring the best we can using what facilities we have 

out there. And I think most farmers are basically honest, but you 

do have to monitor to make sure because it is $1.5 billion worth of 

insurance that we do issue. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I'm happy to hear that arithmetic. 

Out of some 49,000 contracts, only about 781 — I believe that 

was the number — in any kind of a dispute, and out of those all 

but 50. I take it, have been resolved or brought to some reasonably 

amicable conclusion by negotiation. So I think that indicates that 

the problem seems to be getting under control, and I welcome that 

trend. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'd just like to ask you two or three questions about 

the statistics of the program for 1987. You've indicated on several 

occasions that in 1987 — I believe you meant for 1987 — there 

were a total of some 49,000 contracts written. I wonder if you 

could tell me what percentage that represents of all Saskatchewan 

farmers, and whether or not that percentage is basically stable over 

the long term — whether it's going up or whether it's going down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — They tell me over the last four or five years, 

or even further back, it stayed rather stable between 47,000 to 

49,000 contracts. It varies. We were just a touch under the 49,000 

this year, graded in 48. I forget the exact . . . I don't know if I go 

the exact number. And some of that was down due to forage 

contracts. 

 

We had some . . . had a quite a number of forage people who 

didn't renew their contracts this year, feeling that the $60 per acre 

coverage wasn't sufficient and they'd sooner go on their own and 

you know . you're aware of some of the problems we had. We 

going back out there this fall, taking out . . . We've done a lot more 

data research now. 

 

We think we can at least take back out and present to those 

ranchers out there some more information. And I guess they will 

judge . . . We'll let them judge how they'd like to see if this is 

sufficient for them to want to have coverage. 

 

And some of the areas of concern was irrigation; some of the areas 

where they have never reseeded or done anything to it or looked 

after it for almost 25 years, sort of the same crop; some with 

pasture . . . You have to have some formula there to protect . . . to 

be sure that there's a fair and equitable way of doing it. And we'll 

be coming back out this fall to them, and we got some more stuff 

we'll present to them, and we'll have some meetings, and we'll 

listen and see what they have to say and try to come back and put 

together . . . continue with the forage program or maybe hopefully 

that more will come into it. 

 

(1615) 

 

But it is down, there's no doubt about it. It's down from last year 

about 400-odd contractors from last year, and it wasn't very large 

to start with — about 1,200 to start with. So we do cover about 

133 RMs with that, but you know, one here and one there, and so 

it makes it very difficult to get a real accurate production yield out 

of it. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, do you have a quick calculation of 

what percentage the 49,000 contracts represents of the total 

number of Saskatchewan farmers? I'm just trying to identify here 

exactly how many farmers in Saskatchewan are participating in at 

least one crop insurance contract. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I think it's around 75 per cent. There's about 

. . . under the federal government stats it says there are 63,000 

farmers in Saskatchewan, and we have just under the 49,000 

number of policy holders, so it would be about the 75 per cent, and 

that's about where it would be at. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you indicate 

for me in 1987 the total number of claims that were filed by 

farmers, the total dollar amount involved in those claims, the 

number of those claims that have been fully settled and paid to 

date, and the number that may still be outstanding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — For 1987, as you know we're still in the — 

part of adjusting there. We have about, there is approximately 

there . . . I can send the exact numbers a little later when we have 

more. I have no problem sending them to you with the dollar 

values. 

 

We don't have a . . . nothing's finalized, but there was about 14,000 

hail claims. Over 13,000 have been paid, and it costs 

approximately 25 . . . we paid out approximately $25 million. 

There has been approximately 20,000 pre-harvest and post-harvest 

— that's yield-loss claims; none are paid. We estimate it will be 

between 40 and $50 million, and that's an estimate on what we 

see. About 5,000 of these are still in the process of having their 

bins measured because some just finished harvesting and whatever 

else. There was about 1,600 reseeding benefits and they're all paid, 

and that was about $2 million. There was four million paid out in  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3629 

 

 

forage claims; everybody that had forage insurance got some type 

of payments except one — only one didn't, so of the 800 forage 

holders, 799 got a pay-out, and it come to a little over $4 million. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate that summary. And if 

you could provide that in written form with the other detail, that 

would be very helpful in the next day or two or however long it 

takes to put it together. 

 

And I take it from the tenor of your answer that you don't 

anticipate any significant delay in cleaning up all of the 

processing, and that all farmers with outstanding claims could 

anticipate having their files totally settled within the next short 

while. I wonder if you could offer some comment on that in terms 

of when you expect the whole set of files for 1987 to be fully 

closed and farmers to have their cheques. 

 

And just to save time while I'm on my feet, I would ask my last 

question, what I anticipate would be my last question, and that has 

to do with the forage coverage that you have referred to in 

previous answers. I know that you and your officials have been 

engaged in an exercise of meeting publicly with farmers and 

ranchers, explaining the program up to this stage, seeking advice 

about how it might be changed in the future to make it a more 

effective or a more attractive program. 

 

In terms of the farmers and ranchers that I have spoken with about 

the program, there's a general perception, I think, that the effort 

with respect to forage coverage is well worth making. It's a good 

start and a good try, but there are obvious problems in putting 

together a new kind of coverage like this, not the least of which is 

the lack of long-term data upon which to base a new program. 

 

You made some reference in your earlier answers to an effort to 

strengthen the data base, to make the program perhaps more 

effective and more attractive for the future. I wonder if you would 

mind just elaborating a little bit more on your efforts in regard to 

forage coverage, and particularly when would you expect to be in 

a position to communicate broadly with farmers and ranchers who 

might be interested in this kind of coverage for the future so that, 

number one, they could have some input into your deliberations, 

in addition to the input that they might already have had in the 

consultations of last spring. And when would you be in a position 

to explain in greater detail the type of changes in this program that 

you might have in mind for the future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In regards to your first question in regard to 

when could the farmers expect to have their cheques, my staff 

have a sort of a deadline for themselves, and they're looking at 

before Christmas all the cheques out. They're starting to roll . . . 

they'll be starting to roll out really shortly; they'll be coming out 

off the line. 

 

We'll have some hold-back on some because the deadline for late 

for filing isn't till November 15. And then we've got to get an 

adjuster out there, and if it's windy or stormy and if there is some 

problems and we have to measure bins, and in some cases it may 

even be held till spring if they have some left in the field and they 

haven't filed, that the guys been doing something, we have those  

series of things, but 95 or 98 or 99 per cent of all the payments 

will be out prior to Christmas. 

 

In regards to your forage program, or the forage program, we have 

been meeting, as you mentioned, with the stock growers and 

groups of those interested in forage coverage. The department has 

put together some information in regards to our data bank that we 

have now made it much broader. We had gathered information 

both from Alberta and Manitoba in regards to how they run theirs. 

We have a SIMFOY (simulated forage yields) system that we 

want to . . . it just isn't working very well. We want to improve on 

that. 

 

Then we'll be going out after the new year — or the board will be 

reviewing all this at the next meeting coming up right away in the 

next couple . . . next Monday in fact. Then we'll be going out in 

the early part of the year to the producers and putting together 

what we think is a better program than we've got now, and it will 

give them better coverage — although everyone qualified. It's the 

way they qualify, I think, concerned them. And we'll go out there. 

They'll have the opportunity for input into what . we'll say what 

we got in mind. We'll take their input and take it back, and 

hopefully we can come out with a better program and one that 

suits the producer out there better than this one. 

 

Because this one, like you said, it seems to be . . . we have our 

problems with it, and we've really tried to make it fit, but they've 

really run into some problems with it. And we will be going back 

out with all the information we've been able to gather in and take it 

back out there, and then we'll let them review it, and we'll be able 

to make our decision based on their thoughts. I think that's the two 

questions you asked me. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I thank you for that information, 

and I would like to thank you and your officials for the helpful 

way in which you've responded to questions this afternoon. 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Item 3 — Statutory. 

 

Vote 46 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 46 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 46 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 46 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3630 

 

 

Vote 161 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 161 agreed to. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I'd like to thank the minister and his staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to thank 

my staff for the information they've provided me and for the work 

they've done, not only in providing information, but in the move to 

Melville and the whole reorganization of crop insurance. They've 

done an excellent job, and I'd like to compliment them on that, and 

I know in the next year or two it'll be just a really fine organization 

in a really fine city. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you. I was remiss in not thanking the 

minister and his officials for their co-operation during estimates 

and taking the time to come to Regina from Melville. And thank 

you. 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 51 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I would ask the minister please to introduce 

his staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right, the 

president of Sask Housing Corporation, Larry Little. Behind Mr. 

Little is Ron Styles, the executive director of policy, planning and 

information systems. he looks a little bit like the member from 

Moose Jaw, but he's a little darker. Behind me is Larry Boys, the 

executive vice-president of Sask Housing. And to your right, Peter 

Kallos, director, project development. 

 

I would like to lead off with some remarks and speak about the 

good of this corporation, but I will spare you my eloquent remarks 

because I know that as we get into the estimates, I can explain in 

great detail the good that this corporation does for all of the 

taxpayers of this province. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, a few months ago in the summer-time, the president of 

the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation attended a conference at 

the Fraser Institute on privatization, or it was reported that he 

attended. 

 

Could you confirm that the president of Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation attended, and if so, what commitments were made on 

behalf of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation through Mr. 

Little to the participants of the conference? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Little attended the conference, under 

instructions from his minister, as an observer. And  

he learned an awful lot about the good that was said about 

privatization that is going on in Britain and throughout the world, 

for that matter. And as a result he just came back with a wealth of 

information and experience. He did not address the conference, 

and as a result made no commitments to anybody. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — It's reported, Mr. Minister, that the president of 

the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation made an inference, or 

indeed a direct statement, that the Saskatchewan Housing 

corporation would be well on its road to privatizing many units by 

the end of this fiscal year. Could you confirm or deny that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I know of no such statement. If you 

could elaborate on where the statement was made and to whom he 

made it, then perhaps we can get on with it. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Can you confirm or deny that he has said that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — I'd have to deny it, under the circumstances. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — You're saying that there was no statement by 

the president with regard to privatizing units. Can the minister tell 

us this afternoon what his intentions are with regard to the 

Saskatchewan Housing corporation and selling off some of the 

assets, land, and housing units and so on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — I suppose that, Mr. Chairman, what I can tell 

you is that there are certain areas of the housing corporation that 

we are looking at to sell off; whether you want to call it 

privatization or add some other word to it, you can do that. 

 

The prime interest that we have at this point in time is the staff 

housing units that Sask Housing has. Originally the staff housing 

units were built by the prior administration, and presently 57 per 

cent only are housing staff people. As a result it places the 

corporation into the Market-place in an area that it shouldn't be, 

and that is providing housing to the average person against the 

private market-place. We don't believe in that, and so we think that 

the staff housing units as such would provide a very good 

opportunity for the government to relieve themselves in that area. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — How many units are there that you're referring 

to with respect to staff housing units? Mr. Chairman, how many 

units are there that are occupied — in total numbers; how many 

are vacant, and how many would you be selling off; in what time 

frame? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, we assumed about 477 total 

units. Some have already been sold off. We are offering them first 

to the tenants. Obviously pride of home ownership comes into 

play. People enjoy owning their own homes, and so if they have 

the opportunity to buy one that they previously were able to rent, 

they are doing that. 

 

To put a time frame on it, I don't suppose that we're in any great 

panic to sell these. I think that in fairness we would  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3631 

 

 

like to contact those. There are some apartment building units in 

particular that we will be trying to deal off is we can to get out of 

the private sector market-place. It's difficult. We don't have a plan 

in mind to just fully go out and put everything on the market today 

and get rid of it, no. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — The units that you have sold, Mr. Minister, have 

they been sold at market value? That is, have they been appraised 

through the usual process and listed through agents, or have they 

been sold privately to the tenants? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the member is right. 

Appraisals are done on all the units, and so far all of the sales have 

been made directly with the tenants who, as I mentioned, want to 

buy the houses. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — The minister was quoted in the newspaper a 

short few weeks ago something to the effect that the minister 

would not be pursuing the privatization of units of Saskatchewan 

Housing corporation, other than perhaps the selected few, the staff 

housing and others. 

 

Can you just confirm that statement and give us a little 

background on what you meant by that statement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well our housing portfolio is always under 

constant review. You have to remember that we have a partner in 

the housing business, and they're called Canada Mortgage and 

Housing Corporation, so that certainly, if we were to do anything 

with regard to privatization, we would have to be in discussion 

with our partner. We have not had any discussions with our 

partner concerning the privatization of the housing portfolio. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Do you plan on meeting with CMHC to discuss 

the disposal of the mutually owned assets? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I don't have any such plans in mind, but 

I suppose if the opportunity came along and if the major player 

who was the major partner came along and said that they would 

like to do something along that line, why wouldn't we have a look 

at it if it's going to be to the benefit of, number one, the taxpayers, 

both provincially and federally; and number two, if it would be a 

benefit to the people that are already in those homes. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — When do you plan on meeting with CMHC to 

discuss the privatization of these units? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I just told the member that I 

didn't have any proposed date to meet with the minister of Canada 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation, and I don't believe that he has 

any proposal to meet with me. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Are you saying that that's your position in the 

next month, or is that your position for this current fiscal year, or 

is it longer term, or is it shorter term? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I don't know how I can be any more 

clear than I am, Mr. Chairman. You know, the existing portfolio 

sits there, and it's under review all the  

time. Certainly at the officials' level, for varying reasons and 

another, it's highly unlikely that the officials are going to make any 

kind of decision, and I'm referring to privatization. That would 

have to be done at the ministerial level. 

 

As far as making a commitment of this week, next week, next 

month, next year, I'm not in a position to make any kind of a 

commitment, because those discussions have never occurred. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Does the corporation have any kind of a plan, 

whether it be short-term, medium-term, or long-term, with regard 

to selling off the assets of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, 

either by itself or in co-operation with CMHC? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — No. No such corporate plan is in existence. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Minister, what do you consider the mission 

and the role of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in this 

fiscal year and next year with regards to public housing and 

supplying public housing, whether it be low income or senior 

citizen housing in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I think that you said it yourself, Mr. 

Chairman, the role of Sask Housing is to try to assist the people of 

Saskatchewan as best a government can and should provide 

assistance to people that require help in housing. 

 

I can tell you that the biggest role right now that I see for the 

Saskatchewan Housing corporation is not so much perhaps in 

providing the housing as it is in the next biggest thing, which is 

maintaining the houses once the people own them. 

 

And I'm pleased to tell you that we are presently smack in the 

middle of perhaps the largest, most successful home renovation 

program in all of the world. And pride of ownership becomes 

awful important to people as they own their homes and have to 

maintain them. I'm just simply delighted that the Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation is in a position to help those people maintain 

their biggest investment. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess one of the 

problems we have here is that the minister believes that the 

Saskatchewan Housing corporation's mandate should be to sell off 

the assets that it controls or owns. And the people of this province 

believe that the mandate of the Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation is completely different. The corporation was set up 

with a different intention in mind. That's why we have these major 

cost-sharing arrangements with the Canada Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation. 

 

And I want to ask the minister whether he feels the corporation is 

fulfilling its objective of supplying affordable housing to the 

Saskatchewan people that cannot afford housing because they are 

either the low income nature or they're unemployed or they have a 

very difficult time in maintaining any kind of accommodation. 

 

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3632 

 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, our record on doing just that is 

very clear. 

 

And I can tell you that our government, since 1982, has not placed 

a moratorium, for instance, on nursing homes, but rather we have 

expanded that particular part of the portfolio. I can tell you that the 

seniors' enriched housing program has by far increased since our 

government took administration in 1982. And the same goes on 

with the low-family income. 

 

I hardly think that we have abdicated our position. Clearly, we can 

stand on our record that since 1982, since our government has 

been here, our public housing role has dramatically increased over 

what was in existence before. We're very proud of our record, and 

we will continue to be that way. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Well I think the minister is proud of a record 

that he's perceiving to be there, but I have here, Mr. Minister . . . 

and you've seen these figures before, because I raised them in 

Crown corporations. The minister knows, and the people of this 

province know, that the level of housing starts in a province is 

frequently used as an indicator of economic growth. 

 

In the last two years in this province, there's been a very small 

increase in the number of new housing starts in Saskatchewan. 

From '84 to '85 the number of housing starts in Saskatchewan 

increased only by 2.5 per cent, which was the lowest in the entire 

country. Out of all of the 10 provinces, that was the lowest 

increase in the entire country — from 1985 to '86 the numbers 

increased a little bit more — but 2.9 per cent, which was either the 

second or third lowest out of the 10 provinces. And these are 

increases which are significantly lower than the national level, 

which was at 23 per cent in '84 to '85, and a 20.5 per cent increase 

from '85 to 1986. 

 

It's been the practice of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation to 

implement programs to stimulate housing. You've mentioned a 

couple of three of the programs already. And I'm wondering if the 

minister is a little deluded in terms of what he's reading into the 

statistics, into the record, because the statistics from Statistics 

Canada show very clearly that your housing programs have been a 

complete failure in comparison to other provinces. 

 

This government of yours has allocated large amounts of funds to 

the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in order to stimulate this 

economic activity. And I want to just raise a comment from the 

estimates of June 6, 1986. Gordon Dirks, who was the minister in 

charge of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation at that time 

stated, and I quote:  

 

. . . we expect that the housing starts this year will be in 

excess of what they were in 1981, the last year in which you 

(the NDP) were in government; that they will be in excess of 

the housing starts in 1980, the second last year that the NDP 

government was in power (as well). 

 

And that's from Hansard, page 1755. 

 

Now not only has Mr. Dirks failed and your government and you 

as minister have failed to deliver on these commitments, but 

you've spent tens of millions of dollars, and you will be spending 

more in the next year, on housing programs which are failures in 

terms of housing starts and comparative figures to comparative 

provinces. 

 

So I'm asking you, Mr. Minister: why did the government fail to 

achieve its goals of surpassing the NDP levels in 1980 and '81 

when Mr. Dirks was so confident it could be achieved just 14, 15 

short months ago? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess it's called 

consultation. We have finally achieved something in 

Saskatchewan that we've been trying to achieve for a long time, 

and that is a stable market. According to the home builders of 

Saskatchewan, we have achieved just that. 

 

And I suppose that — I don't know where the member gets his 

figures, but just to set the record clear, the official stats, according 

to CMHC and StatsCanada represent this: in 1985, total 

Saskatchewan starts were 5,354 starts; 1986, 5,510 — absolutely 

an increase and an indicator of a good, stable market condition; 

1987 is not finished yet, but it seems to be on a par. I can tell you 

this, that the value of building permits for construction, also 1986 

to 1987, have increased from about 14,000 in '86 to 19,000 in 

1987. 

 

So I think that the housing start area is in a good, healthy, stable 

condition. The home builders of this province — and I meet with 

them regularly; I just met with them again last week — are very 

pleased with these results. 

 

We put in programs, for instance, the very successful first time 

home buyers program, when we feel the market condition can 

absorb that kind of an incentive, and we do it in consultation with 

them, Mr. Chairman. It seems to work very, very well. 

 

And presently, as I mentioned, we're in the middle of a home 

renovation program that is creating and maintaining jobs, that is 

the spark-plug of our economy. And there is no question that that 

is reflected in the unemployment figures that are released monthly, 

when Saskatchewan has consistently been the lowest since 1982. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Well the minister read part of the statistics but 

he didn't continue on. I have the same chart as you do, and it says 

the percentage change from 1980 to 1986 is minus 11.8 in 

comparable terms. 

 

Now I wonder what the minister is going to tell us with regard to 

Mr. Dirks' comments that we will have more construction starts in 

the 1986-87 and '87-88 fiscal years, when in effect it's been almost 

12 per cent less than the figures in 1980 or 1981. 

 

And I'd like to also point out, Mr. Minister, that the housing starts 

for this province have been steadily low, but the programs of the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation have not excited the economy 

to the point where there's a lot of new starts. And as a matter of 

fact,  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3633 

 

 

your claims of creating thousands of new jobs is really not that 

clear. 

 

We don't seem to see where those jobs are. From August of '86 to 

August of '87, when the brunt of that program was in effect, we 

had a net loss of 2,000 jobs in this province, while Manitoba and 

Alberta had net increases. Can you explain those figures to us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, there they go living in the past 

again. I really don't care much about 1980. I care about 1987, 

1990, and the years that my children will be raising their children, 

and on and on. 

 

They continually bury their head in the past and say, look at the 

great things that we're having. We can talk about our economy in 

1980-81, and what did they do with it? They blew all the dollars 

that they should have been saving. They didn't even create jobs. 

All they could do was buy stuff. And as a result, now we find 

ourselves in an untenable position of having large, huge debts as a 

result of what they were buying, rather than building, the way it 

should be. 

 

And since July of 1986 there has been an increase, Mr. Chairman, 

an increase of over 7,000 jobs in the service sector, with another 

2,000 in construction. Manufacturing was up 1,000 jobs over the 

same period a year ago. So, you know, you can scare people all 

you want; you can live in the past all you want. I believe that 

building for the future is where it's at. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Well building for the future is exactly where it's 

at. What your government seems to be doing is building a deficit 

that is growing faster than any other deficit in the history of North 

America. That's the kind of legacy of building your government is 

leaving to the people of this province. 

 

I wish those generations were here today, and were here this last 

four months when we talked about how this government of yours 

has been building the deficit and how they're cutting back 

programs and passing on this legacy of debt of $3,400 for every 

man, woman, and child in this province. I wish those generations 

were here to see the mismanagement and the incompetence of 

your government. Because I think when you're planning for the 

1990s and beyond, your planning will have nothing to do with the 

voters of that age because they certainly won't be supporting you 

come the next election. 

 

But this is another example, Mr. Minister, in my view, of the 

Conservative Party overestimating their ill-thought-out strategies. 

Mr. Dirks said we were going to do terrific after the next election, 

and of course that was another commitment that he made and a 

statement that he made that was not worth the paper it was written 

on. But I won't belabour that point. I think we've made the point 

with respect to those housing starts. 

 

Mr. Minister, Statistics Canada information for 1986 indicates that 

there are about 358,000 households in this province. About 28 per 

cent are renters, and a fairly large percentage in comparative terms 

to other provinces. What I would like to know is why 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation: (a) has eliminated the renters' 

rebates; and  

(b) does not have any program in place to assist people to get 

reasonable rental accommodation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose that I could 

begin by telling you what the member from Saskatoon Riversdale 

is on record in saying over the past years too, particularly when it 

comes to the moratorium that was placed on nursing homes. I 

mean, that's a dandy. 

 

So you talk about rhetoric. There's no use going into rhetoric 

because he will never again be in the position to control that side 

of it and to ever put a moratorium in place again. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to tell you that Saskatchewan 

probably has the highest percentage of home owners of any 

province in Canada — almost 60 per cent. If the members 

opposite would ever go out into the market-place, if the members 

opposite would ever liaise or discuss with the private sector that 

own apartment buildings right now, they will find that we are 

having an extremely high vacancy rate in apartment buildings. 

 

As a result, we don't need a rental stimulant program in place right 

now because we would probably close them up, and that's not our 

intention. We work with small business, not against it, and 

certainly the apartment owners fall into that category. 

 

We have a variety of programs that do have rental supplements 

involved through the corporation under the existing circumstances 

today, Mr. Chairman, because this is where we live today and 

tomorrow. We have very good programs in place that meet the 

need of what we have right now. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Well the minister didn't seem to answer my 

question, so maybe I'll ask another question. 

 

One group whose housing needs have not been met, according to 

many reports, is the needs of low income families. It's been 

reported that — and I've confirmed this with discussions with the 

urban municipality of Regina — that there's around or over 2,000 

low income families on a waiting list for low income housing and 

there's no housing units available. 

 

Has Saskatchewan Housing Corporation been in contact with the 

city officials with respect to this problem, and if so, what has been 

concluded in terms of a strategy to address this problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I'm very pleased to tell you 

that as a result of the innovative '87 housing program initiated by 

Sask Housing corporation this year, we are doing low income 

family units throughout the province. That's our obligation. 

 

I'm pleased to say that there will be 50 units going in in Regina, 30 

units in Saskatoon, and a various other number of units going in 

throughout the province. So I believe that we are trying adequately 

to address this situation, and in fact, as a result of the array that we 

have announced recently, we are. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Has the corporation or the minister been  

  



 

October 28, 1987 

3634 

 

 

in communication with the city of Regina with regard to the 

waiting list of the 2,000 low income families that require low 

rental accommodation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, we have continuing 

discussions with the city of Regina that are ongoing. And I believe 

that it's fair to say that if the city of Regina had a real, pressing, 

urgent, dire, dramatic situation, that they would inform us of that. 

They haven't. 

 

How they gather their numbers and what they conclude that to be, 

and as you investigate different people that feel that they should 

qualify for that type of housing, often cases simply doesn't work 

out. So I don't know that it's worth arguing about whether there are 

2,000 or whether there are 1,000 or whatever the number is. 

 

(1700) 

 

But certainly between the programs that we are delivering in 

conjunction with our federal partners and in conjunction with the 

programs that are asked for, indeed by the municipalities 

throughout the province, we are delivering an adequate number of 

units. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — So you have not been in communication with 

the city about the provision of low income rental units or the 

waiting list that they feel is at a dangerous level. Is that correct, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — No, that's not correct, Mr. Chairman. I 

pointed out that we're in continual consultation with the city of 

Regina. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Has there been any strategies worked out to 

address the problem that has been reported by city council, that 

there's a waiting list of 2,000 families seeking low rental 

accommodation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, there he goes talking again. I 

don't know where he gets the figure 2,000. 

 

The official figures that we have from the Sask Housing authority, 

which indicates the total waiting list and does not necessarily 

mean that there is a demand for it at all, but people that have 

simply indicated that they would like to get into those units if they 

could, within the area of 550 or thereabout. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Okay, I don't want to belabour this point 

because it doesn't seem to be getting anywhere. But according to a 

newspaper report, title saying: "Council to ask Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation to provide additional low income housing." 

And they say here:  

 

A study done by the city's community planning department 

over the summer and fall showed that approximately 2,000 

families are on waiting lists for subsidized housing, 

compared to 147 seniors' families. 

 

But obviously you're not aware of that, so we'll go on to 

something else. 

 

What I'd like to raise with you now — you mention that there was 

some 50 units opening up or under  

construction under the innovative housing program. Could you 

explain how the innovative housing program works, how it's 

funded, and how one . . . whether Sask Housing undertakes the 

initiative to construct or whether there's non-profit organization, 

and how this is initiated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — The innovative housing program is actually a 

partnership program, Mr. Chairman, where the communities or 

non-profit groups or the private sector put in what they felt would 

be good ideas for housing throughout the province, and we 

assessed these programs as they came along. 

 

It was open competition to everybody in the province. Certainly 

the idea was to work in partnership with the small-business 

community, with the non-profits, and take the cream off the crop 

and see where we could get to. It was a very, very successful 

initiation to that program, and we had some 50 various types of 

housing accommodation that were submitted under innovative 

housing. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — So the innovative housing project is an attempt 

by Saskatchewan Housing Corporation and your government to 

put more of the burden of social housing on non-profit 

organizations and private developers. And I think that that is a bad 

initiative to undertake, Mr. Minister. 

 

I know that the provincial government contributes 25 per cent 

toward the program and the federal government 75 per cent. But 

how many, and what kind of non-profit organizations have the 

financial and personnel resources and the structure to engage in 

the development of housing projects under this program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, there they go again using the 

wrong word. It's hardly a burden. It was a direct opportunity that 

was most welcomed by the players involved in public housing 

throughout the province. So there they go again using the wrong 

choice of words, and I only wish that the media would pick this up 

and really chastise the opposition for calling it a burden when it's 

an opportunity. 

 

The major players were just absolutely delighted with it. There is 

absolutely no shift of responsibility at all. On the contrary, Mr. 

Chairman, what happened was we were able to trigger a whole lot 

more units, not because we wanted to as government but simply 

because the private sector wanted to, and here was a major 

opportunity for the private sector to work in partnership with the 

government and create that opportunity. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:06 p.m. 

 

 


