













































October 5, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 5, 1987 

 

3075 

 

The Assembly met at 1 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Effects of Free Trade Agreement 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister 

of Economic Development and Trade, and I’d like to ask a 

series of questions dealing with the free trade agreement 

reached over the weekend by Canadian and American 

negotiators. 

 

This deal, in my judgement, surrenders to the American 

position on almost every major issue and guarantees us very 

little in return. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, turning to agriculture, 

the agreement reduces the power of the Canadian Wheat Board 

and eliminates the Canadian import licences for U.S. wheat, 

barley, oats, and other grain products. 

 

My question, Mr. Minister, is this: can you tell us how the 

reduction in the powers of the Canadian Wheat Board are good 

for Saskatchewan grain producers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. 

member is jumping to an improper conclusion when he says 

that somehow this is going to take away the power of the 

Canadian Wheat Board. This agreement does not do that. In fact 

the agreement, quite frankly, preserves the right of not only the 

Canadian Wheat Board but other marketing boards that have 

come to be part of the agriculture community in not only 

Saskatchewan but across Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I ask the 

minister again: do you not agree that under the agreement the 

Canadian Wheat Board licences for U.S. wheat, barley, and oats 

will be eliminated, and can you tell us how that is good for 

Saskatchewan grain producers? 

 

While you’re addressing the problems of Saskatchewan grain 

producers, would you tell us how the reduction in agricultural 

transportation subsidies for wheat - or shall we say grains which 

go from Canada to the United States - how that is of benefit to 

Saskatchewan grain producers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — With regard to the first question raised 

by the Leader of the Opposition, and that is the elimination of 

import licences on wheat, oats, and barley, that only takes place 

at such a time as soon as the levels of  

support for these products in both countries are equivalent. 

 

Now, I’m sure even the member from Regina Elphinstone 

understands that the Americans support and subsidize their 

farmers far greater than we do in Canada. Their treasury 

advances something like $50 a tonne more to the U.S. farmer on 

a bushel of wheat, or on a . . . $50 a tonne. 

 

So until those are equal, the import restrictions stay the same as 

they are now. And I would say to the Saskatchewan farmer that 

should the day come when the U.S. and Canadian subsidies are 

the same, we’re likely also to see the day when subsidies 

around the world have been brought into check. We can then 

export our wheat like we have in the past, and I quite frankly 

believe that the farmers at that point in time would be very 

happy to see that date. 

 

With regard to the second question raised by the hon. member 

with regards to the transportation subsidy into the Seattle area, 

that’s probably primarily going to deal with canola and with 

wheat meal, as I understand. I’m advised that that is a very, 

very insignificantly small amount of Saskatchewan grain 

production, and the bulk of that is transported now by truck, not 

by rail, and therefore it would have very little impact on the 

Saskatchewan farmer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I’m frankly amazed to hear the 

minister say that the bulk of canola is transported by truck to 

the west coats, but I’ll leave that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well . . . That’s right. 

 

A lot of things happen when your head is way up in the air, 

Jack, which you wouldn’t know about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. I now 

turn to the issue of egg and poultry producers. Mr. Minister, do 

you concede that under the agreement there will be a 

liberalization of Canadian import quotas, to use the word in the 

American summary of the agreement, and, Mr. Minister, would 

you explain just what that is supposed to mean, and just how 

additional competition from American egg and poultry 

producers will assist Saskatchewan producers of those 

products? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand the 

meaning of that particular clause in the agreement, would 

means as follows: that the import quotas would be set at the last 

five years’ average for Canadian imports of U.S. chicken, for 

example. And under that calculation that would allow U.S. 

imports to increase into Canada from 6.5 per cent to 7 per cent. 

And I would think even the hon. member would agree that a 

one-half of one per cent increase in the number of chickens into 

Saskatchewan, or into all of Canada, would hardly do in the 

chicken and feather industry in this country. 

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3076 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I too 

heard some figures approaching what the minister just gave us 

over the air waves but found nothing in the written agreement. 

Can you tell me whether there’s anything in the written 

agreement which similarly protects egg and poultry producers 

as you say they will be protected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the officials from our 

department are at this very moment reviewing and being briefed 

by the federal government on the details, the precise details of 

the agreement on the specific issues of whether it’s point 

one-half of one per cent, or whatever. That is being done at this 

point in time. I can advise the hon. member that tomorrow the 

premiers will go through the particular agreement with the 

Prime Minister. Upon completion of that the agreement will be 

made available to the Leader of the Opposition and the member 

of the opposition. And I would hope following that we would 

have a full debate in this Assembly as to the agreement arrived 

at this weekend - I believe a good agreement for western 

Canada, and I believe a good agreement for Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 

Minister of Trade. It’s rather clear that (a) he believes it’s a 

good agreement and (b) he doesn’t know what’s in it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — May I ask you, Mr. Minister, to 

comment on a curious section in the American summary of the 

agreement under the heading of the proposed free trade 

agreement. It goes on to say that it will include the right to 

cross-border sales and “disciplines on public monopolies.” That 

was a curious phrase. And I wonder whether the minister, who 

is well-informed enough to know that it’s a good agreement, 

will tell us just what is intended by the phrase “disciplines on 

public monopolies,” and in particular the impact of that phrase 

and the provisions thereof on SaskTel, the Sask Liquor Board 

and other public monopolies in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, those particular questions 

are being posed at this moment by officials, will be posed by 

the Premier tomorrow. The approach that we have taken with 

regard to our Crown corporations in Saskatchewan, the position 

that we have taken with regard to our Crown corporations in 

Saskatchewan is that in fact they are measuring up to whatever 

rules you want to cover, that in fact our Crown corporations are 

doing a good job and are competing in a market-driven 

competitive way. 

 

The member opposite, again, when he talks about why would 

you support it - I would pose the question to the Leader of the 

Opposition: why are you against - because it happens to be 

dealing with the Americans - why are  

you automatically against any kind of an arrangement with the 

United States when you have had no briefing, you have seen no 

paper with regard to this? Is that to simply say that you are 

against trade with the Americans? Isn’t that what you’re really 

getting at, and I think that is shameful. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 

Minister of Trade, the minister who supports something he 

knows nothing about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, one of the surprising and 

more shocking concessions in this proposed agreement by the 

federal government is the consent to a continental energy 

policy. Can you deny that the terms of this agreement will force 

Canada to sell its oil and gas and other energy sources to the 

United States at prices no higher than our domestic price. In 

other words, Mr. Minister, Canada would no longer have the 

option of charging Canadian consumers or Canadian businesses 

one price for oil while charging American consumers and 

corporations a higher price for oil. Do you not admit that that is 

a clear result of this agreement as reported in the American 

summary? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with regards to the 

question of the energy dimension of this particular agreement 

for Saskatchewan, let me answer the question the following 

way. Right now uranium is 100 per cent excluded from the U.S. 

market. Under this agreement we will have access to the U.S. 

market, and we will have access to the U.S. market without 

processing it through Ontario, something that the government of 

this province has been fighting for for some time. What this 

means is that 1,300 jobs now in the uranium industry in this 

province are protected, and as well they can grow in the future 

as we supply that U.S. uranium industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — With regards to the U.S. market and 

access to the U.S. market, this province has exported 60 per 

cent of its oil into the United States for some period of time 

under this administration and under that administration there. 

That can be vulnerable, Mr. Speaker. This agreement ensures 

our access to that market. 

 

Now the hon. member from Regina North East would have us 

believe, would have us believe somehow that we should be 

selling oil produced in Saskatchewan to Ontario cheaper than 

we might sell it some place else. I find that inconsistent with 

their position when they were government, and I find that 

inconsistent with the position of the people of western Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Minister, will we no longer have the option  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3077 

 

of charging Canadian consumers . . . or the option of charging 

Canadian consumers and Canadian businesses a different price 

for our oil than we will have to sell it to the United States? Will 

you answer that question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what it sounds like 

the member opposite is asking for is the national energy 

program to be brought back on Canadians. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That’s exactly what he is saying, Mr. 

Speaker. What Saskatchewan needs is the right of access to the 

U.S. market. We have that. We also have the right to provide 

for our security of supply in Saskatchewan and in Canada, and I 

think that is important. With regard to what price we should sell 

it at, those are details that can be . . . will be addressed and dealt 

with. 

 

But I say to the hon. member, should we be selling 

Saskatchewan oil below world price to the people of Ontario? 

That is exactly what they fought for when they were in 

opposition . . . when they were in government. We take the 

same position. We take the same position, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s the way western Canada has always dealt with that issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Another supplementary to the minister, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, do you deny that this free trade 

agreement also guarantees the American a secure source of 

supply? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, it provides a mutual 

benefit to both countries as it relates to uranium and as it relates 

to oil. Uranium - we have excellent quantities in our province, 

and we would hope to be able to develop further mines, and I 

believe this will allow us to develop further mines in the 

province of Saskatchewan to access it. 

 

With regard to oil, Mr. Speaker, we have access to the U.S. 

market with caveats that we have to be assured that we have 

product for Saskatchewan people, and we will continue to 

assure that that is in fact the case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 

minister. Mr. Minister, I refer you to the American summary in 

which it says: Canada will be giving the United States a secure 

energy supply in periods of shortage even when there are 

periods of shortage and when there is rationing required. 

 

In other words, Mr. Minister, during any kind of energy 

shortage, Canada would have to continue to supply our 

American customers even if that meant energy rationing for 

Canadian consumers. 

In other words, Mr. Minister, the Prime Minister is receiving 

the support of you and the Premier when he is saying that 

Canadians can freeze in the dark so that the people of Illinois 

and Iowa can have an assured energy supply. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, do you deny that? And if so, can you show, 

can you justify putting Canadians’ future energy requirements 

at such risk? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Two observations, Mr. Speaker. When 

the members opposite were in government, and when the price 

was high, they still had shut-in wells in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The member opposite should also be aware - if he would only 

take time to look at the oil industry in this province - we have in 

place the largest heavy oil reserves in the entire world right in 

the north-west part of our province, equivalent to the production 

capacity of Saudi Arabia. 

 

Now if Americans want access to oil in event of rationing, that 

means that the heavy oil fields of north-western Saskatchewan 

will be developed. That means millions and billions of dollars 

invested into our area, thousands of jobs, and I thought that’s 

what we were about, as a country and as a province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ratification of Free Trade Agreement 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, I want to ask you what happens from here on? Mr. 

Minister, Canadians understand that this agreement may 

radically alter the economy and the political nature of this 

country. What they are not so sure about is whether or not 

they’re going to have any say in that, and that’s my question. 

 

Specifically, Mr. Minister, my question is whether or not 

Saskatchewan will ratify . . . will have a voice in ratifying this 

agreement? The Premier has said from the very beginning that 

Saskatchewan will have a voice in ratifying the agreement. 

However, the Prime Minister says this deal is largely, very 

largely, within the parameters of federal jurisdiction, to use the 

Prime Minister’s words. My question, Mr. Minister, is whether 

or not this province is going to be involved from here on in? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that for this 

agreement to succeed must be mutually of benefit both to the 

people of Canada - and that means all regions of Canada - and 

to the people of United States. And that’s the way the 

negotiators approach this and, I think, for the most part they did 

a very, very good job on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a number of issues that would have 

impacted on provincial jurisdictions but did not because of the 

way of the agreement. Let me give you an  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3078 

 

example: the procurement policy, the government procurement 

policy under this agreement only relates to the federal 

government in Canada and the federal government in United 

States. It does not apply to the province of Saskatchewan or the 

province of Quebec or the province - any other province within 

our country. 

 

Now one thing that clearly does impact upon us is the fact that 

U.S. wines will now come into Canada, and they must be given 

national treatment. What that means is that they must be 

showed on the liquor stores with the same degree that ours are 

and the mark-ups must be the same. So the net impact of that, 

Mr. Speaker, the net impact on the wines will be that there will 

be more American wines listed in our liquor stores at a cheaper 

price. 

 

Now that’s a provincial issue that will be involved. Anything 

that would relate to agriculture clearly would be involved by us, 

and that will be given a fair hearing with regards to that. So 

with regards to that, the premiers are meeting tomorrow. The 

Prime Minister’s approached this from day one, that he wanted 

support of the premiers, and I would hope he gets the support of 

the premiers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I note, Mr. Speaker, that apart from the last 

sentence the rest of your comments have nothing to do with my 

question. Mr. Minister, the question is whether or not 

Saskatchewan will have a voice in ratifying the agreement? 

 

I, for one, and I think many Saskatchewan people, are not 

comfortable with the Premier of this province being the sole 

person who says yea or nay. The Prime Minister has no more 

faithful solider than the Premier of this province, and his office 

is simply not an adequate forum for analysing the impact of that 

in this province. 

 

So I ask you again: will this province have a voice in ratifying 

the agreement, or apart from the consultations with the Premier, 

are we out of the picture? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was the 

only province in Canada that prior and during to these 

negotiations, that went out and sought advice from all people 

across our province. And we in fact got input from those people 

across the province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the 

member from Moose Jaw yells, “farce.” Well the people of this 

province said, don’t involve the cultural industries, and they are 

not on the table. People said, don’t involve the marketing 

boards; they are not on the table. The people said, be careful of 

the breweries because that will lose us jobs in this province - 

they are not on the table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can go through the lists of the consultation 

that we had, and we took that consultation to the national table. 

When this agreement is done, we will further consult with the 

people; we will listen to the people, not like they did back with 

the constitution, and not like they did back when they 

nationalized the potash industry. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Dispute-Settlement Mechanism 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also to the 

Minister of Economic Development and Trade. And, Mr. 

Minister, it deals specifically with the dispute-settlement 

mechanism. As you are aware, the Premier on many occasions, 

and also the Prime Minister, has indicated that a dispute 

mechanism was essential - a binding dispute mechanism was 

essential to any trade agreement. I ask you, are you aware that 

the American summary of the agreement makes it clear that it 

has conceded nothing with respect to the U.S. anti-dumping 

laws or to countervailing duties? They remain intact and 

unchanged. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, in light of this: how does this toothless 

tiger that’s been set up protect Saskatchewan and Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that 

the members opposite always refer to the U.S. text and never 

bother to refer to the Canadian text. I find that as, number one, 

interesting. And I find that, number two . . . Mr. Speaker, and I 

find it also odd that the member from Riversdale avoids the 

questions on this particular issue. 

 

But let me respond to the member’s question. Let me respond to 

the hon. member’s question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The members opposite ask questions 

and then seem to want to yell and shout and not hear the 

answers. 

 

With regard to the trade settlement dispute mechanism, Mr. 

Speaker, the mechanism is as follows. Let me give you . . . the 

best example is in the potash situation. Was this agreement in 

place, and would the Saskatchewan industry feel aggrieved by 

the decision of the DOC (Department of Commerce), they 

would have a right to appeal that decision to this binding, 

binational dispute-settlement mechanism. The decision of that 

would become binding on the U.S. government. 

 

That is a significant progress. That is the only country in the 

world, is Canada, that had been treated that way under this 

agreement by the United States. I think we should commend the 

negotiators for arriving at something so unique and so 

fundamental to the Canadian people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — A supplement to the minister who didn’t 

answer the question. Mr. Minister, are you aware that the 

decisions of the Commerce department can be overturned only 

if they are not supported by substantial evidence or are 

otherwise not in accordance with the U.S. law. And in fact that 

is the only power that this dispute binding mechanism has? Do 

you feel that that is sufficient to protect Saskatchewan and 

Canadian  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3079 

 

industries? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the dispute-settlement 

mechanism is unique in the world. It’s unique in the world. It is 

unique in the world, and it gives Canada a decided advantage to 

trade in the United States with any other country of the world. 

 

What the members opposite did not wish to raise, Mr. Speaker, 

that the reduction of tariffs under this agreement will have the 

effect of a $1,000 refrigerator being reduced to 850. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. I don’t think the 

members from the opposition should unduly holler to interrupt 

the answer. 

 

Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the reduction of tariffs is a 

very significant part of this agreement, and the reduction of 

tariffs will have the effect of reducing for the consumer the cost 

of goods. And let me give you but three examples. A $1,000 

refrigerator now has a 17 per cent tariff; that means it would 

now cost, under the agreement, $850. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. The hon. member is again being interrupted. I ask him 

to wind up his answer. 

 

Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — A $500 colour television set with 11 per 

cent Canadian tariff would . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me close by saying a $50 pair of 

shoes will be reduced 23.5 per cent to 40 . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 

 

Free Trade Agreement 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, before order of the day, I 

rise pursuant to rule 39 to seek leave of the Assembly to move a 

motion regarding a matter of urgent and pressing necessity. The 

issue, Mr. Speaker, is free trade, and more particularly the 

Government of Canada’s proposed free trade agreement with 

the United States. 

 

The matter is clearly urgent, and I submit that it is clearly of 

great importance for Saskatchewan and for the future of 

Canada. And I trust that the government opposite will agree to 

such a debate in order to try to explain this, what I consider an 

alarming threat to Canada . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. The Leader of 

the Opposition is attempting to raise a point regarding  

rule 39, so I would like the co-operation of the members to 

please allow him to do it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I am 

granted leave by the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I will move a 

motion along the following lines: 

 

That this Assembly regrets that the Government of Canada 

has failed to protect the interests of Saskatchewan and 

Canada in its proposed free trade agreement with the 

United States, and in particular has failed to protect 

Canada’s future as a strong and independent nation by 

failing to protect Canada’s agriculture industries, by 

failing to ensure Canada’s ability to pursue an independent 

energy policy for our future, and by failing to achieve an 

effective and binding dispute-settlement mechanism to 

protect Canada’s interest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Leave is not granted. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I ask the hon. members 

to please relax; leave is not granted. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — As a matter of leave, of course, we thought 

it would be appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that the trade critic be in 

the House when we debate the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Are the hon. members ready? 

 

What is the hon. member’s point of order which I couldn’t hear. 

 

Order. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I tried to raise that I thought it 

would be appropriate when leave is requested that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I think I’ve risen to my feet 

enough times this afternoon and asked for order. Now I’m 

going to ask once more for hon. members, regardless of how 

they may feel about issues, to please co-operate in allowing the 

business of the day to proceed, and it is rapidly deteriorating if 

we don’t get a hold of ourselves. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe when 

leave is asked that we should be given the opportunity to 

explain why leave is not granted, Mr. Speaker, and of course we 

believe the trade critic should be in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 

Order! Hon. members know that that is not the tradition in the 

House. 

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3080 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 34 - An Act to amend The Prescription Drugs Act 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased today to 

explain the purpose and nature of these amendments to The 

Prescription Drugs Act. The amendments are all related to the 

changes which took place in the Saskatchewan prescription 

drug plan on July 1 of this year. I think that by now the public 

and members of the Assembly are all familiar with these 

changes, and I will therefore confine my remarks at this point to 

the main items in the amending Bill itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the existing legislation is based on the premise 

that the government will be making payments to pharmacies on 

behalf of beneficiaries rather than directly to beneficiaries 

themselves. Under clause 4 of the amending Bill the purpose of 

the formulary is being redefined to reflect the fact that payments 

are now being made directly to beneficiaries. 

 

In clause 5 the authority to enter into agreements with 

pharmacies is being broadened so that it clearly covers all 

aspects of the program. As well, in clause 7 the prohibition 

against making payments directly to beneficiaries for formulary 

drugs is being repealed. 

 

Under the program, benefits will continue to be provided in 

some cases under the exception drug status policy. As well, we 

have established a review panel to examine those unique cases 

in which special arrangements might be appropriate. Clause 6 

of the Bill establishes clear, general authority to provide 

benefits in all of these special circumstances. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, in clauses 8 and 9 of the Bill the 

authority for the Lieutenant Governor in Council to make 

regulations is being broadened to ensure that it covers all 

necessary aspects of the new program. In particular, it is 

necessary to have authority to establish different categories of 

beneficiary and to define different requirements and benefits for 

each category. 

 

As I indicated, Mr. Speaker, the changes to the drug plan came 

into effect on July 1 of this year. For this reason the 

amendments to the Act are being made retroactive to that date, 

and authority is provided to make regulations similarly 

retroactive in effect. Mr. Speaker, these amendments are simply 

the legal changes necessitated by the implementation of the new 

Saskatchewan prescription drug plan. 

 

I’m therefore pleased, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of 

Bill No. 34, An Act to amend The Prescription Drugs Act. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to be able to enter this debate today on the Devine PC 

government’s Bill No. 34, their Bill to amend  

The Prescription Drugs Act. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that when the Minister of 

Education stood in this legislature the other day to introduce 

changes to our advanced education system in this legislature he 

delivered a one-hour speech to this legislature, and that Minister 

of Health has given us a three-minute blurb on these changes to 

The Prescription Drugs Act. He’s not very proud of these 

amendments, Mr. Speaker, or he would have stood in his place 

for an hour and given us a lecture on how important these 

prescription drug changes are to the overall health care of the 

people of this province. 

 

In many ways, Mr. Speaker, this is the most important and most 

critical Bill which the PC members opposite have put before 

this legislature to date. For this is the Bill, Mr. Speaker, that 

undermines and wrecks The Prescription Drugs Act. This is the 

Bill that brings out in the open the Devine PC betrayal of the 

prescription drug plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — This is the second time that the hon. member 

has referred to another hon. member by name, and I remind her 

that that is not permitted. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — My apologies. This also is the PC betrayal of 

medicare, Mr. Speaker, and this is the PC betrayal of 

Saskatchewan. And I submit, Mr. Speaker - and I believe that 

the PC members opposite will agree - that it has been their 

deliberate policy attack against medicare, more than any other 

single issue, that has demonstrated the PC betrayal of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

In order for us to understand fully this Bill and the attack on the 

prescription drug plan, we need to examine it in the context of 

the PC government’s overall policy of eroding health care in 

our province. For this Bill before us today, Mr. Speaker, is a 

central part of the larger PC policy strategy. 

 

We have all heard the minister’s lame rhetoric about the need 

for restraint, but he somehow neglects to mention that there was 

no need for crucial restraint when his government decided to 

give high-paying patronage jobs to former PC party candidates 

or PC party presidents like George Hill, or defeated PC cabinet 

ministers like Paul Schoenhals or Sid Dutchak or Tim Embury 

or Mr. Parker or Gordon Dirks . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. We’re starting off the week like 

it was Friday. I’d like all hon. members to please allow the 

debate to go ahead with a minimum of interruption. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we hear the 

minister boasting about the increase in his health care budget, 

but he somehow neglects to mention that he has actually 

budgeted less in this fiscal year than he did last year for health 

care. And we’ve all heard the Premier’s incoherent and frenzied 

talk about his commitment to health care. But as often with the 

Premier, that’s all it is, Mr. Speaker - it’s simply talk. 

 

What the Premier is afraid to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3081 

 

his PC government’s overall, deliberate and secret policy to 

undermine and attack medicare in this province. And the Bill 

before us today, Mr. Speaker, is just one example of PC policy. 

They don’t like to talk about the alarming and rapidly 

increasing hospital waiting lists in our province - more than 

14,000 people on hospital waiting lists in Regina and 

Saskatoon. That is clear evidence of the government’s 

incompetence in health care, or evidence of its attack on health 

care, or both. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Speaker, I note that the Minister of Health and 

the Premier won’t talk any more to health care workers about 

the alarming and critical understaffing and underfunding of 

hospitals across this province. That'’ another set of PC policies 

of attacking basic health care - underfunding and understaffing 

of hospitals. 

 

Nor can the Minister of Health or the Premier justify this PC 

government’s deliberate erosion of preventive health care 

services, Mr. Speaker. If the PC government is failing to 

adequately address acute care services in our province, it’s 

totally ignoring its responsibilities for preventive health care in 

our province. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, we have one other striking example of the 

PC government’s overall health care policy, and that’s their 

destruction of the children’s school-based dental plan - an 

example of PC health policy which practically overnight 

wrecked a unique preventive health care service in 

Saskatchewan, the very best in North America. This is another 

example, Mr. Speaker, of health care policy á la Conservative 

members opposite. 

 

They like to make victims of Saskatchewan families and 

Saskatchewan children. PC privatization of the children’s dental 

plan . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’m sure the hon. 

member has much she would like to mention in her remarks; 

however, I’m not sure that the dental plan directly relates to the 

issue we’re discussing. So I ask the hon. member . . . 

 

Order, please. Order, please. Order. As I said, I’m not sure that 

the remarks about the dental plan directly relate to the drug 

plan. I would ask the hon. member to get to the drug plan. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m getting to it. PC 

privatization of the children’s dental plan, Mr. Speaker, was a 

successful Saskatchewan health care service that was sacrificed 

on the ideological altar of PC privatization . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, please. I would 

like to remind the hon. members that the tradition of the House 

and the dignity and decorum of the House does not allow for 

hon. members to be hollering and interrupting the Speaker, 

whether or not they agree. There are other mechanisms for them 

to show their approval or disagreement if they so wish, but 

hollering from their seats is certainly not one of the accepted 

ways. 

 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana, and I don’t think 

I need to repeat that she is not on the topic discussing the dental 

plan unless she can directly relate it,  

and I’m waiting for that. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it is in the context of this 

overall PC attack on medicare, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 

Saskatchewan will judge the PC government’s prescription drug 

plan amendments now before us today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And, Mr. Speaker, I notice that the member 

from Weyburn seems a bit touchy and defensive on this point 

and tires to shout from his seat. First, I’m surprised that you’re 

not calling him to order, Mr. Speaker, and secondly, I sincerely 

hope that the member will have the courage to enter this debate, 

and I invite him to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And third, I invite him to explain to the 

people of Saskatchewan, and particularly to the people living in 

his constituency, why he supports this PC government’s attack 

on the prescription drug plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — In many ways, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan prescription drug plan, before the PC 

government literally destroyed it, was an excellent example of 

medicare in our province. 

 

Over the decades of our history, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Canada have accomplished some great things by working 

together, accomplishments we can all be proud of. And surely 

one of the proudest of these achievements, Mr. Speaker, has 

been medicare - universal, comprehensive, public health 

insurance - medicare, Mr. Speaker. It was conceived in 

Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people, and we’re proud of 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — It was established in Saskatchewan by 

Saskatchewan people; it was expanded in Saskatchewan by 

Saskatchewan people. The Saskatchewan medicare model, Mr. 

Speaker, which came to shine as a beacon across Canada, and 

which ultimately inspired other Canadians to emulate 

Saskatchewan’s example and to follow Saskatchewan’s 

leadership. 

 

It took the genius, Mr. Speaker, of Tommy Douglas, Woodrow 

Lloyd, and Allan Blakeney, all of whom conceived of 

comprehensive medicare and set up the first public 

hospitalization insurance plan in North America. It took the 

courage of Woodrow Lloyd in 1962 to establish the medicare 

insurance in Saskatchewan - some 25 years ago. 

 

And it took the determination of Allan Blakeney, Mr. Speaker, 

to expand medicare, to develop new, comprehensive health care 

policies, like the children’s dental plan and the SAIL 

(Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living) program and the 

hearing-aid plan,  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3082 

 

and yes, Mr. Speaker, the prescription drug plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — But above all, Mr. Speaker, it took the 

political will of the people of Saskatchewan. The battles for 

medicare were their battles, the victories for medicare were 

their victories, and the future of medicare is their future, Mr. 

Speaker. And today’s battle about the PC attack on the 

prescription drug plan is indeed about the future of medicare, 

Mr. Speaker, and it’s within that context that I talk about 

medicare today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — The Devine PC government opposite is 

trying to . . . I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Okay. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — The PC government opposite is trying to turn 

Saskatchewan, the birthplace of medicare, into the graveyard of 

medicare. But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan want us to protect medicare. They want to 

preserve medicare, and they want to go beyond medicare, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And they, Mr. Speaker, are going to make 

sure that the medicare battles of the late 1980s, Mr. Speaker, are 

not the political graveyard of the PC government. For what the 

PC government has failed to understand, Mr. Speaker, is that 

the same basic principle of medicare that has enriched and 

enabled our past will also guide and inspire our future. 

 

The single principle is this: universal, comprehensive medicare 

means that when we are healthy, earning an income, we should 

pay our fare share into the plan. And when we are sick and need 

health care services, we should receive those necessary health 

services - universal, comprehensive, sharing the load 

throughout society. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please, on both sides of 

the House. Now I realize that the hon. member, as she has 

indicated, would like to make a wide-ranging speech on 

medicare, from what I can gather. She has touched on the 

prescription drug plan just barely, or The Prescription Drugs 

Act. And certainly it can be argued that that is part of medicare, 

but the focus is on The Prescription Drugs Act, not on the 

overall medicare issue, and therefore I think the hon. members 

should keep that in mind. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it is a basic principle of 

medicare which the PC government is attacking, and they’re 

attacking it directly by trying to destroy the prescription drug 

plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister and the Premier have repeatedly made 

two central arguments to try to justify their attack on our 

medicare system and our prescription drug plan. I’d just for a 

moment like to talk about those two arguments. 

First, the argue that they have made no significant change to the 

prescription drug plan and no changes to the benefits under the 

Act, but they fail to mention that they have dropped from the 

formulary important items such as calcium. They fail to 

mention that they have dropped a whole class of prescription 

materials, extemporaneous preparations for which there used to 

be more than 45,000 prescriptions per year. And they fail to 

mention the substantially increased costs now borne by 

diabetics for certain prescribed diagnostic agents. 

 

And second, Mr. Speaker, second, the minister and the Premier 

try to pretend that somehow their attack on the drug plan will 

relieve costs - reduce costs, Mr. Speaker, that’s their phrase - 

but that’s simply not true. 

 

The new PC changes, as they like to refer to it in terms of the 

prescription drug plan - the changes sought by the Bill will not 

reduce the total cost of prescription drugs required by the 

people of this province, not by $1, Mr. Speaker. And let us be 

perfectly clear about that point, Mr. Speaker. The total cost of 

prescription drugs required by the Saskatchewan people will not 

be reduced, not by $1 as a result of this change. 

 

The cost will not be reduced, but it will be shifted, Mr. Speaker, 

shifted only to some members of society, shifted only onto the 

backs of those families and individuals whose illness or critical 

health condition requires prescription drugs. The PC policy is 

very clear. Their policy is to shift the cost of health care 

services so that it is only the sick that pay, and only the sick. 

It’s user pay, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ultimately, Mr. Speaker, it is the people of Saskatchewan who 

will be the judge of this Bill before us today and the judge of 

the Conservative government’s attack on medicare and the 

government’s health care policy. And the government itself will 

ultimately be judged by three central standards, Mr. Speaker, 

three basic standards. These three basic tenets are: competence, 

compassion, and credibility. 

 

And I’d first of all like to talk about competence. The people of 

Saskatchewan have now come to realize that the PC 

government’s fiscal mismanagement was not an isolated 

example of incompetence. You’ve had five straight deficits, Mr. 

Speaker - five straight deficit budgets. The fiscal incompetence 

of the Minister of Finance who made an error in his last deficit 

forecast, was by 200 per cent, Mr. Speaker; the fiscal 

incompetence of the PC government which was responsible for 

the Pioneer Trust fiasco and is now responsible for thousands 

and thousands of Saskatchewan people losing their life savings 

in the collapse of the Principal Group of companies. But that 

fiscal incompetence and mismanagement was not an isolated 

example; on the contrary, Mr. Speaker, mismanagement is one 

of the central distinguishing characteristics of this government. 

 

They can’t even manage to provide the basic public services 

needed by the people of our province. Their incompetence has 

allowed our provincial highway system to deteriorate, and now 

their incompetence has eroded our basic health care system in 

this province. 

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3083 

 

Mr. Speaker, this PC government cannot manage the affairs of 

our province, and they have consistently mismanaged the affairs 

of our province. And their PC incompetence and 

mismanagement have made victims out of literally hundreds 

and hundreds of people. On the basic tenet of competence, Mr. 

Speaker, the PC government has failed, and failed miserably. 

 

The second test is that of compassion. The Minister of Health 

and the Premier try to boast about their compassion, Mr. 

Speaker, but their actions belie their words, and it is by their 

actions that they shall be judged. On the one hand they claim 

they have no money to provide basic health care services in our 

province, but on the other hand, on the other side, they have 

time and money for their PC political priorities. They have no 

money for prescription drug plan; they do have money for their 

PC political priorities; money to fly cabinet ministers to family 

weddings in Calgary but not enough for prescription drugs. 

Money to pay high salaries of $100,000 or 200,000 to defeated 

PC candidates like Paul Schoenhals but not enough money for 

the prescription drug plan. Money to pay more than $6,000 a 

month to defeated PC cabinet minister Sid Dutchak, but not 

enough money for families that can barely make ends meet and 

are now deciding today, Mr. Speaker, whether they put food on 

their table or they buy prescription drugs. 

 

What kind of compassion is that, members opposite? Money for 

the Premier’s bodyguards, money for PC government 

advertising like the quarter of a million dollars in one month for 

a PC Party pre-election ad, but no money for prescription drugs, 

no money for medicare, Mr. Speaker. What sort of priorities are 

that? But that’s their PC priorities. If that’s PC compassion, 

then the people of Saskatchewan see that as unfair, uncaring 

and wrong, and on the basic tenet of compassion, the PC 

government is a dismal failure. 

 

The third and final test, Mr. Speaker, is the basic test of 

credibility, the credibility of the PC government and the 

members opposite. Can this government be believed? Can this 

government be trusted? Does this government keep its 

promises? 

 

What about this promise. In the 1982 election campaign in 

which I ran, I ran against a PC member who became the elected 

member at the constituency that I now represent. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What was her name? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Her name was Evelyn Bacon. And she sent 

out this flyer. Is medicare important to you? And she talked 

about what would happen under a Progressive Conservative 

government: a top-grade, fully-funded universal health care 

program which will enable Saskatchewan to regain its position 

as the leader in health care. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s what she said. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — That’s what she said. That’s what she 

promised the people in our riding. Adequate funding to 

hospitals to allow them to operate at normal levels  

around the year; an expanded drug plan to include all 

prescription drugs, that’s what she said; adequate funding to 

reduce hospital waiting lists; a province-wide ambulance 

system funded by the Department of Health. Progressive 

Conservatives are committed to medicare, this thing said. What 

a joke! What a joke! 

 

And they promised to create jobs, and there are 36,000 people 

in this province looking for work and our health care system is 

crumbling. There are nurses looking for work, and we have 

hospital waiting lists and we have bed closures. There are 

health-care workers looking for work, physiotherapists and 

occupational therapists and speech pathologists. Money for Paul 

Schoenhals, money for George Hill, money, money, money for 

everything that they consider a priority, but not for health care, 

and that is a priority of the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill before us today, the 

Bill to undermine the prescription drug plan, is a central part of 

the PC attack on our health care system and our medicare 

system. The PC government has betrayed its election campaign 

promises to the people of this province. It has betrayed 

medicare to the people of this province. It has betrayed 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The PC government’s health care policy and the government 

itself will ultimately be judged. They will be judged. They will 

be judged on competence, compassion, and credibility. In the 

eyes of Saskatchewan people, the government and its policies 

have failed these three tests, Mr. Speaker, and they will pay, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the Bill now 

before us, and the policy change it embodies, is really about the 

future of health care in our province. The PC government is 

mirrored in the past, still trying to undermine and erode the 

significant achievements of the past, because they are the party 

of the past, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But today, today, Mr. Speaker, what Saskatchewan people need 

and what Saskatchewan people want is a health care policy for 

the future - not PC attacks on the past, but positive 

Saskatchewan solutions for our future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the people of this province are determined that despite the 

PC government opposite, working together against this 

government we can protect medicare in our province, we can 

preserve medicare in our province, and we can expand medicare 

in our province and go beyond medicare to develop health care 

policies for the benefit of all of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some PC members opposite may have the courage 

to enter this debate on this Bill and try and explain to their 

constituents why they support their government’s attack on this 

drug plan. I invite them to do it. 

 

I invite the member from Shaunavon and Melfort and More and 

Swift Current and Biggar - the area that I  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3084 

 

come from, Biggar - where health care was born, where 

medicare was born, to get up on your feet and you defend this 

Bill. You defend it. You defend people paying hundreds, and in 

some cases thousands of dollars up front in drug costs. You 

defend that. Well I suspect they won’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have much more to say about this Bill, much more, and I beg 

leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1500) 

 

Bill No. 48 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Hospitalization At 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to explain the 

purpose of this Bill, which is one that is involved entirely with 

internal government procedures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the basic vehicle for government expenditure and 

revenue transaction is the Consolidated Fund, and standard 

policies and procedures are in place for the accounting and 

auditing functions associated with these transactions. However, 

Mr. Speaker, in the past the Consolidated Fund and its 

associated systems were not adequate to meet the extensive and 

complex financial requirements of the Saskatchewan hospital 

services plan. For this reason, Saskatchewan hospital services 

plan has used a separate Saskatchewan hospitalization fund 

with its own set of accounting and auditing requirements. 

 

With the developments that have occurred in computerization 

and electronic data processing, the systems available through 

the Consolidated Fund have advanced to the point where they 

can now effectively handle the needs of the Saskatchewan 

hospital services plan. This being the case, it is appropriate to 

eliminate the separate SHSP (Saskatchewan hospital services 

plan) fund and to handle Saskatchewan hospital services plan 

financial matters in the same way as is done for the vast 

majority of government business. That is what this Bill 

accomplishes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It will facilitate the streamlining of operations, a goal to which 

our government is committed. I want to emphasize that the Bill 

has no effect whatsoever on the funding of hospital services or 

on hospital benefits for Saskatchewan residents. Mr. Speaker, 

this Bill is in keeping with our commitment to administering 

programs as efficiently and economically as possible. 

 

I am therefore pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 48, 

an Act to amend The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These Bills, Mr. 

Speaker, Bill 48 and 50, the amendments to the hospitalization 

and hospital standards Act, have not been well explained or 

justified by the Minister of Health. He claims that his moves are 

for administrative purposes only, but he has failed to answer or 

even address a number of important issues. For example, he 

talks about  

the hospitalization funds but never once acknowledges his 

government’s severe underfunding of hospitals in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This year, for example, Mr. Speaker, his government has 

provided an overall budget increase of only one-half of 1 per 

cent to Saskatchewan hospitals. That’s right, Mr. Speaker. At a 

time when Saskatchewan has the highest inflation rate in our 

country, at a time when our hospitals are strained by 

understaffing and underfunding, the minister provides an 

increase of only one-half of 1 per cent. 

 

The minister has failed to explain to us how these Bills will 

address and resolve the critical problem of hospital waiting 

lists, particularly hospital waiting lists of over 11,000 people in 

the city of Saskatoon. Across the province, and particularly in 

Saskatoon, thousands and thousands and thousands of people 

are waiting for too long to get into hospitals. 

 

Our medicare system, Mr. Speaker, and especially our hospital 

system, are in a crisis. The minister continues to ignore the 

crisis. His policies are making it worse, and he fails to address 

those issues with respect to these Bills. 

 

Today the minister is eliminating the Saskatchewan hospital 

fund. He’s already eliminated the government’s health capital 

fund that he boasted so much about, and he has already 

eliminated the government’s patient care fund that they 

promised would alleviate staffing shortages in Saskatchewan. 

 

Those measures, Mr. Speaker, are typical of the government’s 

approach to our health care system. They talk about positive 

measures, but their actions are a profound attack on medicare 

across this province. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the minister fails to explain the 

government’s plans for hospital deterrent fees. The PC Party 

promised not to introduce hospital deterrent fees, and now we 

hear rumours of hospital deterrent fees being introduced in our 

province. In their changes to the prescription drug plan they 

broke that promise to keep it and expand it; they broke it. How 

are we to know that they will not break the promise to never 

introduce hospital deterrent fees? 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, the people in this province 

distrust the members opposite, because they make promises and 

they break them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the 25th anniversary of medicare in 

Saskatchewan. And I think it’s fair to say that the government 

has embarked on the most widespread, the most fundamental 

attack on medicare in our history. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, 

I invite the minister and the Minister of Health, in closing this 

debate on this Bill, to state clearly and unequivocally, here in 

this legislature, on the record, that the PC government will not 

introduce deterrent fees. 

 

Will the minister tell the truth to the people of Saskatchewan 

about deterrent fees? Is that what these Bills are all about? 

Having made those few brief remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would 

beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3085 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 49 - An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m 

pleased to explain the purpose of this Bill, and at the end of my 

remarks I’ll be moving second reading of Bill No. 49. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police operate a 

program across the country known as the witness relocation 

program. Under this program individuals who testify in court 

proceedings, and whose lives could be endangered by virtue of 

their giving testimony, are given a new name and identity and 

relocated in another part of the country. 

 

If this program is to be effective it is obviously imperative that 

the change of name and identity for these individuals remain 

strictly confidential. However, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan 

this is not legally possible at present. The existing provisions of 

The Change of Name Act would require the director of Vital 

Statistics to publish in the Saskatchewan Gazette the former 

name and the new name of any individual participating in the 

RCMP witness relocation program. 

 

The purpose of this amendment to The Change of Name Act is 

to permit the making of regulations which would exempt name 

changes of this type from the requirements for publication. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should note that until recently it was possible for 

the RCMP to process all name changes in the Yukon 

jurisdiction without the changes being made public. However, 

amendments to Yukon legislation have now eliminated this 

option and, accordingly, the provinces are now moving 

individually to amend their own legislation to accommodate 

this Royal Canadian Mounted Police program. And the 

amendments being proposed here are part of this national 

initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the amendments are a necessary and 

reasonable step to permit the effective operation of the witness 

relocation program, and I therefore am pleased to move second 

reading of Bill No. 49, An Act to amend The Change of Name 

Act. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in essence members of the 

opposition have no difficulty with this Bill whatsoever. We 

agree with and support the Bill. And I think that, as the minister 

says, it permits non-publication of name change in certain cases 

such as RCMP efforts to protect witnesses, and it permits 

regulation to be made which would implement that new policy. 

We have no objections and will be supporting the Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 50 - An Act to amend The Hospital Standards Act 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, these are two minor 

amendments which are simply consequential to the amendments 

to The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act, which I outlined 

earlier. 

 

As I’ve indicated, the Saskatchewan hospitalization fund is 

being eliminated as a separate entity. The fund is referred to at 

two points in The Hospital Standards Act, and these references 

are being deleted. 

 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, these are simply consequential 

amendments, and I therefore move second reading of Bill No. 

50, An Act to amend The Hospital Standards Act. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Bills 48 and 50, the 

Hospitalization and The Hospital Standards Act are related in 

that they both have, as their primary purpose and effect, the 

elimination of the Saskatchewan hospitalization fund. The fund 

served as a mini-consolidated fund for hospitalization purposes. 

Its major source of revenue was the normal annual budgetary 

payment, but it also collected some other revenues from some 

other Saskatchewan government agencies and other 

governments in the case of services to non-Saskatchewan 

residents. The fund then paid out moneys, as I understand it, to 

hospitals and made payments to SHSP administration. 

 

The fund today in this Bill is being eliminated and, as I 

understand it, all disbursements will still be made from the 

Department of Health under the subvote, payments for hospital 

services. 

 

The purpose of the change, Mr. Speaker, is not clear. We want 

to examine the Bill further, and I would therefore adjourn 

debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 32 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 

have with me, to my immediate right, Walter Podiluk, the 

deputy minister of Health; to my left is George Loewen, 

associate deputy minister of Health; immediately behind Mr. 

Podiluk is Dick Bailey, assistant deputy minister of Health, and 

immediately behind myself is Lawrence Krahn, who’s the 

director of administrative services. And obviously with a 

department as large as Health and with the various . . . you 

know, it’s a very large enterprise; we have a number of other 

people but we’ll call them forward as the questioning will 

suggest. So we have other people available, obviously, and 

we’ll bring them forward at the right time. 

 

(1515) 

 

Item 1 

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3086 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. I’d 

like to welcome the officials of the Department of Health to 

these estimates today. I can tell you that we’re going to be here 

for some time because we have a number of concerns about the 

present direction of our health care system. So I guess I’m in 

essence saying, get prepared to be here for some time. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, 25 years ago this year, or 25 years ago on 

July 1, 1987, a Saskatchewan government, under the leadership 

of Woodrow Lloyd, introduced North America’s first universal 

medicare insurance program. And the citizens of our province, 

through their duly elected officials, and the CCF-NDP 

government, decided that never again would people in this 

province have to go without health care services because they 

couldn’t afford to pay for it. They decided that never again 

would their babies or their loved ones go without health 

services, become maimed or disabled, or in some cases die 

because families couldn’t afford to pay for that service. And 

there were lots of detractors, Mr. Minister, lots of detractors 

who said that their freedom would be taken away from them. 

And there were demonstration out in from of this legislature, 

and there were even some clergymen who called supporters of 

medicare communists. 

 

And families were divided, and neighbours were divided, and 

communities were divided, and some of those communities 

have never been the same. And I happen to come from one of 

those communities, and that’s the town of Biggar. It has never 

been the same since that debate in 1962. 

 

And I recall as a 10-year-old child, my father and a number of 

other farmers in that area who decided to go out and collect 

funds for a medical clinic in the town of Biggar when doctors in 

that town decided to take away health services for the people by 

going on strike. And in a matter of hours they raised some 

$30,000 and were able to get doctors to come and provide 

health services. And it divided the town, and it divided families 

and friends, and that town is just starting to recover from some 

of those divisions, Mr. Minister. 

 

And it’s interesting that during the 25th anniversary of 

medicare, and it’s sad, Mr. Minister, in the 25th year of 

medicare, instead of your government celebrating this 

tremendous achievement by the people of this province that has 

been emulated by province after province in our country, 

instead of a celebration, instead of a resolution before this 

legislature that we could debate, you, Mr. Minister, and your 

members, your government members, have betrayed, betrayed 

medicare. 

 

And how have you done that? I thought in the 25th anniversary 

of medicare, the 25th year, that we could reflect on our past and 

look forward to our future and go beyond medicare. I thought 

we could do that and so did the members on this side. But 

instead of the province that introduced medicare celebrating 

medicare, this is the province in this country that is under the 

most stress when it comes to medicare. And I want to talk about 

that stress to our health care system and how your government 

is undermining our health care system. 

And the first thing I want to talk about is the drug plan. You 

just, Mr. Minister, introduced an Act that in essence will do in 

the prescription drug plan as we knew it. You have introduced 

an Act that will introduce a deductible scheme for people who 

require prescription drugs, and they, Mr. Minister, in order to 

afford prescription drugs will have to come up with the money 

up front, and at some time down the road as they go beyond 

their deductible they’re eligible for a rebate. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, that is not taking us beyond medicare, that’s 

taking us backwards. And I know that you and members 

opposite, and all members in this House, have received letters 

from citizens who have said, I can’t afford to pay for my 

prescription drugs. And you’ve received letters from elderly 

people who have said, I might take my heart pill once a day 

instead of three times a day, or I might take my pills every other 

day, or I’m making a decision not to take my arthritis medicine 

because I can’t afford the money. And they’re proud people, 

Mr. Minister. They don’t want to have to go before some sort of 

special drug review panel to have their income and their 

financial situation looked into. 

 

And they’re making choices, Mr. Minister, because of your 

deliberate policies to undercut our medicare system and our 

prescription drug program. And, Mr. Minister, you will be 

responsible for this. You’re the minister that brought in these 

changes to the prescription drug plan. And I say to you, Mr. 

Minister, if anybody in this province suffers unnecessarily and 

goes without their drugs as they’re telling us they’re going to be 

doing it, Mr. Minister, whatever happens to them will lay on 

your shoulders and on your head, Mr. Minister. And I hope 

you’ve got a strong conscience. I hope you can take what’s 

going to happen to people. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, we had a dental program, and that dental 

program for children was introduced for a very, very good 

reason. In 1969 it was determined that the children in our 

province had the worst dental health in this country, the worst. 

And I recall growing up on a farm, and in those days my 

parents didn’t have the benefits of the children’s dental 

program. And I would say that there are lots of rural children in 

this province - rural adults who were children in those days - 

who didn’t benefit from a program, and they are now paying for 

it dearly through visits to the dentist. 

 

Mr. Minister, the dental program was introduced for a specific 

reason, and that was to improve the dental health of our 

children, and we have done that. The dental health of our 

children is the best in North America, and studies have proven 

that. All of the information available shows that the work of the 

dental therapists and the other dental workers in the children’s 

dental program enhanced and improved the dental health of our 

children. And that was a preventive service, Mr. Minister. It 

was a preventive service, and it meant that dental care today and 

dental health today means fewer visits to the dentist later on in 

life and fewer costs associated with dental health. 

 

And what did you do, Mr. Minister? You privatized the 

children’s dental plan. You fired 411 workers in this province 

who have very specific skills - very specific skills, Mr. 

Minister. And you’ve now turned that program  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3087 

 

over to the private sector private dentists. And you’ve done that 

saying that parents were demanding that dentists do the work 

and not the dental therapists. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I want you, before these Health estimates 

are over, to table a poll showing, or table data showing that 

parents were demanding that you do in the children’s dental 

program, fire 411 workers, and transfer that to the private 

sector. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that you won’t be able to show 

any such data because you have a survey yourself showing the 

satisfaction rate of parents, and we have statistics showing the 

number of young people who were enrolled in the program and 

the satisfaction rate of that program. And as I read those annual 

reports, over 90 per cent of children in this province were 

enrolled in the children’s dental program. So that shows 

satisfaction. 

 

Mr. Minister, we will show in these estimates that your decision 

to do in the children’s dental program will have serious 

negative effects on the overall dental health of our children in 

this province, because contrary to what you say, your own 

estimates, your own budget shows that you’re expecting parents 

not to take their children to a dentist. And you’ve budgeted for 

it. 

 

Under the former children’s dental program, parents didn’t have 

to worry about making appointments and running the children 

here and there and taking time off of work. That program was in 

schools, in 578 schools in 338 communities, Mr. Minister, and 

children had access to it. And now, Mr. Minister, it looks as 

though dental services will be available in less than 75 

communities in our province. And how is that service to people 

living in rural Saskatchewan? It’s not. 

 

And I want to talk about, Mr. Minister, the hospital waiting 

lists. And as you recall in my earlier remarks on The 

Prescription Drugs Plan, I read into the record a pamphlet put 

forward by your candidate in the ’82 election in Saskatoon 

Nutana, and she talked about hospital waiting lists. She talked 

about hospital waiting lists and how it was a problem. 

 

Well I want you to know, Mr. Minister, that it is a serious 

problem. There are over 11,000 people in Saskatoon waiting to 

get into hospitals. There are men and women in Saskatoon and 

area who are waiting up to six weeks to get into hospital for 

cancer operations - or their doctor believes that they have the 

potential of cancer. And, Mr. Minister, if you think that that’s a 

laughing matter, you’re seriously mistaken because those 

families are under a great deal of stress. 

 

When we have people waiting for a year and a half or two years 

for a hip replacement operation or a cataract operation, there is 

a serious problem in the health care funding system in our 

province. And your underfunding of hospitals in our province 

has led to closure after closure of hospital beds this summer, for 

a two-month period in many, many instances. We have more 

hospital beds closed this summer than at any other time in the 

history of our province. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, if there are people waiting to get into  

hospitals and something serious happens to them and their 

health is jeopardized, Mr. Minister, I say to you once again, the 

blame will be rested on your shoulders and your head, and I 

hope you have a conscience, Mr. Minister, because if you had a 

conscience, you’d be doing something about the present 

situation. 

 

Mr. Minister, prior to the 1986 election campaign the former 

minister of Health promised 700 additional health care workers 

that would go into the system to alleviate the serious problem 

with understaffing in our hospital system and nursing home 

system. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I want you to show us in these estimates 

where that money and funding and staffing positions have gone 

to. I want you to tell us what hospitals and what nursing homes, 

because the health care workers in our province are saying they 

can’t see it. 

 

And they are saying, Mr. Minister, and I’m sure you’ve heard 

from them, that they, in some cases, are planning on getting out 

of the health care system because they can no longer take the 

stress. And when you’re dealing with patients who are critically 

ill, you have to be on tope of things, and you can’t be run off 

your feet, and you have to be mentally alert. And we have 

instance after instance, Mr. Minister, where health workers are 

coming to work sick because they don’t want to stay at home, 

because replacements aren’t being called in, and they don’t 

want to put that kind of stress on their co-workers. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, those health care workers and some doctors 

are saying that the hospital system in our province is verging on 

a disaster. It’s in a crisis. And I’m not using strong language, 

Mr. Minister, and I’m not exaggerating; those are their words - 

their words, Mr. Minister. 

 

And if something happens because of an error in human 

judgement because a nurse is sick or a doctor is sick or 

someone hasn’t been called in to replace those health care 

workers or they haven’t got enough funding, Mr. Minister, if 

something happens, it will rest on your shoulders and you head. 

And I hope you have a conscience. And I wouldn’t laugh about 

it, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, our mental health system in this province has 

been a leader in de-institutionalization of people who face 

psychiatric disorders and problems. And, Mr. Minister, in these 

Health estimates we’re going to talk about what’s happening to 

our mental health system; why is it that so many people were 

early retired and laid off - and we haven’t yet seen replacement 

workers - and how there are people who have psychiatric 

disorders that can’t get into hospital because there isn’t a bed. 

 

And they’re out on the street with no support services, and 

they’re ending up in jail because there are no support systems 

for them to go. And it’s not right, Mr. Minister, that you have a 

psychiatrically disordered person who ends up in the RCMP 

cell in Saskatoon to spend the night because there isn’t a 

hospital bed at University Hospital or City Hospital, and there’s 

no support services or half-way services. And what does that do 

to the family, Mr. Minister? 

 

Mental illness in this province is a hidden disease, and I  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3088 

 

think it’s time that your government got with it in terms of 

starting to deliver some proper mental health services to people 

who are under a great deal of stress because of some of your 

economic policies. 

 

Mr. Minister, during these Health estimates we want a 

commitment from you that you are going to do nothing to limit 

the number of visits to a chiropractor. You are going to do 

nothing to limit that because there are citizen after citizen after 

citizen in this province that require the services of 

chiropractors; that they have chronic back problems and chronic 

muscle problems, and if you do anything to cap those services, 

once again you show your betrayal of our health care system 

and our medicare system, Mr. Minister. 

 

(1530) 

 

And physiotherapy - there are people who have a long enough 

wait to see a physiotherapist, and if you do anything to limit the 

number of visits that are there on an insured basis, you once 

again prevent access to our health care system and you go back 

to your theme, Mr. Minister, that those that have money can pay 

for services, and those that don’t, can’t. Those that have money 

that have access to health care services, and those that don’t, 

don’t have access. And what sort of a health care system is that, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Mr. Minister, as I’d laid out on Friday to the former minister of 

Health, the member from Moose Jaw South is the critic for 

home care and nursing homes, continuing care, as well as the 

critic for the alcoholism commission and policies regarding 

alcohol. 

 

But I’d just like to say this. It was interesting, in 1982 the 

member who campaigned for your party in our constituency of 

Saskatoon Nutana talked about nursing home fees of $390 a 

month. Well, Mr. Minister, we have never seen such increases 

in nursing home fees in our history, and we are now at 

$580-odd . . . $87, it could be 590 because of changes to your 

health policies. And, Mr. Minister, you’re leaving older people 

and disabled people with a hundred bucks a month, and that’s to 

take care of some of their prescription drugs, that’s to take care 

of their personal effects, and I’m hearing from people that that’s 

not enough. 

 

And home care, Mr. Minister - we have waiting lists in this 

province because of your underfunding of home care. And there 

are many, many people worried about home care becoming an 

acute-care service for people who are ill, rather than a support 

system of families who are trying to help their older person or 

disabled person maintain themselves in their own surroundings. 

And there are several people who are worried, Mr. Minister, 

and I’m sure you’ve heard this from home care people around 

this province, that you are moving away from a support service 

to the family for people who are frail, elderly, or who need a 

little bit of maintenance work or laundry or housework done in 

order to help them stay in their homes. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have home care board after home care board 

that are now making the decisions to move more and more into 

acute care in support of hospitals and  

doctors and medical health clinics rather than supporting the 

frail, elderly, or the disabled person to stay in their own home. 

Mr. Minister, in the 25 years that we have had medicare in this 

province we have never, ever seen the attack and undermining 

of our health care system such as we had under your 

ministership. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think it’s fair to say that many people were 

surprised that your government didn’t do more to undermine the 

health care system in your last four years of government prior to 

the ’86 election campaign. They were surprised that you even 

introduced some positive things, Mr. Minister. You did some 

positive things to enhance the health care system, and you 

consulted with people. The former minister of Health consulted 

with people, and they were pleased about that. 

 

But that has not been the case under your leadership, Mr. 

Minister. It has not been the case. You have not bothered to 

consult with people. Well, you can shake your head, you have, 

but you haven’t. If you had consulted with people, you would 

have not have done in the children’s dental plan; you would not 

have changed the prescription drug plan; you would not even 

have contemplated changing and limiting chiropractic care, or 

physiotherapy care; you would not have increased home care 

fees by 66 per cent, Mr. Minister, and you would not have 

increased nursing home fees by some 18 or 19 per cent. You 

would not have done that had you consulted with people. 

 

I guess, Mr. Minister, in closing my initial opening remarks, I 

think we’re going to have an interesting time of it here. I would 

hope that we can treat each other with some courtesy, but I 

expect, Mr. Minister, that you answer the questions straight and 

direct. I will pose the questions in a straight and a direct 

manner, and I would expect the same courtesy from you. 

 

So the question, the first question, Mr. Minister: in this 25th 

year of medicare what has your government, or what have you 

done to commemorate this important historic event in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will . . . I hear 

the member’s comments at the end saying that we should treat 

each other with some courtesy and so on. I certainly agree with 

that and I will . . . I’m not sure what start we’re off to in that 

category but I think it’s fine. 

 

I want to just make a couple of remarks as it relates to some of 

the comments made by the member, and obviously I won’t go 

through each of the items in order as she did because I’m not 

sure that I could remember them all in that order. But I will just 

make a couple of comments and at the same time relate to the 

first specific question asked. 

 

There’s no question as we go into this very large enterprise, 

which is health in this province, and it’s the case everywhere in 

the country but obviously in this province, we’re dealing with a 

circumstance where the citizens of our country and the citizens 

of our province, are faced with extreme costs and faced with a 

system which will be very difficult as we look down into the 

future - will be very difficult for the society to be able to  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3089 

 

afford if it’s allowed to carry on at the same stage that it has for 

some time. That’s the fact. 

 

The member talks about this being, this 1987 being a 

anniversary year and a significant year, I agree with that, of 

medicare and what medicare has meant not only to 

Saskatchewan but certainly to Canada. And no one will ever 

dispute that medicare began here in Saskatchewan - medicare 

being medical services, access to physician services, access to 

hospital, those things which people, I think, in this province 

understand very, very well. 

 

So there’s no one on this side of the House, certainly no one in 

my ministry or certainly the Premier of this province presently, 

will ever in any way attempt or any way diminish the important 

work that was done by some of those what I will call true 

pioneers in the medicare system. And you mention people from, 

you know, from Woodrow Lloyd, Tommy Douglas before him, 

and others. Nobody will diminish that. The fact that it’s a fact 

across this country, medicare is in place across this country. 

 

There are other Saskatchewan pioneers. Once can think of 

Emmett Hall and his role in the commission that he led, and so 

on, having been appointed by Mr. Diefenbaker who was Prime 

Minister at that time. 

 

It’s a fact that Saskatchewan for whatever . . . there are some 

very large . . . there are some pioneers in that area that people 

across Canada owe a good deal to. There’s no question about 

that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Now in looking at this 25th anniversary, one can look at it in 

many different ways. And I submit to you, Mr. Chairman, and 

to members of the House today that the way in which the 

member opposite and several of her colleagues over past 

number of months and so on and throughout this session, have 

looked upon the health care system is to say, we have this 

anniversary, 25 years ago we reached nirvana, and so we should 

stay there and we should remain there and we should not look 

into the future. 

 

What I’m saying, Mr. Chairman, is the following - is that 

there’s no question that we must look back over the 25 years 

with some significant satisfaction as residents of Saskatchewan 

and as residents of Canada. There’s no question that that’s true. 

 

And at the same time it’s incumbent upon any of us who are 

charged with responsibilities, who hold responsible positions as 

it relates to this very large enterprise which is Health, to say, 

and to ask ourselves questions like what will our medical 

services look like 25 years into the future? What will be the 

structure of that? What are the demographic principles? What 

are the demographic changes, trends, and so on which are out 

there and which are obvious to all who would look and who 

would read the research? What is the medical technology of 

today and what are the projected medical technologies of the 

future that will determine what our system will look like into 

the future? Those are the kinds of things to do, so we must have 

a balance there. 

Certainly we must look back and we must be satisfied and 

happy with ourselves, or with those who were pioneers 

certainly, but ourselves as citizens of this province. But we 

must look forward and we must have, I submit to you, Mr. 

Chairman, the courage to look forward and not to continue to 

only look back. It’s extremely important to us that we look 

forward and know what this system, or have a sense of what 

this system will look like as time goes on. 

 

Mr. Chairman, a couple of remarks that the member makes and 

just so I can illustrate the point that I’m making and that I have 

made on several occasions in the House and elsewhere across 

the province. The member opposite will use terminology like, 

medicare is finished, and you’ve destroyed medicare. She uses 

those kinds of very inflammatory language that says, you’ve 

destroyed medicare. We’ve all heard that kind of language from 

them that says, the drug plan is gone; there is no drug plan. 

We’ve all heard them say that. 

 

They said there is no dental coverage for children in 

Saskatchewan. We’ve heard them say that. And I repeat that. 

They have said, there is no dental coverage; there is no drug 

plan any more - when in fact, Mr. Chairman, we have, even 

with the changes that took place, in the drug plan, for example, 

we have the most generous drug plan that there is in the 

Dominion of Canada. We have the most generous, with the 

changes. 

 

We have coverage for our children who are up to 13 years old, 

from five to 13 years old. We have coverage for them. And the 

coverage now comes at a dentist’s office and so on. Sure there 

have been some changes, and there will be some debate 

surrounding those changes - how they took place, if they should 

have taken place. We will certainly disagree on that. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, regardless of what portfolio I’m in, I 

frankly came to this legislature to disagree with the political 

bent of the member opposite and her colleagues. Frankly, that’s 

why I’m here, because I disagree with the kind of directions 

that they suggest that they’ll take the province. 

 

So I don’t have a problem with suggesting to the hon. member 

and to all members of the House and you, Mr. Chairman, we 

will certainly at best agree to disagree on many of these things. 

So I want to make that point. 

 

The member has also used some very, what I would call strong 

sort of . . . I would say has not told the exact truth on all 

occasions across Saskatchewan. When she says things like, 

you’ve betrayed medicare; there has been no building of any of 

the hospitals; the hospital programs have not been built; you’ve 

betrayed the elderly in terms of the nursing home spaces. I’ve 

heard this kind of thing. I mean, all of this sort of thing has been 

coming from them for some time. 

 

So in keeping with this agreement we have to be courteous to 

each other, I’m going to just hold back a little bit on that, but I 

want to remind the member of several things. I want to remind 

the member a little bit about the legacy that was left as it relates 

to Saskatoon, that she made some reference to, in terms of the 

hospital facilities that are in Saskatoon and that will be in 

Saskatoon in the  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3090 

 

near future and on into the future. 

 

She says that, you know, that there is no building and there is 

no construction going on - all those kinds of things. We’ve 

heard that, Mr. Chairman, there’s regeneration going on at St. 

Paul’s Hospital. That regeneration is as a direct result of the 

establishment of a planning council. It was done by my 

colleague, the former minister of Health, the member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley. That planning council was under the leadership 

of Dr. Gathercole who is the chairman of the University 

Hospital board. And that was done some time ago. 

 

One of the recommendations of that planning council, which 

was established with the express purpose of addressing the 

Saskatoon, and therefore the northern Saskatchewan waiting 

list, over the long term recommended that there be a major 

redevelopment and regeneration at St. Paul’s Hospital. Mr. 

Chairman, that regeneration is under way. There’s major 

regeneration under way at University Hospital. And, Mr. 

Chairman, there will be a new City Hospital in Saskatoon. All 

of those things are major expenditures for the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, those people that so often are forgotten by 

members opposite who don’t refer to the taxpayers or to the 

burden that those taxpayers have to deal with. 

 

And on the other side - and I know there is another critic as it 

relates to special care homes and so on - but in Saskatoon, once 

again, Parkridge, a major new development in Saskatoon, 

opened. Developed and planned under this government and now 

open. Circle Drive Alliance Church has a major seniors’ 

development. Luther Towers - all of those Saskatoon 

developments. 

 

In Regina - and I’ll just stay with the cities for a minute - but in 

Regina a major direction taken by this government, taken by 

this government, Mr. Chairman, in response to the legacy that 

was left us by the last couple of terms of that other 

administration, was there was a dire need for a rehabilitation 

centre in this province. And it is now under construction for all 

to see over here, not far from the building where we now stand, 

the new Wascana Rehabilitation Centre, a major, very excellent 

facility which will serve the workers and the disabled people of 

our province. That’s under way, planned by this government, 

being constructed under this government, and will be opened by 

this government. 

 

(1545) 

 

So just to put some of this inflamed rhetoric into perspective, 

new facilities in Leoville, in Big River, in Watrous, in Meadow 

Lake, in Lampman, in Watson, in Cut Knife. I believe there are 

others - Lloydminster, whatever. But there are several new 

facilities across the province. Because when we look at this, 

when we look at this very large system which is the health 

system, it’s related to basic - and I’ll speak now more directly 

as to the hospital system - it’s based on four basic categories. 

We have . . . and none of those categories should ever be 

forgotten as it relates to their importance to the wider system. 

 

Those hospitals and those services which obviously get  

the most attention always - and it’s because they are so much 

larger and so large in the scheme of things - are the big base 

hospitals in the two largest cities. No question that that’s true, 

and we have issues which we’ll deal with, I know, in specific 

terms in those areas. 

 

We have the regional hospitals in the Moose Jaws, the Swift 

Currents, the Yorktons, the Prince Alberts of this province - 

very significant facilities, very significant facilities in the 

scheme of things in the province which, I will say here, should 

be enhanced. And we have been working toward a system 

whereby we can enhance those regional hospitals for a couple 

of reasons. Number one, to take some pressure off the big base 

hospitals in the two large cities; and secondly, to in fact 

enhance the kind of work that can be done for people closer to 

home in their regional centres. 

 

We have the large community hospitals which are very efficient 

hospitals in the province. They’re just in the larger communities 

- they’re just the Watrous hospital, the Meadow Lake hospital, 

Melfort, whatever. They’re all . . . many of them, and we know 

who they are, and the small rural hospitals which are very small 

facilities built in another time. 

 

And what I’ll say to the members opposite is this. We have 

heard from the time of the Finance minister delivering the 

budget speech, and he said, the rural hospitals, there will need 

to be some change in the configuration of those to recognize the 

demographics that I mentioned earlier, to recognize the kind of 

medicine that can be and would appropriately be practised in 

those small centres. 

 

And that medicine, Mr. Chairman, relates to a large degree to 

the treatment of an ageing population. So we have in our rural 

areas older people who we have been working to develop 

housing facilities for, and so that they can be treated to a good 

degree in those places. 

 

And for that reason, the strategy which was introduced in the 

first term of office of this government, of integrated facilities 

where we in fact build onto smaller rural hospitals which have 

been concerned about their viability for some time, build on to 

them special care beds, in the level 3, 4 category so that they 

can be administered together, so that they can address the actual 

demographics that is out there in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So those are the four categories. And there is no question that in 

this large system that we have, related now to hospitals, there is 

no question that all four of those, as we look into the future . . . 

And I challenge the member and ask the member to do that, 

because I’m quite willing to take the suggestions on how we’ll 

deal with rurals . . . with regionals, with community hospitals, 

and so on. But the four categories must mesh together so that 

we have a system that touches our folks of this province 

regardless of how remote an area they may live in. 

 

So I won’t say any more in response to those specific things, 

but I’ll say to the hon. member as it relates to the 25th 

anniversary of medicare, we . . . You know, I don’t have any 

specifics. We didn’t have a large celebration or anything of that 

order, he we did say, you know, we did have some . . . On the 

July 1 weekend, I believe, which  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3091 

 

was the pertinent weekend for the coming into force of the 

medicare system as we now know it, or as we knew it then, let’s 

say, because as we now know it is certainly a little different, 

and we commended that and commended those pioneers who 

were there. 

 

I’ll reiterate that no one in this government will ever try to 

diminish the role played by those people. But I will say once 

again, we have . . . it'’ incumbent upon all of us in responsible 

positions to look forward now into the next 25 years of 

medicare and what that includes. Thank you. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you can have big trade 

fairs in Saskatoon and talk about all the wonderful things that 

business people in this province are doing, but you can’t have 

anything of any significance to show the people of 

Saskatchewan and the people of this country how we in 

Saskatchewan have advanced the cause of universal, accessible 

health care in our province. You’ve got big bucks and big 

money for big business events, but no money for health care. 

 

Mr. Minister, we’re talking about people’s lives. You talk about 

money and how you can’t, how the system can’t really afford 

this, and we’ve got to look into the future to make sure we have 

a health care system. You talk about money. Well, Mr. 

Minister, we’re talking about people’s lives and the quality of 

their lives. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, this is interesting. You really didn’t do 

much to celebrate the 25th anniversary of medicare. In tact, you 

wouldn’t even have a discussion in this House, a resolution put 

forward where we could all talk about how much we’ve 

accomplished in the last 25 years. You don’t want to talk about 

medicare and the 25th anniversary of medicare. And I can see 

why you don’t want to talk about it, because of what you’re 

doing to this province when it comes to health care system and 

the delivery of health care in our province. 

 

And I’ll tell you what you’ve done this year, in the 25th 

anniversary of medicare. You’ve virtually done in the 

prescription drug plan. There are people who are going without 

drugs because they can’t afford the up-front charges. There are 

people that are paying hundreds and hundreds of dollars extra in 

up-front charges because of your changes to the prescription 

drug plan. 

 

You’ve eliminated dental health coverage for children between 

the ages of 14 and 17. You’ve privatized the children’s dental 

plan with budgetary considerations for parents not taking their 

kids to the dentist. You’ve taken that into consideration in full 

anticipation that parents will not take their kids to the dentist. 

That’s taken care of in your budget. 

 

We’ve got a hospital waiting list in Saskatoon of more than 

11,000 people, and it’s growing in Regina as well. You’ve done 

absolutely nothing to deal with that. You know, you blame 

doctors in the media because their patients aren’t getting into 

hospitals because they’re not on the urgent list or something. 

Doctors aren’t buying that, Mr. Minister. You blame here, 

there, and everywhere, but you don’t take any responsibility for 

it yourself. 

You increase home care fees by 66 per cent. Now some older 

folks are going without the services of home care because they 

can’t afford it. You increased nursing home fees to over 580 

bucks a month, and some older people can’t even buy 

Christmas presents and birthday presents for their grandkids 

because of what you’re doing to health care. 

 

And then you threaten, you introduce the threat, the possible 

threat of limitations on visits to the chiropractor and the 

physiotherapist. In fact, we’ve been told that private 

physiotherapy services that have now been covered, or have 

been an insured service up until now, are looking at going the 

way of having to pay for it. And there will be people who can 

afford physiotherapy services and there will be people that 

can’t. 

 

And that’s not the kind of health care system that we envisioned 

25 years ago, or that people envisioned 10 years ago, or five 

years ago, or a year ago. And my question to you, Mr. Minister, 

is: why didn’t you and your brothers and sisters over there, why 

didn’t you tell the people of this province what you were going 

to do to our health care system in the 1986 election? Why didn’t 

you tell us? 

 

You know, we’ve got all of these commitments on the part of 

your government to our health care system, and here’s one of 

your commitments: 

 

The Progressive Conservative Party believes in removal of 

deterrent fees for prescription drugs and will increase the 

number of drugs provided under the plan. 

 

That was in the Meadow Lake Progress, compliments of you, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Can I see it? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You bet you can see it; September 27, 1978. 

You made that commitment to the people you represent, and 

your members made that commitment to the people that they 

represent, but you didn’t tell us in October of 1986 that you 

were going to significantly change the prescription drug plan or 

change the children’s dental plan - you didn’t tell us that. 

 

And my question to you is: why didn’t you? Why didn’t you 

tell the people of Saskatchewan that you were going to cut back 

on health care services? Because I can tell you this much, Mr. 

Minister, you people would not have been elected - you would 

not have been elected because health in this province is a 

priority; it’s a priority of the people of this province and the 

people that all of you and all of us represent. 

 

Why didn’t you go to the people and talk about the deficit and 

how you have to save money? You talk about saving money. 

Well the people on this side of the House talk about people’s 

lives and the quality of people’s lives. And you are doing 

everything to undermine that. Why didn’t you tell the people in 

October of 1986 what you were going to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of things  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3092 

 

just to clarify. The member talks about things like the resident 

charges at nursing homes, and we’ll get into that in a while. I 

want to remind you, Mr. Chairman, and everybody in the 

House, that the system that’s now in place for nursing home 

fees, and so on, was a system that was brought in in 1981 by the 

former administration. We haven’t changed in essence of that 

system in terms of how much is charged on a monthly basis. 

 

An example, Mr. Chairman, in 1981 the disposable income of a 

resident of a nursing home in Saskatchewan was $65.58 when 

they brought in that system - $65.58 disposable income per 

person; that’s what they left the folks with. And at present it’s 

. . . or in November when the fee goes according to the formula, 

when the fee goes up again to 596, in November coming up,. 

there will be $103.47 disposable income. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the member can say, well there’s this 

increase and, you know, that’s all part of it, and I know exactly 

where that comes from and the political motivation for the 

various statements. But I want you to be very clear on that, is 

that before 1981, before that system - and that group over there 

was in government for a good long time before that - people 

paid in a range of anywhere from $500 up to as high as $1,300 a 

month for nursing home spaces in this province. 

 

So they brought in a system which said there will be a 

subsidized rate beyond a certain amount. And they set in a 

system, and as I’ve said, the former government brought in the 

system and we have not changed the essence of that system in 

terms of . . . and what we have done is said, look, we’ll leave 

each of the people who are residents in level three or four with a 

disposable income which is of a certain amount; and I just 

reiterated that it’s over $100 now. It was $65 a person when 

they brought the system into place, $65 a person. And then they 

raised it, if you just . . . just prior to the ’82 election in a 

desperation bid but it meant nothing because people had 

decided that they were gone. But they raised it from 65 up to a 

significant amount at that time. 

 

And we have kept that level. We’ve kept that at the higher level, 

and we stay in the range of $100 disposable income per resident 

to this day. And we intend to stay at that type of level 

throughout. So that should be clarified because the member - as 

has been said here on many occasions and as I, I believe, have 

said as well on several occasions before - the member has a 

tendency to get a little carried away with her political rhetoric 

from time to time - more than from time to time, but I’ll say 

from time to time now. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the member says that the plan in the dental plan 

on our part was that we were planning on parents not taking 

their children to the dentist. Nothing could be further from the 

truth. Mr. Chairman, I believe parents will take their children to 

the dentist, and in fact they will take their children to the 

dentist. Parents in Saskatchewan will take their children to the 

dentist. What the children of Saskatchewan between five and 

thirteen years of age have - despite the comments of the 

member opposite, not only in the House but elsewhere in the 

province, which say that children have no coverage - children 

between five and thirteen are fully covered for their dental 

services, fully covered. 

Now that means that if the parent takes that child to the dentist 

. . . Let’s just talk about this for a minute, Mr. Chairman. How 

often is that for an individual child? How often is that, a visit to 

the dentist? For the most part it’s once a year, and in some 

cases, a significant enough percentage, it’s twice a year. And 

then someone with a chronic problem or whatever, it may be 

more than that. But for the most, the largest percentage of 

children, it’s one trip per year to the dentist. Once - once a year. 

 

And the member says that’s terribly inconvenient for people. 

It’s very, very inconvenient. People will not take their children 

to the dentist. And to listen to her talk today and other days, you 

would think from that, if you just were visiting here for the first 

time and had never been around here, you would think that 

these children in Saskatchewan need to visit the dentist at least 

twice a week, like hockey practice or something, the way she 

talks about it. 

 

Well it’s not the case, Mr. Chairman. People in Saskatchewan 

take their children to hockey practice once or twice a week, but 

they need to take their children to the dentist once a year. And I 

say, Mr. Chairman, the parents of Saskatchewan when the 

onerous part, which is the payment, is covered, will take their 

children to the dentist to have their dental health looked after. 

They will, and their children will be well looked after by 

excellent, well-trained professionals in dental offices. That will 

be the case. 

 

(1600) 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, as times goes on and people understand the 

program better, which is what is happening right now in this 

province, the level of concern that the member relates to has 

been dropping in direct proportion to the level of understanding 

of the system, both as it relates to the dental plan and as it 

relates to the drug plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well I guess the Minister of Health doesn’t 

want to answer the question, and I’ll just give the question once 

again. Mr. Minister, in your own election propaganda, in your 

own paper, the Meadow Lake Progress, you said that there’ll be 

no fees in the medicare system in any way, shape, or form. In 

fact that sounds like your language - any way, shape or form. 

You use those kinds of words regularly. 

 

You said the present fees on the drug plan will be removed. 

You said, the Progressive Conservative Party believes the 

removal of deterrent fees for prescription drugs and will 

increase the number of drugs provided under the plan. You said 

that, Mr. Minister. And you said: 

 

Today as always the Progressive Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan rejects any form of deterrent fees or health 

insurance premiums. 

 

You said that, Mr. Minister, and my question to you is this: why 

did you not, in the October 1986 election in which you were 

elected and other members of your party were  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3093 

 

elected, why didn’t you tell the people of this province prior to 

the election campaign what your plans were for our health care 

system? 

 

Why didn’t you tell them that you were going to, in essence, 

introduce deterrent fees to the prescription drug program? Why 

didn’t you tell them when you told them that there would be no 

deterrent fees? Because when you have a deductible system, 

that’s a deterrent fee, Mr. Minister. Why didn’t you tell them 

that you were going to change dramatically, radically, the 

children’s dental plan? Why didn’t you tell them that? 

 

And why didn’t you tell them that you were considering putting 

limitations on visits to chiropractors and, in fact, doing away 

with insured visits to private physiotherapists? Why didn’t you 

tell them that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Two or three things, Mr. Chairman. The 

first comment is I’m really pleased to hear that the member’s 

been reading the Meadow Lake Progress. I Hope that you’ll 

read more than a selective ad here and there, because if you 

would go to Meadow Lake, read the paper and talk to the good 

citizens of that area, your warped view of the world, I submit, 

would be very, very different. It would be very much more 

realistic than it is now. Okay? I just would say that to the 

member. 

 

So I invite you to go to Meadow Lake as often as possible and 

listen to the people, and I believe it would be to your benefit. 

Take as many colleagues as you like, as well. I’m not sure my 

constituents would like me to invite all of you at once or any 

time, but I’m sure they can deal with you. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there’s a very important concept here that we 

must discuss and that should be pointed out. Medicare, which 

we’ve talked about to some degree here in terms of what is 

medicare and is classic medicare - I mentioned it earlier and 

talked about the physician services, access to hospital - access 

to those kind of services. There’s no question that that’s the 

case. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there is a difference between some of the 

supplementary benefits. And I call the dental plan for children 

and I call the drug plan, which has been in place for some time 

and which is now changed as of July 1, a supplementary benefit 

- obviously in the health care and dealing with the health and 

well-being of our citizens. But those are supplementary benefits 

which are not in classic medicare by any one’s description - any 

rational person’s description. I shouldn’t say anyone, because I 

can’t speak for those folks opposite. 

\ 

Mr. Chairman, the deductible system in the drug plan, I submit 

to you and all members of the House, is not a deterrent fee. It is 

not a deterrent fee. The way the system is set up it is not a 

deterrent to people in terms of their access to having the drugs 

which they require for their well-being. It’s not a deterrent. 

 

And as I said in my earlier comments, as the people of the 

province have come to understand the system now that it’s been 

in place for some time, their level of understanding has 

increased and their level of concern has diminished in a major 

way. Because they now see  

that the rhetoric that came from those members which said there 

is no longer a drug plan - I understand the consternation of 

people, especially elderly people who will have listened to this 

stuff and say, well that’s a member of the legislature; probably 

she’s responsible; probably they will say something that’s fairly 

close to what is the fact. And that would scare people. And I 

just submit to you and as I have to the House before, that is not 

an appropriate type of rhetoric regardless of the political benefit 

that one hopes to gain, to use. 

 

So I would just . . . and I will say that the drug plan is intact. 

The drug plan is the most generous - our Saskatchewan 

prescription drug plan is the most generous in this country right 

now, even after it’s been changed. There is no one else in the 

country that comes even close. I suppose Manitoba, after the 

program which we patterned our new program after, is close, 

but other than that there is nothing else even close. And we’re 

proud of the new program, and the citizens of Saskatchewan 

have adjusted well and will continue to. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you didn’t answer the 

question, and I think that’s par for the course when it comes to 

asking ministers of your government answers. I told you that we 

were going to ask straightforward, direct questions, and we 

expect straightforward, direct answers. But you don’t want to 

tell the people of this province why you basically misled them, 

why you told them that you weren’t going to introduce deterrent 

fees and you were going to remove deterrent fees, which I 

presume meant dispensing fees for prescription drugs and 

increase the number of drugs under the plan. You didn’t do that. 

You didn’t do that, Mr. Minister. 

 

And a deductible is a deterrent fee because if you don’t have the 

money, you can’t pay for it. It’s as simple as that, Mr. Minister. 

And with your new drug plan, people have to have the money to 

pay for their drugs up front in most cases, or practically all 

cases. 

 

But nevertheless, you’re the Minister of Health and you’re 

running the largest department of government. I’m wondering if 

you can tell me what your health care, your personal health care 

philosophy is, Mr. Minister. Can you tell us what the 

philosophy of the Department of Health is when it comes to 

delivering health services in our province? Can you tell us what 

the long-term goals and objectives of your Department of 

Health are, and what your short-term goals and objectives are 

going to be for this coming year when it comes to the delivery 

of health care in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of things. I’m 

pleased to get into this sort of philosophical debate for a few 

moments anyway. I just want to go back for a minute as it 

relates to the drug plan, just to add a couple of things, just so 

that the member will see the sort of structure that was in place 

and that needed to be addressed in the way that we did address 

it. It needed to be addressed in some ways, and we chose to 

address that, and we’ll get to that later. 

 

But between and ’75 and ’82 - ’75 was when the drug plan first 

came in, Mr. Chairman - in ’82 drug plan fees were raised from 

$1.75 to nearly $4.00. That’s over 100  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3094 

 

per cent increase. They started off at $1.75 and so that’s . . . you 

know, the other members also recognized some cost factors 

here. In ’84 under our administration, and the former minister, 

the drug fees for social assistance recipients were reduced from 

the 3.95 level down to $2 for those recipients who were asked 

to pay a fee, and that has remained the same even under the new 

plan - at $2 for those people most in need. 

 

I point that out because it’s important to make the point because 

the member continues to say, well there will be people in our 

province and there are people who are most in need who will 

not have access to drugs, will not have access to the 

prescriptions that they need for their well-being because of 

some Draconian measures of this plan. And I just say outright, 

Mr. Chairman, to you and to everyone here, that that is not the 

case. People most in need in this province are covered, as they 

were under the former plan, and there is no one found wanting 

as it relates to the system. 

 

And we have the unique circumstances panel in place and some 

people have been covered in various ways by that. And others, 

you know, much to the chagrin of some of the members 

opposite, and of themselves, have had a reply which says no, 

we don’t believe that you are unable to handle this; we know 

it’s difficult for you; we don’t believe that it is out of your reach 

to be able to handle this, and so you won’t have special 

coverage. Sure, there will be cases like that. 

 

Another thing, since 1982, since this government came into 

power, the number of products that are covered under the drug 

plan have increased from 1,560 prior to ’82 to a total of 1,800 

products now, separate products. That’s based on several things, 

some which our people in the formulary committee believe 

should be in and some because there are new drugs being 

developed all the time, and that’s an obvious thing. 

 

That becomes a variable in the structure of a drug plan - new 

drugs being developed all the time, the kinds of new procedures 

that are being carried on. All of those kinds of things are 

important to remember when we talk about the total cost of 

something as massive as a drug plan to serve a million people. 

So I just point that out. 

 

And I’ll get into . . . I want to make another point as well as it 

relates to the medicare debate that we had a minute ago. The 

thing that happened in terms of protecting the very fabric, what 

we will call the fabric of medicare, that happened under this 

administration, which did not happen from 1962 right up till the 

time that the former administration left office, was that many 

people in our province were faced with extra billing, for various 

reasons, prior to extra billing being banned in the province by 

our government last year. So it was a fact of life from ’62 until 

last year when it was banned. It was banned, not by the NDP 

government resting on their laurels, and so on, it was banned by 

ourselves, by this government who had the courage to do it 

early despite the federal program and so on, but this 

government moved quickly to comply with The Health Act. 

 

Now as it relates to the philosophy of health care and so on, I 

just want to say to the member and to all the  

members here, all of us who have been raised in Saskatchewan 

. . . I heard a little bit of a life story from the critic over here a 

few minutes ago about Biggar and what a nice place it is, and so 

on and so on. But I would just say that my philosophy as is the 

philosophy of, I would say, most of our members here who 

have lived in Saskatchewan for a good long time, many of us, 

most of us born here and raised in the system which has come 

up over a long period of time - my philosophy of medicare or of 

health care and the delivery of health care is very much like 

that, I believe, of the widest population in our province. And 

that is that people must have access to medical services, they 

must have access to physicians’ services, they must have access 

to as wide a range of health care services as possible for the 

lowest possible cost that it would ever be for them as an 

individual or family. I believe that. I believe we can still 

maintain that as long as we look at the financial circumstances 

in a very realistic way. 

 

The goals, and let’s just . . . some of the goals that we have will, 

whether short term and long term, must be dictated by the 

changing circumstances, some of which I mentioned a little 

earlier, and that is the ageing population that we have. That’s 

not a phenomenon of Saskatchewan although it’s very 

significant here. 

 

I believe it’s a case that we have more . . . we have the largest 

percentage of citizens in our province who are 75 and over, 

which is significant for a system like the health care system. So 

ageing population, the changing practices in the way medicine 

and health care practices are conducted, changing technology - 

some of these I mentioned earlier - changing demographics in 

terms of the number of people moving to the various centres. 

 

And as the economy diversifies and as we move from 

agriculture more and more into some of the other - 

manufacturing, some of those things, there will be changing 

places of residence. And that has implications for the 

infrastructure out there, whether it’s in education or in health or 

others. But it’s certainly here in health, and the changing 

systems of delivery. 

 

All of those things, all of those things are the circumstances 

which we must be aware of as we frame the goals of the 

department in the short term and the goals of the department in 

the long term to better serve the folks of our province. 

 

So those are things which we’re very aware of, which we’re 

attempting on an ongoing basis to become more aware of. I 

don’t think any member in this House, or any person, can 

honestly stand up and say that they know of the new trends and 

all of the new directions in health care. But we are making 

every attempt in this excellent Department of Health to be 

aware of all the trends and to blame, or blame . . . I say blame, 

but to frame the goals that we develop on these things, both 

short-term goals and long-term goals. 

 

(1615) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I have no idea what your health 

care philosophy is. You haven’t told me what the long-term 

goals of your department are, you haven’t told  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3095 

 

me what your short-term goals are. 

 

Surely, Mr. Minister, as the Minister of Health in this province 

responsible for over one-third of the budget of the people’s 

money, surely you must have some health philosophy. Your 

department has policy analysts and researchers. I would think 

that you would have put together some type of philosophical 

statement that governs your actions and governs the actions of 

the employees of the Department of Health. 

 

Now I’m asking you again, Mr. Minister: what is your health 

care philosophy? You are the Minister of Health; surely you 

have a health care philosophy. And I think the people of this 

province are entitled to know what it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I did outline then, and I said it’d 

be . . . My philosophy of health care is that there should be 

access. I put it very succinctly so the member understands well. 

And I’ve said that. 

 

My philosophy, I said to you earlier, is not unlike the 

philosophy of health care that has been - that most people have 

in their souls, who live in this province for a long time, and that 

is that access to hospitals, physician services, those kinds of 

things, access to the best possible health care facilities and 

services that are available, is what we should be striving for. 

That’s the philosophy I have. And that is for people of the 

province, regardless of what part of the province that they live 

in - regardless of what part of the province they live in, that 

access. 

 

I have a philosophy that says there should be a reasonable and 

responsible use of the services which are provided by the 

taxpayer to the citizens, to all of us as citizens. We should be, as 

citizens all of us, responsible in our use of those services which 

are provided by our fellow taxpayers. There’s no question that 

that’s the case, and I submit to you that I believe that there has 

been, over a period of time, a feeling or a lack of understanding 

of what the costs of health care are. It just happens over a period 

of time. 

 

People have no reason to question what does this cost. And that 

isn’t just citizens who are users of the system, that fact . . . 

that’s in fact the professionals who deliver the system. I mean, 

I’ve had physicians say to me that they do not know the cost of 

the drugs that they prescribe, didn’t have a clue before, now 

they do. Why? Direct result of the new drug plan which comes 

in where people will ask questions, responsible questions about, 

is there a way that I can . . . is this prescription, is there a 

cheaper one available? - those kinds of questions. 

 

So I believe in a reasonable and responsible use of the system 

by the citizens who are the users of the system, but who are as 

well the taxpayers who pay for the system. I believe that. I 

believe that, as I say, it’s important for our department and for 

the citizens across our province who, as they think about their 

health care system and the very excellent system that they have, 

as they think about that - and I’m sure they do - that they say, 

what is the best system for the present, and what’s the best 

system for the future, and what research is there to show what 

the future will look like? 

So we want to talk about, and we will continue to in this 

department, look at the very best information available as it 

relates to the new practices of medicine, the new research that’s 

available, the demographics, all of those kinds of things. 

 

So while the member will say that she can’t take from that what 

my philosophy is, I’m sorry for her, but that’s what it is and 

that’s as best as I can express it, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you say that your 

philosophy is one of access, and I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, 

does access mean that people regardless of income, have access 

to the system? Or does access mean, Mr. Minister, that only 

those that can afford it have access to the system? What do you 

mean by accessibility? What’s your definition of access? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I mean access, as I have said before and 

as it related to the drug plan, and that would go across the 

broadest system. I believe that people should have access to the 

medical services, access to health care benefits, and those most 

in need who are unable to, you know, if they were unable to pay 

for the deductible as it relates to the drug plan. If they’re most 

in need, then that should be covered by the wider society. And 

it is the fact, and so I believe that, because it’s extremely 

important that no one goes wanting for health care services. 

That’s not a change in the way in which health care has been 

approached for a good long time in this province, and it should 

be that way and will continue to be that way under this 

administration, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, children in this province used 

to have access to a children’s dental program in 578 schools in 

338 communities. Does your definition of accessibility mean 

that you change the children’s dental program so that children 

are denied access to dental health because children’s dental plan 

is no longer available in 338 communities, Mr. Minister, it’s 

only available in 75 communities. Is that your definition of 

accessibility? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well we went through that in terms of 

how often will children visit the dentist. 

 

What I call access is that there will be reasonable access to 

dentists’ services by the children in our province, Mr. 

Chairman. I submit to you, under the new dental plan that is in 

place, that there is access for children of 5- to 13-years old to go 

to dentists’ offices in this province. There is an increasing 

network of dentists’ satellite offices and in fact full-fledged 

dental offices opening in communities which have not had 

dental services heretofore for a good long time and some of 

them never before. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, you know, because if you take the member’s 

argument to its logical conclusion - her argument which says, 

because dental services are not included now in the schools, the 

children no longer have access to dental services. That’s what 

she said. Because you can’t get your teeth fixed in the school, 

you no longer have access to dental services. That’s what the 

member said. Now if you take to its conclusion, what she would 

say is that there should be . . . in order for children, in  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3096 

 

order for people to have access to the health care system and 

physician services, there should be a doctor’s office in the 

schools. That’s what she wants. 

 

Mr. Chairman, access to dental service is available for the 

children of our province on an increasing network of dental 

offices on the main streets of our communities, and certainly 

there is access to dental services for the children of this 

province. 

 

What is required is this: there are two things; there is choice for 

the person, the parent, to say, this is the dentist I shall take my 

child to. There’s that choice. The members, obviously, are 

against that. So be it. I’m for that. 

 

And secondly, there is access to the dentist’s offices. And what 

is required is that a loving parent will take their child to the 

dentist and, Mr. Chairman, that is not too onerous for any 

parent to take their child to the dentist, for the most part once a 

year. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — The Minister of Health talks about 

reasonable access when he talks about the children’s dental plan 

as we now know it - a dental plan available in only 75 

communities in Saskatchewan. I take it then, Mr. Minister, 

when the children’s dental plan was available in 338 

communities, you saw that as unreasonable access, and that’s 

why you’ve changed the children’s dental plan and basically 

fired 411 workers. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is your definition of accessibility when it 

comes to prescription drugs? We know what your definition is 

when it comes to the children’s dental plan: you do in the dental 

therapists, 411 of them; you fire them; you do away with dental 

services available to children in 338 communities, and now 

those services are only available in 75 communities. So we 

know what your definition is of accessibility when it comes to 

the children’s dental plan. 

 

What’s your definition of accessibility when it comes to the 

prescription drug plan? When we have citizen after citizen in 

this province that are making choices today whether or not they 

get their prescription drug or they put food on their table; how 

is that accessibility, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Two things, Mr. Chairman. As it relates 

to the dental plan, I reiterated to the member a while ago that 

there’s an ever-widening number of locations in the province 

where there will be dental services - dentist offices opening. 

There are . . . let me just read a list to the member. These are the 

ones that have opened since July 1. There are 20 new dentist 

offices open in this province since the first of July. I want all 

members in the House to hear that. 

 

Since the first of July, 20 new rural locations for dentist offices 

that were not there before. And I predict, I’ll stand here and 

predict to you, Mr. Chairman, and to others in the House, there 

will be more. There will be more dental offices opening in rural 

communities where there have not been dental services not only 

for children for where there have not been dental services for 

the adolescents and for the adult population in some of those 

more remote communities. Mr. Chairman, that is a positive 

thing for Saskatchewan. That’s a positive thing to have  

dental services available in a wider area than just in the larger 

centres. And that’s what’s going on. 

 

Let me just read some examples. Big River, no dentist’s office 

before, now there’s a dentist’s office; Blaine Lake, Cupar, 

Debden, Delisle, Dysart, Earl Grey, Edam, Kelliher, Lestock, 

Lipton, another one in North Battleford which is a satellite 

office to deal with children’s services; Paradise Hill, Porcupine 

Plain, Radville, Southey, St. Walburg, Turtleford, Waldheim, 

Wolseley. These are the services that have opened since July 1. 

These are new dental offices which are opening in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Chairman, as we said . . . I said to the media and to the 

House on a prior occasion that that’s what the trend would be 

with the implementation of the new dental plan. That is, in fact, 

what the trend is with the implementation of the new dental 

plan, and I stand by my former statement, and will reiterate here 

again, there will be an increasing number of rural communities 

who will have access to dental services, not only for their 

children, 5 to 13, but because of this program will take the 

people out there - the dentists - and there will be services 

available to the adult population in those communities. 

 

As it relates to the member’s question about the drug plan and 

about accessibility - and I hear her say, and I have heard her say 

on occasions before - and I reject outright her statement which 

says that there are people making choices between the drugs 

they need and the food that the need. I reject that out of hand. 

Those in need in this province are covered. 

 

There are people in this province, you know, who will say, I’m 

making these choices. There are people who are motivated by 

things other than their needs for prescriptions who will say 

these things. I know that. That’s an unfortunate aspect. But, Mr. 

Chairman, the system that'’ in place in the drug plan, in the new 

drug plan, is a system very similar to the one that’s in the 

province of Manitoba just to the east. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I defy the members opposite to find stories as 

they will try to reiterate to us here about the communities and 

the people who live in our province of Saskatchewan. I defy 

them to go to Neepawa, and Minnedosa, and Brandon, and 

Winnipeg, and whatever other community in the province of 

Manitoba, where their drug plan is not as generous as the one 

we have here, and find stories where people say they’re making 

choices between food and their prescriptions. It’s not the case. 

It is not the case there and, Mr. Chairman, it is not the case in 

the province of Saskatchewan under the new drug plan. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well the minister likes to talk about the new 

places where we now have a dentist, and I’d like to talk about 

the places where we no longer have a children’s dental 

program, where we no longer have access to dental care in 

particular rural communities. And this is particularly hard on 

rural communities and, as a member who represents a rural 

community, you should be concerned about this, Health 

Minister. 

 

Let’s look at the Saskatoon region. Is there a dentist in 

Aberdeen? No. There used to be one - a dental therapist. Is there 

one in Allan or Annaheim or Asquith or Beechy or  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3097 

 

Bellevue or Borden or Bruno or Carmel or Clavet or Conquest 

or Craik or Cudworth or Dalmeny or Delisle or Domremy or 

Drake or Duck Lake or Dundurn or Elbow or Englefield, 

Guernsey, Hague? And it goes on and on. 

 

Let’s talk about accessibility. And the Minister of Education 

talks about a telephone book, and we know about telephone 

books in Saskatoon and how inept this government is at even 

printing a telephone book. And it’s interesting that a 

chiropractor had his practice left out of the telephone book, 

along with a dentist, both of whom live in the constituency that 

I represent. Some competence! 

 

(1630) 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I want to get back to accessibility. You talk 

about accessibility. You talk about having accessibility to the 

best possible. You talk about a reasonable and responsible use 

of the system. That’s your philosophy - reasonable and 

responsible. And you talk about goals dictated by changing 

arrangements and the ageing circumstances and the changing 

practices of health care and changing technology and changing 

demographics. 

 

And I’m just asking you, Mr. Minister . . . I guess we now have 

an idea of what your philosophy is, and it’s supposed to have 

something to do with accessibility that’s reasonable. And we 

know what’s happening in this province, where people are 

having to make decisions based on their income and whether or 

not they have money. That’s their accessibility. They don’t have 

access. 

 

We’re going back to the bad old days prior to the time that 

members on this side of the House made the decision to 

introduce medicare and add on to medicare and provide services 

so that people wouldn’t have to go without. We know what 

your philosophy is, and that’s to cut, cut, cut, cut, cut, and do in 

the system bit by bit, dime by dime, piece by piece - that’s your 

philosophy, Mr. Minister. Accessibility doesn’t mean a hoot if 

it’s not universal, that regardless of how sic one is, regardless of 

one’s income, that one has access to a system - regardless. And 

that’s not your philosophy. Well I can assure the public of 

Saskatchewan that’s our philosophy, that regardless of your 

income and regardless of how sick you are, you have access. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And that you shouldn’t have to worry about 

being sick and being out of work, or not being able to do your 

job because of your illness. You shouldn’t have to worry about 

those things because you’ll always have access to a health care 

system that’s world class and number one as you people like to 

talk about. Well you are nickel and diming the system to death - 

to death, Mr. Minister. People can’t get into hospital in this 

province. There are some people that can’t afford prescription 

drugs and are making decisions about whether or not they get a 

prescription or they put food on their table. That is happening, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

And you are denying rural people access to dental services that 

used to be available in their communities  

and no longer are. You are denying rural women jobs by firing 

411 dental therapists and dental workers, and those jobs were 

used to subsidize the family farm which you know full well 

isn’t doing very well these days. And those people aren’t going 

to forget what you’ve done to them. You’ve taken away rural 

employment, Mr. Minister. 

 

We know what your philosophy is - it’s to cut the system; 

nickel and dime it to death, Mr. Minister. That’s your 

philosophy - user pay, deterrent fees. And you promised, you 

made a sacred promise to the people of your constituency and 

the people of this province that there wouldn’t be deterrent fees 

and there wouldn’t be user fees. That was your promise, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

And I ask you now: do you, or does your government intend on 

introducing deterrent fees when it comes to hospital care, Mr. 

Minister? What are your plans in that area of health care in our 

province? We know what your plans are when it comes to the 

prescription drug plan. We know what your plans are when it 

comes to the dental program. We know what your plans are 

when it comes to hospital waiting lists. There seems to be no 

end to it - underfund hospitals. What about deterrent fees and 

hospitals? What are your plans? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Couple things the member talks about, 

the dentists and right off the list, Aberdeen and . . . I think 

beginning with Aberdeen and other small communities in the 

province where she says, there were these dental services for 

the citizens of that area. It’s really important to note that those 

dental services that the member talks about were a visit once a 

year, once a year by the dental therapist to the school - once a 

year, that was the dental services. 

 

That wasn’t the dental service available to the adults of 

Aberdeen or to the adolescents of Aberdeen, or whatever, so 

let’s just be sure that we have that in perspective so that . . . and 

I won’t go on it very much longer, but I’ll just say, in 

perspective, and I would ask the hon. member to keep her 

remarks in some kind of perspective in terms of what services 

were available. 

 

An Hon. Member: — One day a week for us in Paradise Hill? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The member says, one day a week in 

Paradise Hill. Mr. Chairman, the dentists in Paradise Hill that 

the member refers to from her seat - Paradise Hill being an area 

I’m very familiar with; it’s in my constituency, an area that has 

supported me very well three times, and I believe will continue 

to do so - has services once a week which they have not had, 

and I don’t think they have . . . I don’t remember, and I don’t 

think there has been dental service in Paradise Hill before, ever 

before, and now there is dental services for all the citizens 

regardless of age in Paradise Hill. And I mentioned a bunch of 

others here earlier. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, the services, as I outlined earlier, in an 

ever-widening range of communities, are having dental services 

for their whole populations which they did not have available to 

them heretofore. And I’ll just leave it at that because I believe 

that number is widening over a period of time and will continue 

to do so for some time to  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3098 

 

come. 

 

As it relates to the member’s comments, you know, about my 

comments about deterrent fees and about premiums, I have said 

then . . . I’m not sure what the date of the quote there and so on, 

but I believe that to be the case now. We have not introduced 

deterrent fees. The member says we have. I say we have not 

introduced deterrent fees, and there are no deterrent fees on the 

health care system now. 

 

The prescription drug plan, where there is a deductible level 

which is not onerous and which is as low as $50 for a whole 

year - a deductible as low as $50 for a year for seniors . . . And 

for those seniors who are in nursing homes who are certainly 

most in need, there is a 3.95 charge per prescription. So, Mr. 

Chairman, no change for those people in nursing homes, no 

change for those on social assistance, those most in need in our 

society, and so there is no deterrent fee, and there is no plan to 

introduce one in any aspect of our program. And as far as 

premiums are concerned, insurance premiums and so on, the 

same thing stands, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, will you say unequivocally in 

this legislature and to the people of this province that you will 

not introduce any deterrent fees, health insurance fees, or 

de-insure any health care service in this province? Will you say 

that to the people of this province such as your said in your little 

ad here when you were running for election? I’ll say it again: 

will you be unequivocal, there shall be no deterrent fees 

introduced by this government; there shall be no health care 

premiums introduced by this government; there shall be no 

de-insurance of medical services by this government? Will you 

say that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I have no plan as the 

Minister of Health to introduce deterrent fees or premiums, I 

have no plans to introduce those things. I’ve said that to the 

member. I have no plans to introduce deterrent fees for people 

going into the system. 

 

The member has already demonstrated to the House today that 

she believes that the payments in the drug plan that are 

deductible payments are deterrent fees. I say that that’s not true, 

and they are not. They are not deterrent fees. But there are no 

plans for introducing deterrent fees, because deterrent fees in 

the history of our province, and deterrent fees in terms of that 

term, will mean this, and it means this to me: it means when 

someone has to pay for every service they receive from the 

dentist. So that’s what that term . . . They go in, they pay for the 

service, and there it is. And regardless of how many times you 

visit, you pay some portion up front, some portion of the 

payment, that you would pay some portion of the payment up 

front every time you go, regardless of how many times. 

 

That’s not the case in the case of the drug plan. The case in the 

case of the drug plan is that there is a deductible, and when you 

get beyond a very reasonable amount, you are covered. And 

that’s why it is not a deterrent fee. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I don’t care if we call it 

deterrent fee, health premiums, deductibles - I don’t care what 

we call it. But do you have any plans to introduce other 

deductibles - since you like that little  

phrase better than deterrent fees - do you have any plans to 

introduce other deductibles into our health care system where 

people will have to pay up front for health services, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ve said, Mr. Chairman, to the member, 

and I say again, I have no plans. This Minister of Health has no 

plans for deterrent fees or premiums to be introduced. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you assure the members of 

this legislature and the people of this province that your 

government - during your term of office, in the next three or 

four of how many ever years it takes us to get into a next 

election - that your government will introduce no more 

deterrent fees or deductibles or health premiums or de-insure 

any health service in this province? Will you give us your 

assurance and therefore come clean with the people of this 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I have said, I have said to the 

member that we have not introduced deterrent fees to this point, 

and we are not in the process of planning any deterrent fee 

introductions. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you’re not answering the 

question. We’re not in the process. We haven’t introduced any 

deterrent fees. Well you have. The deductible on the 

prescription drug plan is a deterrent fee. It deters people from 

having access to prescription drugs, because if they don’t have 

the money, they don’t get the drugs. If they can’t come up with 

the money up front, they can’t get the drugs. That is a deterrent 

fee, Mr. Minister. That’s a deterrent fee. And when they do get 

beyond their deductible the can apply for a 80 per cent rebate. 

They still pay 20 per cent of that drug. That’s a deterrent. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you again: do you . . . or will you 

make a commitment - I won’t ask you whether you have any 

plans because you can avoid that - but will you make a 

commitment to the people of this province that we will have no 

deterrent fees, no insurance premiums, no deductibles on any 

other health care services in our province, nor will there be any 

moves on your part to de-insure any health care services? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, there is no 

deterrent for people in the drug plan as it is now constituted. 

There is no deterrent for access to the drugs that they need for 

their well-being now. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I have said and I will say, and that’s all anyone 

could ever say here, so any one could ever say it, that I have 

said to you that at the present time I have no plans. This 

Minister of Health and this Department of Health has no plans 

whatever for the introduction of deterrent fees or for 

introduction of premiums. 

 

And I have said that before, and I say that again, we have no 

plans for that. Okay. And frankly we have not introduced 

deterrent fees in any aspect of the health care plan now. So 

there’s no question that that’s the case, and that’s as far as any 

minister could ever go as far as saying this is the case. And that 

is the case as it now is, and that will be the case, and I can speak 

for myself and the  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3099 

 

department that I’m now responsible for. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, do you call the dispensing fee 

of $5-and-some-odd cents per prescription, do you call that a 

deterrent fee? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I call that the fee which goes to the 

professional pharmacist for dispensing the drug that the person 

needs. That is called a dispensing fee for very good reason 

because it’s payment for the dispensing of the drug. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, in your election 

propaganda in 1978 you called it a deterrent fee, Mr. Minister. 

You called the dispensing fee a deterrent fee. Those were your 

words. Now if I call a deductible a deterrent fee, it is a deterrent 

fee because it prevents or it can deter people from getting 

access to prescription drugs because they do not have the 

money; that is a deterrent fee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And I ask you, you may not have plans to 

introduce deterrent fees or health premiums or deductibles 

today - you may not have a plan to do that today - but I ask you, 

Mr. Minister: can you assure the people of this province that 

you will not introduce deterrent fees, or a deductible, or health 

insurance premiums, or de-insure any medical service that 

people in this province now have while you’re in office for the 

next three and a half, four years, or however long we have to 

put up with you people? Can you assure us that there’ll be no 

introduction of any of those things that I call deterrent fees? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the record will show that 

I have given the assurance there will be no deterrent fees or 

premiums. I’ve said that. I will say there’s no plans for it. The 

member will as well know . . . well she won’t know this, but 

she should know this and all members should know this. Mr. 

Chairman, the present drug plan as it’s now constituted, despite 

what the member opposite says and continues to say, does not 

in any way deter access to the drugs that people need for their 

well-being - does not deter them. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, who do you have your special 

review committee if it doesn’t deter people? Why is it that some 

people are getting priority post envelopes if it doesn’t deter 

people? Why are some people only paying 20 per cent at the 

drug store - they’re paying their 20 per cent instead of the full 

shot - if it doesn’t deter people, Mr. Minister? It is a deterrent 

fee. 

 

(1645) 

 

There are people now, and you can ask any health care 

professional in this province and they’ll tell you, that there are 

people now going without prescription drugs because they don’t 

have the money up front. You can ask pharmacists, Mr. 

Minister, if there are customers leaving their stores or their 

pharmacies because they don’t have the money to pay for those 

drugs. Ask pharmacists, Mr. Minister. 

Now, Mr. Minister, since we won’t call it deterrent fees because 

you don’t like that definition, and we won’t call it health 

insurance premiums, do you have any plans to introduce a 

deductible to get into our health care system in terms of visiting 

doctors or getting into the hospital, any kind of up-front 

payment? Do you have those plans, Mr. Minister, in the weeks 

or months ahead? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you said in 1978 when you ran 

for election, that there should be an elimination of deterrent fees 

for prescription drugs. And what have you done? You 

introduced a deductible, that’s what you did. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you again: can you assure the people 

of this province that there will be no deductible introduced into 

our health care system in the next three or four years by your 

government? Can you assure us and give us your word? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member says the 

health care system. The health care system is a very 

wide-ranging area. I mean, Mr. Chairman, just a minute . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I hear the member from P.A.-Duck 

Lake who would giggle and cackle in here, which is his only 

contribution for how many years . . . or how many months have 

we been here, but . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . How many 

months has he been here? That’s right, months, and his seat 

mate from Regina North cackles with him. They’re in unison, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman, just as an example of what I mean in terms of 

the very wide-ranging system. If you’re talking about access to 

doctors or hospital care, all of those kinds of very basic, there’s 

no question. 

 

As it relates . . . You know, let me give you an example, Mr. 

Chairman, of why one could not say that for every aspect. In 

August of 1976 the government opposite, when they were the 

government, they introduced a nutritional product coverage 

plan for nutritional products in the drug plan. Okay. They 

introduced that - 1976. And the put a deductible of $100 on it - 

of $100. They did that. She calls that deterrent and all the rest of 

it. And 30 per cent patient costs thereafter; patients paid 30 per 

cent thereafter. 

 

That’s been in place since ’76. And I will admit, Mr. Chairman, 

it remains in place. We see that as a reasonable approach. But to 

listen to the rhetoric of the member opposite, that is not a 

reasonable approach, even though her colleagues introduced it. 

And that’s why you can’t say . . . I cannot say and I won’t say, 

every aspect of the health system. They say every aspect of the 

health system. It could be something that was new, which was 

something that was deemed to be necessary at a particular time, 

1976 in this case, and was introduced. 

 

So I won’t say every aspect of the health system, but I will say 

the health system as we know it and understand medicare in 

terms of physician services, hospital services, those kinds of 

things. There is no way and no reason for anyone to believe, 

suspect, suggest, any way, shape, or  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3100 

 

form, that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Or insinuate. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — . . . or insinuate that our government is 

out to introduce deterrent fees or premiums in any of those 

kinds of areas. Or deductibles. Okay. There’s no reason to 

suggest that. 

 

And as it relates to costs and access to hospital and so on, the 

member knows very well that the Canada health Act that is now 

in place across this country, no government could impose those 

in any case, and we have no intention of suggesting that we 

would want to. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, then I interpret from your 

comments that you have no plans and you will not, in the next 

three or four years ahead while your term of office, introduce 

any kind of deductible system into our medicare system as we 

now know it. That’s how I’ve interpreted your words. Is that 

correct, Mr. Minister? There’s be no deductibles as we now 

know the system. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, I believe that that’s a fair 

comment, as I would understand the question. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And so we’re really clear, because there’s a 

lot of people that want to know what your intentions are. Mr. 

Minister, what you have just said is that you have no plans 

whatsoever and you will not, in your three- to-four- or five-year 

term of office, introduce any more deductibles or deterrent fees 

or health premiums into our health care system as we now know 

it; that you will not de-insure any kind of any health care 

services that are now insured; that you will not introduce any 

deductibles into our health system; or insurance fees or 

deterrent fees. That’s what I thought I heard you say, Mr. 

Minister. Will you just substantiate what I thought I heard you 

say? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to be clear. 

The member has four categories. You said de-insure certain 

services; introduce deductibles; introduce premiums; introduce 

deterrent fees - for whatever those can mean to any of us. 

 

I will say that we have no plans, and that’s all I can say. That’s 

literally all that I can say, is that I have no plans, this Minister 

of Health has no plans to do any of those things - to introduce 

deductibles or to introduce premiums to the system. We have no 

plans for that and, frankly, I believe that we won’t introduce 

deductibles, premiums, what you call deterrent fees - any of 

that. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you say, we have no 

plans; I believe we won’t - your words. But you’re not being 

unequivocal, Mr. Minister. You will not level with the people of 

Saskatchewan and tell them what your plans are. You won’t 

say, we will not put it to you any more, folks, than we already 

have. You will not say that. You will not say unequivocally that 

while a Progressive Conservative government reigns in 

Saskatchewan or governs Saskatchewan, we will not introduce 

deterrent fees or premiums or deductibles or de-insure any 

further services. You won’t say that. You won’t be unequivocal  

with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so what I say to the people of Saskatchewan is that that is a 

warning, people, that is a warning of things to come. We’ve 

seen what you’ve done to the prescription drug plan and it 

seriously limits some people’s accessibility to drugs because 

they don’t have the money to pay for those drugs up front, and 

yet we have a Health minister that says that his philosophy 

means accessibility to our health care system. Some 

accessibility! 

 

We’ve seen what you’ve done to the children’s dental program. 

It used to be available in 338 communities, most of which are 

rural. It’s now only available in 75 communities in this province 

- and 411 people were fired. Lots of employment for rural 

people. Serious accessibility problem for people living in rural 

Saskatchewan., We saw what you did there. We’ve heard you 

make all kinds of noise about limitations to chiropractic care, 

putting a cap on chiropractic care, and total de-insuring 

physiotherapy services, private physiotherapy services. But you 

won’t be unequivocal with the people of Saskatchewan today 

and say, we shall not introduce deterrent fees or health 

premiums or deductibles or de-insure any further health 

services while we, the Progressive Conservative Party, are the 

government of this province. You refuse to do that, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

And so all I say is that that is a good warning and we know 

exactly what you people are up to. You’re out to undermine 

medicare. You talk about your philosophy, Mr. Minister; we 

know what it is. We know what it is. It’s a use-pay philosophy. 

If you need access to service, you pay for it. Yet our taxes are 

going up and up and up and up, and our access to services are 

going down and down and down and down because of your 

priorities. 

 

We know what your priorities are. You’ve got money for 

George Hill, ex-PC president; you’ve got money for Paul 

Schoenhals; you’ve got money for advertising - $20 million a 

year spent on advertising. You’ve got money for your hacks and 

all your political assistants; you’ve got money for Peter 

Pocklington; you’ve got money to give away PAPCO (Prince 

Albert Pulp Company) to Weyerhaeuser; you’ve got money for 

big business events in Saskatoon. No money to celebrate 

medicare; no money for the children’s dental program; no 

money for the prescription drug program; and no money to 

increase accessibility to hospitals in Saskatoon and other areas 

because of the priorities of your government. 

 

We know where you’re at, Mr. Minister, and through these 

estimates, Mr. Minister, we’re going to show very clearly to the 

people of this province exactly what you people are up to when 

it comes to health care. 

 

You made some commitments in the ’78 election, and the ’82 

election, and the ’86 election. You said that our health care 

system was sacred, that you wanted to make it number one. 

Well our health care system is being nickeled and dimed to 

death, and it’s falling apart around us. It’s falling apart, Mr. 

Minister. It’s in a crisis, and as I said, if anything happens to 

anybody in this province, and if their quality of life serious 

deteriorates or if anybody dies, it will be on your shoulders and 

your shoulders only  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3101 

 

because you are the Health minister. You are the Health 

minister and you are not looking after the health of the people 

of this province, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you have not been unequivocal. I would ask 

you to be unequivocal. Tell the people of this province what 

exactly it is that you have in mind. You won’t tell us what your 

long-term goals and objectives are. You won’t tell us what your 

short-term goals and objectives are. Your philosophy has 

something to do with reasonable access, whatever that is. Some 

health philosophy! Health should mean comprehensive, 

universal, and accessible. That’s the kind of philosophy the 

people of this province have had for the last 25 years, and that’s 

the kind of philosophy that they no longer have because of your 

government’s cuts to our health care system, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, let’s just try to put this 

into perspective because the member will make all of these 

accusations as thought . . and if one was listening, as I said 

earlier, if a person was listening to this debate and listening to 

this member, not only today but other days since she’s taken on 

the critic’s position here, one would think that there is no 

money being spent on health care, that it’s just a total dog eat 

dog out there, and that there’s no money being spent in the 

health care system in Saskatchewan. Nothing could be further 

from the truth, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Let me just give you a couple of examples, Mr. Chairman, in 

1981-82, just so I can make a comparative year, 1981-82, and 

we will know that 1981 was the last year in office of the former 

government. So what’s a good way to make the comparison in 

terms of the commitment that they had to health care, and a 

commitment through spending on health care, compared to the 

commitment of this group, the Progressive Conservative 

government? What’s our commitment to health care in terms of 

the total budget in some very difficult times, Mr. Chairman, in 

some difficult times? And everyone knows what those times are 

as it relates to the farm, and as it relates to the various 

commodities which are part of our economy here. 

 

In ’81-82 health spending, as a share of provincial spending, 

was slightly over 29 per cent - 29 per cent under their 

administration. And in 1987-88 this percentage is approaching 

32 per cent - 31.7 per cent - an increase of more than 2 per cent 

as a share of the provincial spending. 

 

And they say, oh you’re slashing health care; you’ve eliminated 

total programs. There is no longer . . . This is what they say. 

There’s no longer coverage for children to have their teeth fixed 

in Saskatchewan. She said that so many times, and I believe she 

said it for whatever political gains she can get in terms of some 

people maybe believing that. And I believe that out in 

Saskatchewan there are some people who believe that, because 

of what they’ve heard from “responsible” members of the 

legislature. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Chairman, and to all members of this House, 

those kinds of statements are irresponsible statements because 

they serve to do only one thing, for  

political gain, very short-term I will add, very short-term 

political gain. They are reiterating, there’s no dental plan; 

there’s no drug plan; people are not able to fill their 

prescriptions. I heard her say it again today. 

 

Mr. Chairman, people in Saskatchewan are able to fill their 

prescriptions. People most in need in Saskatchewan pay nothing 

for their prescriptions - nothing. People in Saskatchewan are 

able to fill the prescriptions that they need for their well-being, 

there’s no question. The member opposite says people are 

deterred from buying the drugs that they need. She says they’re 

deterred from buying those drugs because they can’t afford the 

very limited deductibles that have been included in the plan. 

Mr. Chairman, I once again reject that because it is simply not 

the case, that’s simply not the case. She’s wrong on that. And as 

it relates . . . and she’s been wrong on other things. 

 

As it relates to the dental plan, I’ve said before, it’s a system 

that as people understand it better, the level of consternation 

drops accordingly. There’s no question that that’s the case. 

She’s wrong on that count as well, Mr. Chairman - once again, 

wrong. 

 

Now she knows that there’s coverage in these areas, and she 

knows that there’s $1.2 billion being spent on health care in 

Saskatchewan in this fiscal year - $1.2 billion being spent on 

health care, one-third, approaching one-third of the provincial 

budget. She knows that. She knows that that’s more than $40 

million more than what was spent last year. But she says and 

leads her troops over there in talking about the slashing and 

cutting back and the fact, according to her, that there is less 

money being spent on health care. 

 

The fact is, there is more money being spent on health care this 

year than there was last year - more, m-o-r-e, more money 

being spent on health care this year than there was last year. 

And she continues with that line of rhetoric. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in the short term there will be some political 

gain for her, maybe, in the short term among those that she 

succeeded in frightening out there. But, Mr. Chairman, in the 

long term, frightening and fear tactics in the long term . . . any 

politician that conducts herself that way, it’s be at her own peril. 

And I just say that to suggest that to the new member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Being near 5 o’clock this committee is 

recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


