


















































July 2, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 2, 1987 
 
 

899 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister, just prior to the supper bread you indicated to us that 
you had personally called Mr. Paul Meagher regarding the 
developments at Redberry Lake, and you said to the Assembly 
that you phoned him and personally told him that an 
environmental impact statement was required before the 
development was to go ahead. I wonder if you could tell us when 
it was that you phoned Mr. Meagher. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t have the exact date, but I believe it 
would have been about February. I don’t have the date here. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I wonder if you could undertake to provide us 
with the date that you phoned Mr. Meagher. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If the telephone bill that would register that 
call is available, I would try and do that because that would be the 
only exact source of the date. I tried a number of days, I know, 
and I didn’t reach anyone. Finally I did get him. So I’ll try and 
see if the telephone bill would give me that date. If it does, I’ll 
give it to you. 
 
While I’m on my feet, I’d like to provide the member with some 
of the answers to the questions you asked, that we promised to 
bring back for you. The first meeting we thought was January of 
‘85. It was February 14. Those in attendance were Bob Walker, 
Saskatchewan Environment, Lloyd Talbot, Saskatchewan Rural 
Development, Lehman Walker, Saskatchewan Urban Affairs, 
Neil Tamlin, Saskatchewan advanced education and manpower, 
Dave McQuinn, Saskatchewan Economic Development and 
Trade, Roger Couturier, Saskatchewan Highways and 
Transportation, Karl Crosby, Tourism and Small Business, John 
Spicer, Tourism and Small Business, Dave Steward son, Tourism 
and Small Business, Alan Appleby, Saskatchewan Parks and 
Renewable Resources, Boris Mamchur, Paul Meagher, and Bill 
Tuer, a consultant from Winnipeg, representing the company 
proposing development. 
 
The date of the letter that was sent to Boris Mamchur with regard 
to advising him of the need to do an environmental impact 
assessment was sent on August 2, 1985. The meeting that was 
referred to was held on August 8, 1985. Those in attendance: R. 
Walker, Saskatchewan Environment; B. McGregor, 
Saskatchewan Environment; S. Barber, Saskatchewan Parks, 
Recreation and Culture; J. Howard, Parks, Recreation and 
Culture; T. Good, Saskatchewan Rural Development; A. Dzubin, 
Canadian Wildlife Service, G. Bogden, Canadian Wildlife 
Service, A. White, Canadian Wildlife Service, R. Kerbes, 
Canadian Wildlife Service, B. Mamchur, Redberry Development 
Corporation, B. Robinson accompanied by  

Mr. Mamchur and J. Slimmons, Saskatchewan natural history 
society. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could provide me 
with that information that you’ve just handed back to your 
officials. Instead of wasting time waiting for Hansard to come 
out tomorrow, if you could table it with us, table it with us here 
now. Is that acceptable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I could provide you some of it, not all of it. 
 
What I am providing to you is the lists of the names of those who 
were at the two meetings; and the other letter, I just gave you the 
date. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for providing that 
information. I just wanted to go back, if I may to some of the 
statements that you had answered to earlier on today. I just don’t 
know whether it was the phrasing of the question or whether you 
hadn’t heard the question correctly. 
 
I notice here now that the attendance at the meeting held on 
February 13, 1985, that among those attending were Mr. 
Mamchur, Mr. Meagher, and Mr. Tuer. I just want to make it 
clear in my own mind. Is this meeting held on February 13, 1985, 
was this the only meeting held with officials of your department 
or in which officials of your department were involved, attended 
to by Paul Meagher? Was he at any other meeting to your 
knowledge or to the knowledge of your officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — This is the only meeting that he attended in 
1985. He was at a meeting this year. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m sorry, I just missed the last part of your 
statement. You said, until this meeting this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that’s what I said. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And the meeting this year was on what date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I told you that I didn’t want to get into the 
dates and the details of what happened this year because of the 
court case, and I think it’s wise that we both observe that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Am I to assume by your answer that this meeting 
took place — and without going into the details of the meeting — 
did this meeting take place after the bulldozers began to roll at 
Redberry Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You had a meeting with Mr. Meagher prior to the 
bulldozers happening at Redberry Lake. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I told the hon. member I wasn’t going to 
make any comments with regards to the details of the case for this 
year. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I’m sorry, but that’s not good  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

900 
 

enough. The case before the court — and I want the hon. member 
on the other side to realise this as well — the case before the 
court involves a decision made by your department to halt the 
development at Redberry Lake. 
 
There is now an appeal before the court due to an action taken — 
and now I take it from your words — after your meeting with Mr. 
Meagher. Your response, that you don’t want to deal with events 
leading up to that, I would submit, sir, with all due respect, does 
not endanger or does not put in jeopardy any of the proceedings 
before the court. 
 
The fact that you met with Mr. Meagher prior to the bulldozers 
going, I think, is quite well within the realm of questioning 
available to us here in the legislature. It’s particularly within the 
realm of us questioning, given the fact that you stated here in the 
legislature this afternoon that you had no dealings with Redberry 
Lake project until the bulldozers began to roll. 
 
You said the file was dormant. You said that the file was not 
active, that there was nothing happening at Redberry Lake until 
the bulldozers began to roll. You said that you had not talked with 
anybody, that Mr. Meagher had talked with everybody else 
except yourself. this is your words, Mr. Minister. You said that 
Paul Meagher had not talked with you prior to the bulldozers 
rolling at Redberry Lake. 
 
Now you’re telling us that you did talk with Paul Meagher prior 
to the bulldozers running at Redberry Lake. Was your meeting 
with Paul Meagher as a result of your telephone call to Mr. 
Meagher, or did your telephone call take place after the meeting 
with Mr. Meagher? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member is misconstruing what I told 
him. What I did tell you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s on the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, of course it’s on the record, and I’m 
glad it is because that will prove what I’m saying is absolutely 
right. What I told you was that from 1985 until this year, that 
there had been a long period when nothing was happening. Then 
the department advised me that there had been a few phone calls 
where technical information was provided to Mr. Mamchur, and I 
told you that. And I told you that there was nothing else happened 
until this year and advised him that he must do an environmental 
impact assessment. So I gave you that kind of information prior 
to the supper hour. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I’ll check back on the record 
because that’s not my recollection of what you said. However, the 
question is: did you meet with Paul Meagher before you made the 
phone call to him to tell him that environmental impact statement 
was met, or did you meet with Mr. Meagher after the telephone 
call? Was the meeting the result of the telephone call made by 
yourself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The hon. member is getting into detail that I 
think would be best left until the item is out of court, and it’s not 
just a very narrow issue that we talk of. The appeal would be, but 
also we’re advised that there is a  

court case being registered that will deal with the whole case. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — The appeal is on the point of law. As I understand 
it and as I am advised, the appeal is on a point of law in regards to 
the activities of your department, in terms of making the 
judgement. 
 
Would you tell us what . . . Would you now tell us what other 
court case is now before the courts that doesn’t deal with that 
narrow point of law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s not before the courts at this point. We 
are advised that there will be a court case, and I don’t feel that I 
should be providing anything that can be used on either side of a 
court case at this time. I believe because it’s before the court on 
the appeal case that we should not be dealing with any more of 
the details of the issue for this year. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, now it’s either before the 
court or it’s not. Our discussion, our questioning here today has 
got nothing to do with the point of law that the appeal was based 
on. That’s my information. 
 
Are you trying to say now that I am to stop questioning you on 
this case because of something that may happen in the future? I 
mean, are you saying that there is not the other case before the 
court, and that there is the possibility of a case, and therefore I 
shouldn’t ask you any questions because there is the possibility of 
something coming before the court? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Not entirely. That’s part of it. The issue 
that’s before the court, the appeal case that is being looked into 
now, will deal with partially just the legal part, but it will also 
bring in all the information of how the decision was arrived at, 
and so I think that it’s better that we don’t discuss it in the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, that is not, Mr. Minister, what is before the 
court. That is not what is before the court. I would respectfully 
submit that that is not what Mr. Meagher and Mr. Mamchur are at 
with your department right now. And as to the possibility of 
something else, some other court case arising at some time or 
another in the future, I don’t think that that is relevant one little 
bit. 
 
(1915) 
 
You are before the court of the people of Saskatchewan. This is 
the . . . You don’t agree? You don’t agree. 
 
Well, sir, I’ve got to say I’m just flabbergasted. You’re saying 
that you’ve got no respect for the legislature. the people in this 
province have the right to know. They’ve got the right to know 
what’s going on, particularly in regards to the Department of 
Environment and the controversy that surrounded your 
department since back before 1985. 
 
This is the first opportunity we’ve had to begin to bring these 
items before the court of the people for a long time. You know 
that. You know that there hasn’t been Environmental estimates 
like this for the last little while. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

901 
 

So this is our opportunity. and for you to try to sweep questions, 
or try to deny questions, or try to hide behind something that 
might happen in the future, I think is reprehensible. I think it’s 
dishonest, quite frankly, in trying to deal with this. 
 
We have here a situation, Mr. Minister, where a former member 
of the government, where a former legislative secretary to 
Executive Council is involved with business dealings with a 
department of the government, involved in business dealings 
prior to his defeat in the 1986 election. 
 
we have some questions of conflict of interest which have been 
raised in this legislature before. This is the first time that we’ve 
had the opportunity to begin to examine, in fact, the precise 
nature upon which those conflict of interest allegations were 
based. 
 
Your department was involved in dealing with Mr. Meagher and 
had a long relationship stretching back to February 13, 1985, 
when in fact Mr. Meagher was a member of the governing party 
at that time — party that you represent. I think it’s only fair, and I 
think it’s only right that we have the opportunity to address the 
concerns that people have raised around this issue. And for you to 
try to hide behind what doesn’t exist legally is preposterous. 
 
I have respected your right, if you like, or respected your wishes 
in regards to asking you the question: what occurred after the 
meeting. What occurred after making the decision which led to 
the court shutting down the Redberry Lake development? And if 
you notice that I haven’t asked you any questions precisely 
because the events that took place in regards to you shutting 
down that development and subsequent events are before the 
court. And I’ve precisely left that area alone. But I think that 
people of this province have the right to find out what happened 
before, particularly in regards to something that was hanging fire 
in your department for over two years. I think that’s only fair and 
I think that’s only reasonable to expect some kind of answers. 
 
My question is again: did your meeting with Mr. Meagher, which 
you said took place prior to the bulldozers working at Redberry 
Lake, did that meeting take place as a result of a phone call from 
yourself, or was it initiated by Mr. Meagher, or was it initiated by 
anybody else? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member is making some pretty 
wide-sweeping statements in his comments. If you would like to 
go back and read Hansard during 1985 when this issue arose as a 
possible conflict of interest and the statements by the Premier at 
that time, when he said that there would be do development 
allowed because Mr. Meagher, could be thought to be in conflict 
of interest . . . And that’s the reason that the item stopped in 
August and sat until after Mr. Meagher was no longer a member 
of the legislature. 
 
So I believe that the proper things were done to avoid conflict of 
interest. Now that the man is no longer an elected member, we 
can’t plead that it’s conflict of interest. We’re into a new year; he 
is no longer a member;  

so different rules apply. And that is the course that he has decided 
to take evidently. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not questioning whether 
there’s a conflict of interest between Mr. Meagher in the present 
day in his role as a private citizen and his role as a developer of 
Redberry Lake and the government, which is why I’m not asking 
you questions concerning your decision in terms of shutting down 
the development. 
 
What I am asking you is precisely the fact that the Premier did, in 
this House, say that there was not going to be any development at 
Redberry Lake and he said that there will be nothing happening at 
Redberry Lake until the proper environmental steps took place. 
And we did see, we did see the marshalling of forces, and we did 
see the kind of preparations for the development begin to go 
ahead, and it wasn’t until the public in this province raised the 
hue and cry at Redberry Lake that you finally stepped in. 
 
That’s the interpretation I’ll put on events; that’s the 
interpretation I want to put on events. I want to put it on the 
events because I think from your own mouth the words that you 
have spoken here today in regards to your role as Environment 
minister speaks pretty loudly. When you say today in the House 
that the proponents of a development should decide whether they 
or not will submit an environmental impact statement — and 
that’s what you said. In other words when Peter Pocklington . . . 
He’s the one that’s going to decide whether to put forward an 
environmental impact statement. And we see a length of time in 
terms of Redberry Lake go from January of — pardon me — 
February of 1985 up until the spring of 1987, then Paul Meagher 
obviously thought that the same rules apply to him, and Boris 
Mamchur thought the same rules applied to him, that they were 
the ones who are going to decide that an environmental impact 
statement was necessary, then I think we’ve got some fairly valid 
grounds to put that interpretation on events. And you yourself 
said it, that it’s the proponents who should decide whether an EIS 
(environmental impact statement) should be submitted or not. 
 
An Hon. Member: — EIA 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Pardon me, the member says EIA. It’s called an 
environmental statement. Get your terms right. 
 
So we have a situation here where the minister is saying that the 
proponents of development should be the ones who decide 
whether or not that development go ahead. On the one hand we 
see Peter Pocklington let entirely off the hook because his isn’t a 
development, and on the other hand we see in the spring of 1987 
all of a sudden Paul Meagher is coming down on, and I don’t 
hold any brief for Paul Meagher, as the members opposite know, 
but it seems to me that there’s a problem in determining within — 
from the ministers of Environment in this province — the kind of 
interventionist role . . . and I say that deliberately because I think 
the people of this province want their Environment minister to be 
an interventionist and to be a proponent for the environment and 
to be pro-active on environment. 
 
When I see the kind of history of events leading up to  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

902 
 

Redberry Lake, particularly given what’s happened at North 
Battleford in the Gainers plant, and also what’s happened at 
places like Waden Bay . . .Waden Bay on Lac La Ronge, where 
the proponents of a development which uses Crown land, which 
alters the shore line, which changes the ecology of the sites upon 
which they are developing for that area . . . And I would submit 
that that’s a development — and here I’m speaking about the 
houseboats — the houseboats that have somehow appeared to be 
in the hands of Mr. Dave Longpré, who I’m quite sure the people 
of the province want to recognise will be the proponent in this 
development. We see Mr. Longpré who’s taken over from 
Canadian Wilderness Adventures, move houseboats out of 
McGibbon Bay into an entirely different part of Lac La Ronge, 
will have an impact on the lake. And when we see your decision 
not to go ahead and demand from Mr. Longpré’s operation an 
environmental impact statement, we see that you have not in fact 
responded to the general hue and cry raised by the cottagers on 
Waden Bay. 
 
And I want to bring you back to something you said in regards to 
why you raised, why it was you who raised the issue of Redberry 
Lake. And one of he reasons that you raised the issue of Redberry 
Lake and demanded an environmental impact statement was 
section 2(d)(iv) of the Act. And you said one of the reasons why 
you were going to demand an environmental impact statement 
from Redberry Lake was the fact that it raised . . . caused 
widespread public concern because of potential environmental 
changes. 
 
Those are the reasons, Mr. Minister, you gave for demanding an 
environmental impact statement at Redberry Lake. You yourself 
know that there was a widespread public interest and widespread 
public concern about the potential impact the environment of the 
development at Waden Bay. Why is that you did not demand an 
environmental impact statement and assessment from Mr. Dave 
Longpré in his operation in Waden Bay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — When you go over three different issues in 
order to ask a question, it gets a little difficult to give you an 
answer to anything. 
 
To begin with you talk about North Battleford, and I’ve outlined 
to you the reasons that it was not a development, so the same 
rules then do not apply. If it’s not a development an 
environmental impact assessment is not required, and therefore 
the project goes through the municipal bodies for its licensing and 
its clearances. 
 
When you talk of Redberry Lake, it was ruled that it was a 
development, and I gave you the exact sections of the legislation 
that indicated that it was a development and why it needed an 
assessment. so the member refers to two entirely different things, 
but evidently is not able to see the difference. 
 
Waden Bay. I’ve responded to you by letter, and I believe that the 
letter spelled out very clearly why Waden Bay was not required 
to do an environmental impact assessment. And I can read some 
of the background if you like: 
 

In 1985, the Department reviewed a proposal by Canadian 
Wilderness Adventurers for operation of houseboats on Lac La 
Ronge. 
 
Aspects of the review included impacts on fish resources and 
wastewater management. 
 
The Department determined that an environmental impact 
assessment was not required because environmental (impacts 
could be considered) adequately (and) controlled by conditions 
of the annual Outfitter’s Licence issued by Parks, Recreation 
and Culture. 
 
Operation of the houseboats at Waden Bay which was 
proposed this year will continue to require an Outfitter’s 
Licence. 
 
Proposed onshore facilities such as the new 14 stall parking lot 
and store on the new dock will be approved by Parks, 
Recreation and Culture. Conditions of leases will address 
concerns expressed by Waden Bay Cottage Owner’s 
Association. 

 
So those are the reasons. The issues concerned are addressed and 
handled by the licensing through the Parks department. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m afraid that doesn’t answer, Mr. Chairman, 
Mr. Minister, I’m afraid it doesn’t answer the question. The 
question is that you, in your department, in making the 
determination that the development on Redberry Lake constitutes 
a development, and you quoted from the areas of The 
Environmental Assessment Act upon which you made that basis, 
one of which was to “cause widespread public concern because 
of potential environmental changes.” And you, yourself, have just 
admitted that there was widespread public concern, particularly 
by the residents of Waden Bay. 
 
(1930) 
 
And as you very well know, there was widespread public concern 
by the residents of Waden Bay. And the fact is that you received 
many letters form residents from Waden Bay, some copies of 
which were sent to myself, some to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly. You used the fact in The Environmental 
Assessment Act, section 2(d)(iii) — pardon me, section 2(d)(iv) 
— that was one of the bases for demanding environmental impact 
statements from the proponents of fl. The same rules for 
assessment do not apply in this case with Dave Longpré. Is it 
because, is it because Dave Longpré was the campaign manager 
for the PC candidate in the last provincial election, Mr. Larry 
Wolkowski? Isn’t that the real reason why you didn’t demand 
from Dave Longpré that he in fact submit an environmental 
impact statement despite the widespread public concern up in the 
La Ronge area? Or has that ever crossed your mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — To begin with, I didn’t know who the 
campaign manager was, and thanks for the information. 
 
I might tell you that we had some public concern, but I  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

903 
 

wouldn’t say great public concern, registered — a few letters 
before the decision was made, and two or three or four afterwards 
— but I wouldn’t say it was wide public concern. There was 
some public concern by the cottage owners at Waden Bay, but it 
was not a big hue and cry. There were a few. And we did write to 
any who wrote to us, and I think with the explanations that were 
given we’ve heard very little since. 
 
I believe that the development itself, as it goes ahead, and as the 
houseboats begin to operate there — they likely are by now — 
that people will see that the sewage is handled properly and that 
they are anchoring their houseboats away from the regular 
cottage owners and things, and I think the people will not find it 
the problem they at first expected. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I beg to differ with you on that as a 
former resident of La Ronge and somebody who was resident of 
the great town of La Ronge when the houseboats were first put in. 
Far from the public in La Ronge being assured that the houseboat 
operation, even out of McGibbon Bay, was going to cause less 
concern, far from having their fears assuaged in that matter, as the 
houseboat operations proceeded day by day, as they proceeded 
day by day, public opposition to the houseboat operation by 
residents of La Ronge increased. And one of the places where 
that opposition was highest was in Waden Bay, because they 
found that the houseboat operation did, in fact, did, in fact, 
pre-empt their utilisation of the public resource which is Lac La 
Ronge. 
 
Which brings me to not one reason why you should have had a 
public environmental impact statement from Mr. Longpré. 
Section 2(d) of The Environmental Assessment Act, the second 
part, 2(d)(ii) says: 
 

“development” means any project, operation or activity or any 
alteration or expansion of any project, operation or activity 
which is likely to . . . substantially utilise any provincial 
resource and in doing pre-empt the use, or potential use, of that 
resource for any other purpose . . . 

 
And the facts of the matter are that in Waden Bay, Mr. Longpré’s 
operation does, in fact, pre-empt the use of part of the provincial 
park in La Ronge — has in fact made, had in fact pre-empted the 
use because of the tree cutting that’s gone to create the parking 
lot; has pre-empted the use of part of the shore line; and for the 
residents of Waden Bay, have pre-empted the use of the lake 
because of the kind of ignoring of the regulations under which the 
first houseboat operation was first licensed. The houseboats don’t 
care. The people who drive the houseboats don’t care what the 
outfitting licence says. they utilise and put those boats anywhere 
they want to. And that includes running them up around the rocks 
around Waden Bay, and they’re parking them in Waden Bay 
despite the fact that they’re prohibited. 
 
What is the impact on the environment up there? You have two 
portions of the Act, one which says there’s public concern, the 
second which says it pre-empts the use. And yet you refuse to 
demand that the former campaign manager for the PC candidate 
in La Ronge and  

in the Cumberland constituency — you and your department — 
have failed to make him provide the adequate documentation and 
undergo the necessary assessment of their impact on the 
environment. You rushed it through and you did it holus-bolus. 
 
The question is: why is it that there’s one law for Paul Meagher, 
and why is it that there’s another law for Peter Pocklington, and 
why is it that there’s another law for Dave Longpré and his friend 
Larry Wolkowski in this? Why are there three laws for three 
different people in the province? Why haven’t you been applying 
this law even-handedly? And why has your department not taken 
an active role in protecting the environment but are sitting there 
and allowing these developments to proceed apace except when 
you own political purposes don’t suit you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’d like to thank the member for clapping for 
me. I didn’t know I’d said anything. 
 
the hon. member’s made quite a speech — not very much of it 
factual, but quite a speech. We’ve been over the ground quite a 
number of times with regard to the reasons that the different 
decisions have been made. I think each of the decisions have been 
made quite clearly and separately. Each one has to apply the text 
of the Act,. and if the Act says they’re development, then they 
are. If it says they aren’t, they clearly aren’t. 
 
And that’s the way the Act is applied. It has nothing to do with 
political background. If I were going to rule in favour of a 
politician, then I suppose I should have let Paul Meagher go 
ahead. Clearly we didn’t do that. Clearly we put a stop to that. So 
the member is making wild accusations that have very little 
background to them. 
 
There were meetings held in Waden Bay with the people, by the 
Parks department. All of the background information was applied 
and the people were given the evidence. They were able to ask 
questions and they were given the answers. Our department has 
looked very carefully at the issues at Waden Bay and the decision 
was made. it was made because we felt that the operation of 
houseboats, the installation of anchorage for those houseboats 
and the parking lot could not really be considered a development. 
 
Along Lac La Ronge there are a number of places that have built 
cottages and have put in roads and things, and they haven’t all 
been ruled to be developments and required environmental 
impact assessments. As far as the few houseboats that are there 
— obstructing the use of the lake — I find that very hard to 
accept. La Ronge is a very large lake. You could likely lose those 
houseboats out on that lake and most people would have 
difficulty even finding them. So there’s still room. If you have a 
boat there and would like to go fishing, you can likely fish for a 
good part of a day and not encounter any houseboats. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m glad you now finally 
conceding that, in fact, there was a great deal of public concern. 
You are now conceding that there was public concern. A little 
while ago, a few minutes ago, you said we’ve got a few letters 
before and a few letters after. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

904 
 

Now you’re talking about meetings with residents held between 
officials of the Parks department. 
 
Now isn’t it true that the reasons that those meetings went ahead 
was because of the kind of public outcry, not from a few people, 
not from a few cottage owners up in La Ronge, but dozens and 
dozens of cottage owners on Lac La Ronge, on Waden Bay, and 
also from residents, long-term residents, of Lac La Ronge itself? 
Isn’t that the real reason that you began to do it? Isn’t that the real 
reason that the park officials went up there to try to mollify, so 
that you wouldn’t have to do the environmental impact statement, 
so that you would cover for Mr. Longpré, and so that Mr. 
Longpré could rush into this operation and get it started this year? 
Isn’t that the real reason? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The statement that I made to you, that there 
were a few letters, still applies. There were a few letters, but very 
few. 
 
The decision was made that we would not require an 
environmental impact assessment long before the Parks 
department went in to hold its meetings with the cottage owners. I 
don’t have the exact dates; I’m just advised it was long ahead of 
that time. The meeting was held on April 1, so it would have been 
some time prior to that that our decision was made. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I can report 
to you, Mr. Minister, that I had a constituent come into my office, 
and they have had a cabin at Waden Bay for many years, and this 
was before April 1. And I have no reason whatsoever to doubt 
this person’s word. And this person was very concerned about 
what was happening at Waden Bay. 
 
And the thing that concerned the person the most — and I don’t 
know whether it’s your department or the other department — 
but the thing that was concerning my constituent the most was the 
total lack of consultation that had been held with the residents of 
Waden Bay. And it seemed to me on the surface that this person 
had a very good case. And I was concerned that this person 
appeared to be very reasonable. They said, I have no objection to 
houseboats on Lac La Ronge, but why are they putting them right 
on top of Waden Bay? And why does this person appear to have a 
special entry into what the government . . . what is being done 
here? How does this person get special consideration and we’re 
not even consulted about construction of pump houses? And he 
mentioned a number of other things as well. 
 
So I want to add to what the member from Regina Rosemont 
says, that there was concern. There was a concern from one of my 
constituents. He came to my office and was . . . He had been in 
Waden Bay for 10 to a dozen years and was really quite 
concerned about the total lack of consultation on this issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As I indicated to you, the decision was made 
by my department that an environmental impact assessment was 
not required. then it went to Parks and Recreation. They did hold 
public meetings. The first of them was on April 1. So that would 
be long before any houseboat activity really occurred. You know, 
that’s  

before spring arrived. If you were to go up there to hold meetings 
in the middle of the winter, there likely would be very few people 
at a cottage site like Waden Bay. So I believe April was probably 
as early as you could anticipate there was any need. 
 
The discussion and so on, you would have to talk to somebody in 
Parks and Recreation when that estimate comes up because they 
were at the meeting, we weren’t. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well perhaps, Mr. Minister, my question 
should arise when I’m talking to the other minister on this 
particular matter, but I know that my constituent was concerned 
about this matter. Not that his concerns were primarily 
environmental, but they were about lack of insensitivity of the 
government with regard to allowing this project to appear to 
move ahead when nobody had been consulted at Waden Bay. 
And this was not too much ahead of April, beginning of April. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I suppose people always fell there is no 
consultation. Any department moving with an issue like the 
Waden Bay issue is bound to go out and talk to the people. The 
Parks and Recreation department did that. But to go up there in 
March or February would not be a reasonable time to expect to 
find cottage owners there. So I think it was wiser to go at a time 
when there was more liable to be opportunity to meet with the 
people who would be concerned, and that’s what they did. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just 
again somewhat on the same topic as that being pursued by the 
member from Saskatoon Westmount. I want to read to you a 
letter that was sent to our office from a constituent in Saskatoon. 
the constituent of, I believe, the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
It says: 
 

Dear Sir: The enclosed letter regarding the operation of 
houseboats at Waden Bay . . . has been forwarded to the 
Ministers of the Environment and Parks, Recreation and 
Culture. 

 
And your department obviously received this letter. 
 

I am concerned with the present Government’s disregard of 
established rules and regulations as well as the ominous 
secrecy involving decisions which favour a selected individual 
or Company in preference to the wishes and well-being of the 
public at large. 
 
I am at a loss to know how to assemble all the pertinent facts 
relative to this case, but certainly I suspect gross patronage and 
perhaps government money or promise of same. 
 
I apologise for imposing on your busy schedule but I believe 
this is an important issue, and one in which you and your party 
are genuinely interested in. 

 
And then it says: 
 

Re: Proposed Operations . . . .at Waden Bay. Dear  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

905 
 

Sir: (And this is your letter to the minister) As a private citizen 
who has used the Lac La Ronge Waden Bay facilities for the 
past 10 years or so several times each summer for various 
periods, I voice my . . . concerns regarding proposed transfer of 
the houseboats now located at English Bay and previously 
managed by Apex Award nominee (now bankrupt) Wilderness 
Adventures Company. 
 
I do not believe the original houseboat charter considered all 
the environmental factors adequately to begin with. 
Additionally, to the best of my knowledge, no follow-up 
studies on environmental effects have been made. As an 
example, Mooney Beach was a clean, quiet, respected picnic 
spot enjoyed by many cottagers, visitors, and tourists. Three 
and four years ago, I never saw any litter . . . beer bottles, cans, 
etc., in that vicinity. Since the houseboats appeared, litter is 
evident . . . and this is probably only one of the places so 
affected. In the interests of preservation, a follow-up 
environmental study on the effects of the houseboats to-date is 
imperative. 
 
Apparently, a Mr. D. Longpré of La Ronge has been given 
permission to move the houseboats from English Bay to 
Waden Bay without any further environmental study or 
canvassing of Waden Bay cottage owners. 

 
This was after permission was given for Mr. Longpré to take over 
the operation and move it to Waden Bay. And this cottage owner, 
who is a prominent member of the cottage owners at Waden Bay 
says, “without any further environmental study or canvassing of 
Waden Bay cottage owners.” 
 

If true, this is to my mind an inexcusable and irresponsible act. 
If a study has indeed been done, I would appreciate 
information relative to obtaining a copy. 
 
I am sure a site to handle, dock, and repair the houseboats as 
well as parking space had to be prepared at English Bay. This 
undoubtedly meant clearing of trees, etc. Additionally, it is 
likely Government funds were used to at least some degree in 
the site preparation. Does it really make sense to abandon a 
recently prepared site and devastate the environment again a 
few miles further north to accommodate the desires of one 
individual? As a tax-payer and concerned citizen, I 
emphatically say it is not! Apparently more people’s money is 
to be spent to accommodate the houseboats at Waden Bay. The 
current concerns regarding judicious expenditure and curtailing 
the deficit reaffirms this Government’s credibility. 
 
It is very likely sound judgement brought in the very restrictive 
fishing limits on all species in the past five years. Cottagers 
and visitors using normal dock facilities can be readily checked 
regarding catches. What ensures limit adherence in the case of 
houseboats anchored in out-of-the-way locations for several 
days in a row and equipped with modern cooking facilities? 

 

Mr. Minister, this letter goes on and on, raising valid concerns. 
Now those aren’t concerns of just one individual, those are the 
type of concerns raised by both cottage owners at Waden Bay and 
also by long-time residents of La Ronge, many of whom 
originally were in favour of the houseboat idea and the houseboat 
initiative and who, because of their experience with the 
houseboats, have turned against it precisely because they are not 
being controlled by any of the present regulations. 
 
I go back again to The Environmental Assessment Act, and that 
part that says The Environmental Assessment Act shall have 
supremacy over all other Acts, regulations, or by-laws, in 
determining what kind of development should go forward and 
what kind of development should be controlled in order to protect 
the environment. That’s what The Environmental Assessment 
Act says. 
 
I submit that in the case of Waden Bay, and I submit that the 
cottage owners and the other residents in La Ronge will agree 
with me in this, that you in fact are derelict in your duties in 
regards to the Waden Bay development, that you have not 
listened to the concerns of the residents of La Ronge, you have 
not listened to the concerns of the cottage owners at La Ronge, 
and that you allowed this development to proceed in much the 
same way and with much the same kind of reasoning that allowed 
the Peter Pocklington development to proceed in North 
Battleford. 
 
Again, I ask you, why? Is there one law for Peter Pocklington, 
who’s a Tory in favour? Is there one law for Dave Longpré and 
Larry Wolkowski, who are Tories in favour in La Ronge? And 
another law for Paul Meagher, who’s a Tory out of favour with 
this government. Isn’t that the real reason that there is not an even 
application of this law? Isn’t that the real reason that you’re not 
exercising your authority as minister in a pro-active way? Isn’t 
that the real reason that we have one after another, after another 
fiasco in environment in this province, is because you’re using 
the department for narrow political and partisan purposes? 
 
I submit, sir, that that’s right, and I submit that your actions 
around this, in fact, are adding up bit by bit to the case to prove 
that to be the case. 
 
I want to go back to one of those Tories who are out of favour 
with your government, go back to the Redberry Lake 
development. I want to ask you: you’ve had, and you’ve admitted 
as much in these estimates, and you’ve said as much in these 
estimates, that you’ve had meetings with Mr. Meagher, that your 
officials have been in contact with Mr. Meagher in regards to up 
until . . .and I won’t ask you anything past from the time the 
bulldozer started rolling there, because of respect to the court 
case. Prior to that, did you have any conversations with the 
Premier as to the developments which were taking place at 
Redberry Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well the member again gets up with a long 
diatribe of nothing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .I think it’s time 
that we call it for what it is because he’s making wild statements 
with no background at all. I don’t mind him making statements if 
he has some background and he can prove it. But he’s making 
statements that have  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

906 
 

absolutely no substance. He makes the statement about the North 
Battleford, Gainers plant, then he makes the same statements 
about the Redberry development, which I think was a very 
serious error on the part of the developer and that was the reason 
that everything was stopped. 
 
Then again, after I advise you of the reasons that there was no 
environmental impact assessment needed for Waden Bay, that the 
licensing would be handled under Parks and Recreation, then you 
go on again to make a bunch of wild statements. They really have 
very little purpose. If the member wants to make long speeches, 
I’ve got all kinds of time, but I don’t believe that they’re proving 
anything to anyone except that perhaps we’re putting in the 
evening. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now, Mr. Minister, it’s an interesting response to 
a long diatribe, interesting response to a long diatribe. 
 
The question was, and I’ll refer . . . You say that you were 
dealing with individual cases here and that you have dealt with 
things on an individual case. And I submit, sir, that what we are 
seeing is a pattern, a pattern of action by your government. And 
I’ve said this before, I said this in my opening remarks, that there 
is a pattern of action by this government where environment is on 
the bottom of the totem-pole in terms of priority, and that you and 
your predecessors have in fact put environment way down there 
and have not acted in the best interests of the people of this 
province. 
 
We’re building the case bit by bit here. And the fact that it may 
cause some political embarrassment, the fact that this causes you 
some political embarrassment shouldn’t worry you too much 
because it reflects not just on yourself, but it reflects on your 
predecessor and reflects particularly on the Premier. 
 
My question is in regards to the Premier, in which you dodge 
very neatly, or tried to dodge. When did you tell the Premier, 
when did you tell the Premier that in fact Redberry Lake, 
Meagher and Mamchur, were going to go ahead with Redberry 
Lake. When did you tell the Premier that they planned to go 
ahead despite the fact that they’d been told they needed an EIS? 
When did you tell the Premier that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I never told the Premier that because there 
was no need of telling the Premier that. When the bulldozer came 
on site, we put a stop to the issue immediately. We have always 
told that development group at Redberry, Mamchur and Meagher, 
that the environmental impact assessment was required and there 
was no authorisation for them to proceed. 
 
The Premier knew that because it had been in the news it had 
been talked about for a long time. So there’s no need of me 
running to the Premier with information about things that he 
already knows about. And when the injunction was placed to stop 
that project going ahead . . .I don’t have to run over and tell the 
Premier that there’s an injunction. He reads quite well, thank you, 
and he can understand. 
 
And when you start talking about what a terrible job the  

former minister was doing of the environment, and I bring you 
back to the nice report card that we get. Sure we got a C minus, 
but we’re still second among all the provinces in Canada, and we 
rose on the scale from third up to second. 
 
Your counterparts in Manitoba have been holding a good 10th for 
a long time, and they get a D minus. So don’t criticise the 
emphasis that we place on environment. I think we place a lot of 
emphasis on environment and the results are the proof that we’re 
doing a good job. 
 
Mr. Lyons: Talk about . . . if you want to talk about the results, 
Mr. Minister, that’s fine, but first of all we have here three 
instances of your fumbling. we have three instances of your 
fumbling. We’ve got Peter Pocklington let off the hook; we’ve 
got Dave Longpré let off the hook, and we’ve got Paul Meagher 
put on the hook. We got Dave . . . Mr. Meagher put on the hook. 
And rightly so, and Mr. Meagher quite rightly so, and we’ve 
admitted that. We’ve admitted that. 
 
But there is something wrong with the process. There is 
something wrong with the process. And you’ve admitted, sir, you 
admitted in your opening remarks that you intended to fix the 
environmental assessment process. And you recognise . . . I think 
you’ve got to recognise because every blind person in this 
province recognises that there is something wrong with the 
environmental assessment process. 
 
You know, there’s the old saying — if it happens once, it’s 
coincidence; if it happens twice, it’s happenstance; and if it 
happens three times, it’s enemy action. And when I look at the 
record of your department, we see not three or four or five things, 
we see a long list of actions which are detrimental to the 
environment in this province. 
 
Going back to the question, going back to the question: when did 
you or any official in your department inform the Premier — and 
this is prior to putting in the injunction — when did you inform 
the Premier that in fact that the Redberry Lake development, 
Meagher, Mamchur, intended to go ahead with the Redberry 
Lake development? Are you saying that the Premier didn’t know 
about this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m not saying that at all. What I am saying 
to you is that I did not advise him because we had no indication 
that they were going ahead. They were doing a lot of talking, they 
were doing looking, they were trying to see what they could do to 
dodge an environmental impact assessment. He was advised on 
every turn that he must do the environmental impact assessment. 
He didn’t follow that. Eventually he took a bulldozer on site, and 
that caused the court injunction, and the development stopped. 
 
So at no time was he ever given authority by the department to go 
ahead. He knew at all times that he must do that environmental 
impact assessment. He chose not to do it. He tried to bulldoze his 
way in and start that way. It didn’t work. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well I recognise he tried to bulldoze it over  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

907 
 

the department, and you did the right thing in stopping him. 
That’s not the question. I’m asking you because the Premier had a 
particular interest in this. And you’ve already referred to the fact, 
you’ve already referred to the fact that the Premier spoke in the 
House on this issue, so he obviously had a particular interest. And 
let’s not kid ourselves, he had a particular interest in it because 
Paul Meagher was involved and he and everybody in this 
province knows that the Premier and Paul Meagher weren’t 
exactly bosom buddies when it cam to things that went on in 
caucus and came to the direction of the government. And again, 
particularly in the light of Mr. Meagher’s statements around 
Redberry Lake and his estimation of your government — an 
estimation that I don’t particularly agree with — but given the 
fact that this is a political issue, and given the fact that the 
Premier stood up not very long ago and talked about how he was 
politically competitive and he was out there to win, isn’t it true 
that he was out there to win and beat Paul Meagher and this thing 
into the ground, and that you had instructions to keep him 
informed on Redberry Lake development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, that’s not the case at all. The member 
makes a lot of wild assumptions but unfortunately is a long way 
from the truth. The case with Paul Meagher, if there had been 
such animosity as you’re trying to describe, then Paul Meagher 
would not have sought re-election last October. But he did seek 
re-election as a member of the Conservative Party. He was not 
successful, unfortunately, but he nevertheless was signed in as a 
nominated candidate by the Premier, supported whole-heartedly 
by the Premier, and he ran, and if he had been elected would be 
part of this government. But he wasn’t. So when he went ahead 
this year and tried to start a development at Redberry without 
clearing the environmental impact assessment process. He was 
simply stopped. 
 
If I recall properly, I think the Premier was in Japan at the time 
that occurred. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, the Premier has been in Japan for a 
lot of the events that are taking place in this province, and 
perhaps the people of Saskatchewan will be fortunate to have him 
move there permanently. Bad luck to the Japanese. 
 
You say, sir, that Paul Meagher was on good terms with the 
Premier. You try to deny the fact that there was a falling out and 
there had been a falling out between the Premier and Paul 
Meagher previous to the election. 
 
Is it not true that Paul Meagher was contested for the nomination 
in Prince Albert? And is it also not true that the person that ran 
against Paul Meagher had the backing of members of Executive 
Council? And is it not also true that the Premier tried to bump 
Paul Meagher off but was unsuccessful in the attempt because 
Mr. Meagher had support from other former members of this 
Assembly like Gay Caswell and other sterling lights of the back 
bench? Isn’t that the real truth? Mr. Minister, how can you stand 
here and try to defend the relationship between Paul Meagher and 
this government? 
 
Look at this, Mr. Chairman. “Meagher raps province,  

promises major scandal.” There it is. Meagher . . . from the 
Prince Albert Daily Herald, April 10th, Friday, 1987, page 3. 
That’s real good terms, Mr. Minister. Don’t you think those are 
real good terms? Here he is rapping the province, promises major 
scandal. And “the words ‘major scandal’ and ‘vendetta’ rolled off 
the tongue of Paul Meagher today in the wake of an injunction to 
halt the Redberry Lake project.” And isn’t that just the 
culmination of a long and bitter relationship between the Premier 
and Mr. Meagher? 
 
Again the question is, which you dodged: when did you and the 
Premier talk about the Redberry Lake development prior to you 
applying for the court injunction? What date did you speak to him 
about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I advised the hon. member that the Premier 
had not been involved. The Premier was out of the province at the 
time that that Redberry problem occurred. The decision to place a 
court injunction was made because you can’t allow someone to 
disregard the legislation that we all must live by. 
 
The department has the right to see that that legislation is 
followed, and when it was not being followed an injunction was 
placed. I believe that’s the legal process that’s proper — it was 
taken, the project was stopped. You hold up a sheet of paper and 
major scandal is going to be revealed. I haven’t heard of any 
scandal, but there was a man under a fair amount of pressure right 
at that time and probably made irrational statements. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well I’m glad to see that the minister admits that 
Mr. Meagher was irrational at the time he made the statements. I 
think that irrationality may, or may not, extend to other members 
of the government opposite. I hope you’re not trying to imply 
that, sir. Because we’re certainly not doing it here, yet. 
 
As to the major scandal, Mr. Meagher says: “I actually welcome 
now the opportunity to get this into the judicial system. I promise 
a major scandal will develop when this reaches the court.” So I’m 
sure all members on the other side are waiting for the other shoe 
to drop in this matter, waiting for that major scandal to occur. 
 
Again because you did not deny, you did not deny, sir — and I 
submit that you did; I submit that this is the following series of 
events because your own words have in fact put this link of 
events together. Prior to the Department of Environment putting a 
court injunction on the Redberry Lake development, from your 
own words you said you had phoned Paul Meagher. You said you 
had met with Paul Meagher. Now which is first and which is 
second is something that you’ve refused to answer, is something 
that you’ve refused to answer. And it’s very interesting why 
you’re refusing to answer. 
 
But after having telephoned Paul Meagher and met with Paul 
Meagher, I submit that you went, or one of your officials went 
and met. with either the Premier or one of the Premier’s advisers, 
told him about that conversation, told him what was going to 
happen, told him what Paul Meagher’s response was, told him 
that that was what really happened because the Premier himself, 
as you’ve admitted, had a special interest in this — had a special  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

908 
 

interest in this matter. You said it. You said it here, that he had a 
special interest. 
 
Are you asking us to believe now that all of a sudden, after the 
Premier’s taken the time to stand up in the House and assure the 
House that his project would never go ahead until the proper 
environmental impact studies were done, and that putting his 
reputation and his credibility on the line in that regard, that all of 
a sudden he was going to forget about this? That he was going to 
forget about it despite the fact that he had the political falling out 
with Paul Meagher; that Paul Meagher took on his designate in a 
nomination race for the Conservative Party in Prince Albert; that 
Paul Meagher had beat it and Grant Devine wasn’t necessarily 
unhappy to see . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. I’ve asked members 
many times not to use other members’ names, and I would 
appreciate if you’d . . . Order. I’ve asked members not to refer to 
the members of this House by name, and I would like them to 
keep that in mind. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, excuse me. Which 
name did I use? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — You used the Premier’s name. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That is a profanity. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Yes, I don’t want to repeat that name too often. I 
don’t want to repeat that name too often when I refer to the 
Premier. 
 
And it was true. Isn’t it true that this is what really happened? — 
that the Premier was informed by either yourself of someone in 
your department and the Premier was informed by one of his 
officials and that he was keeping a constant day-to-day watch on 
what was going on in the Redberry Lake development. 
 
Are you going to deny that the Premier was completely left out in 
the cold — that you did this all yourself, the preliminary stuff? 
Are you going to deny that you didn’t advise anybody in the 
Premier’s office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t know. The hon. member mustn’t 
sleep well at night. He seems to have a lot of very bad dreams. 
 
The things that you’re starting and assuming really are not 
factual, and I don’t see any answer that I can give you other than 
what I did give you. The decision was made by me. 
 
We went ahead with the court injunction because the hon. 
member had not followed the legislation that’s in place. He had 
been advised a number of times that he must do an environmental 
impact assessment; he went ahead to develop with it; and the 
court injunction followed. 
 
No, I didn’t run to the Premier’s office and say: what do I do 
now? You know, we’re put in position as ministers to carry out 
the duties that fall to a minister of a department. The Premier has 
plenty to do without me running to him with small issues like 
that. 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Well that’s very interesting, Mr. Minister. That’s 
very interesting. When you see the kind of development going on 
at Redberry Lake and the kind of controversy that surrounds it, 
and you think that that’s a minor development, when you see 
environmental groups across the province banding together to 
oppose Redberry Lake, you say it’s a minor development, and 
that you don’t keep the Premier involved, I say you’re not doing 
your job. 
 
But that’s not the question. The question isn’t whether or not you 
put the injunction in. You did. The question is: did you report any 
proceedings of the meeting between Paul Meagher and yourself 
or a telephone conversation between Paul Meagher and yourself? 
Did you report that to the Premier or anybody in the Premier’s 
office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I told the hon. member that the issues that 
were surfacing in the paper, the Premier was well aware of, 
because he reads and his staff reads, and they read well and they 
keep up to what’s happening. But at the time that the Caterpillar 
was on sight at Redberry and the injunction was issued, the 
Premier was not even in the province. The decision was made by 
me, and the issue was brought to a complete stop. And I think the 
decision was the right decision. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, you’re not denying the fact that you 
informed the Premier’s office or the Premier. I take it then that 
you reported to somebody in the Premier’s office, whether it was 
the Premier or somebody else, that you had had a meeting and a 
telephone conversation, or both, with Paul Meagher, and that you 
reported the contents of that meeting to the Premier. And I 
respectfully submit, sir, that, in fact, was how the Premier was 
kept informed. Again I repeat: we’re not talking about making the 
injunction, we’re not talking about making the injunction, we’re 
not talking about putting the injunction in. We’re talking about 
those things that led up to making the injunction, because we had 
a former member of the legislature challenging the authority of 
the environmental department, challenging the authority of 
yourself, challenging the authority of the Premier. And are you 
trying to tell me that that’s just a little matter, and that the Premier 
wasn’t kept informed of that supposed little matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m sure after the injunction was filed that 
the Premier’s staff would’ve read it in the paper and advised the 
Premier regardless of where he was. But I didn’t go and advise 
the Premier because I don’t see the need of that in something of 
this type. You deal with it as an issue — a person goes beyond 
the authority provided under the legislation. When that happens, 
the department must act, did act, and, I believe, made the right 
decision. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, once again, you’re dodging the 
question. Once again, you’re just dissimulating — 
disinformation. That’s not the question. We’re not talking when 
you put the injunction in place, or when you asked the courts to 
put the injunction in place; we’re talking about before that time. 
we’re talking about the time at which reports were circulating that 
Paul Meagher and Boris Mamchur were going to go ahead with 
the development. We’re talking about the time when Paul 
Meagher said, they’re not; I’ll never do an environmental 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

909 
 

 impact statement; I’ll new present one; because I’m going to go 
ahead because the government doesn’t have the authority. We’re 
talking about the time when Paul Meagher was saying to the 
government, I’ve got the approval from the department of rural 
affairs. We’re talking about that time. 
 
We’re talking about the time that you called Paul Meagher. 
We’re talking about the time that you called him and arranged a 
meeting. We’re talking about the time that you met with Paul 
Meagher. And we’re talking about the time that from that 
meeting you went and reported the contents of that meeting with 
Mr. Meagher to the Premier or somebody in the Premier’s office. 
I want to know: when did you report the results of that 
conversation? And I also would like to ask you, what, in fact, was 
the content of that conversation with the Premier? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t know. The member must be hard of 
hearing as well. I’ve advised you a number of times that I did not 
go to the Premier with that kind of an issue. The Premier has 
many things on his mind; he has lots of work to do. Things that 
the minister can handle should be handled at that level. The 
minister should not run to the Premier with every bit of trivia. So 
I didn’t go to the Premier. I dealt with the issue; other members 
within the cabinet dealt with the issue as it applied to their 
departments. That’s the way the work is done. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Once again, you’re trivialising. Here we had a 
former member — here we had a former member . . . You know, 
Mr. Chairman, the minister says I must have trouble sleeping at 
night because I have these bad dreams. Well I can tell you right 
now, I’ve got nightmares. I have nightmares, thinking it’s people 
like you in charge of the environment in this province. I have 
nightmares and so do the rest of the province have nightmares. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — When we see you allowing Peter Pocklington off 
the hook in North Battleford; we see you allowing Dave Longpré 
off the hook up in Waden Bay; and when we see you using the 
Department of Environment to put the screws to Mamchur and 
Meagher, you darned right we’ve got concerns. Your darn right 
we’ve not nightmares. 
 
But once again, and I’m not hard of hearing — I’m not hard of 
hearing — did you talk about . . . Let’s put it this way; did you 
talk about . . . Let’s put it this way; did you relay the contents of 
any meeting that you had with Paul Meagher to any member of 
Executive Council, including the Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The only time that I met with Paul Meagher 
was at a meeting instigated by him, and other members of the 
Executive Council were at the same meeting. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And I assume from that statement, Mr. Minister, 
that the meeting took place prior to the bulldozer going into 
action at Redberry Lake. Is that the correct assumption? 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I told the member the answer to that before, 
and the answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now we’re getting somewhere. Now, you admit 
you met with Paul Meagher, after phoning him. There were other 
members of the Executive Council present. Will you tell me who 
the other members of Executive Council were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The members that were there were the 
members from, I believe, Turtle ford . . . Were you there? You 
were away. Okay, it was the member for . . . The minister of rural 
affairs was the other member. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — The only other member there was the minister of 
rural affairs, is that correct? There were no other members there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that’s right. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Were there officials from your department present 
at that meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m sorry. There was one other member. The 
member for Redberry was there, and the officials from the Rural 
Development, the officials from Environment, and officials, I 
believe, from parks and recreation were also there. There were 
quite a number of people. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Would I be way off base in assuming that the 
topic of conversation at this meeting was the Redberry Lake 
development? And at this meeting, in terms of Redberry Lake, 
did you at this meeting at Redberry Lake, meeting with the other 
members, with Mr. Meagher, did you put forward the proposition 
to Mr. Meagher that an environmental impact statement was 
required? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I told the hon. member that that statement 
was put forward in August of 1985. It was put forward at the 
meeting that we had here in Regina, and he was again advised by 
telephone later on. So he had plenty of advice that the 
environmental impact statement was required. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, I’m not denying that fact. I think it’s 
obvious from your words here that in fact he was told of that, and 
that at this meeting the screws were put to Mr. Meagher in terms 
of saying, you got to do the environmental impact statement. I 
hope that’s what took place. I hope that’s what took place. 
 
At this meeting that we refer to, was it the position of Mr. 
Meagher at that time that he did not need to do an environmental 
assessment of any kind because he had a permit, and he had 
ministerial approval from the minister of rural affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member is getting into detail that I don’t 
believe I should provide because of the court case, and I’m going 
to leave it there. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Are you talking about the court case in terms of 
the appeal, Mr. Minister, or the supposed court case, or the 
alleged court case which may at some time arise in the future? 
 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

910 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m talking about the appeal that’s before the 
court. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Would you care to expand then on how the 
conversation with Mr. Meagher would affect that court case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, I would not. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . The follow-up 
question, as the member from Weyburn point out, I think is fairly 
obvious. Did Mr. Meagher, at that meeting between yourself and 
the minister of rural affairs and the member from Redberry and 
the other department officials, did Mr. Meagher at that time say to 
you, or to any of the officials, that he had leave to go ahead with 
the development, leave provided him by the Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I indicated to the hon. member that I don’t 
want to get into that kind of detail. I would not be privilege to any 
conversations he may or may not have had with the Premier. I 
don’t think he had any conversations with the Premier, but I 
wouldn’t be privilege to them if he had. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s not what I asked, sir. I 
said, at this meeting that you attended along with the minister of 
rural affairs and the member for Redberry and other officials 
from the various departments, was it the statement, or was it the 
position of the Redberry Lake development group that they did 
not indeed need an environmental impact statement because they 
had had previous leave by the Premier, given to them by the 
Premier, that they in fact did not need to do an environmental 
impact study because they had ministerial approval from the 
department of rural affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The hon. member is again making very wild 
assumptions. Let me advise you that the Premier does not have 
that kind of authority. The legislation is in place. The legislation 
applies to everyone. So the Premier would not have that kind of 
authority, in our government, to make that kind of a decision. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — It’s interesting you say the legislation applies to 
everyone. We’ve just gone through an exercise here today where 
we proved that it doesn’t apply to Peter Pocklington, and where 
we proved that it doesn’t apply to Dave Longpré, but in fact it 
seems to apply to Paul Meagher. 
 
Again, the question is . . . I didn’t ask you whether or not the 
Premier had the authority to give leave. I’m asking you whether 
or not it was the position of the Redberry Lake development 
group. Meagher, Mamchur, that in fact they did not need to do an 
environmental impact statement because they had previous 
commitment from the Premier of this province that they could go 
ahead, provided that the . . . because of ministerial approval from 
the department of rural affairs. Was that the position of the 
developers at Redberry Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I can’t advise you on whether or not they 
ever talked to the Premier, as I told you. You indicated earlier that 
you weren’t going to get into  

questions that dealt with this issue as it came close to the time of 
the injunction, because that issue is before the court. So I believe 
for the benefit of your side of the House, and this side, as 
members of this legislature, that we would be wise not to get into 
details that close to the court case. I think it’s not proper. So I 
would ask the member to ask other kinds of questions, but those 
questions I can’t get into. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, what I agreed to 
— and I want to make this clear to the minister — I agreed that I 
would not ask you questions concerning events which took place 
after the bulldozers began to roll at Redberry Lake. And I’ve said 
that three times. But I am going to ask you questions concerning 
events which took place prior to the bulldozers rolling at 
Redberry Lake. 
 
The question I asked you was this: at the meeting attended by 
yourself, attended by the minister for rural affairs and the minister 
for Redberry, was it the position of Mr. Meagher, on behalf of the 
Redberry Lake group, that he did not, and their group did not, 
have to go through an environmental assessment process because 
the Premier had told him that he didn’t need to do it, and he 
didn’t need to do it because he’d gotten ministerial approval from 
the minister of rural affairs? Isn’t that the position of the 
Redberry Lake group at this meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Those decisions of whether or not an 
environmental impact assessment is required are made by the 
department and the Minister of Environment. They’re not made 
by the Premier. That decision was made in 1985. It has never 
changed from that time to this. So the requirement was there in 
1985; the requirement was still there this year. It’s still there 
today. The decision has not changed over all that period. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well I can appreciate that fact. Again, you didn’t 
answer the question. You didn’t answer the question. I’m not 
asking you what the Premier . . .whether he was in Japan, or 
whether I sleep well at night, or whatever other red herring you 
want to throw up, or in your case a blue herring. 
 
What I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, is this: was it the position at 
the meeting attended by yourself and the other . . . the minister for 
rural affairs, and the member for Redberry, was it the position of 
the Redberry development group, Mr. Paul Meagher, that he and 
his group did not have to submit an environmental impact 
statement because the Premier had told him that he didn’t? Isn’t 
that right? Aren’t I correct? Wasn’t that the position of the people 
from Redberry Lake? The Premier told him he didn’t have to do 
it, so he wasn’t going to do it. Isn’t that his position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay. Now you’ve agreed to talk about this, what 
went on at this meeting, finally. What was the position, then? 
You say no. What was the position of the Redberry Lake group at 
this meeting? What was the position of Mr. Meagher at this 
meeting? And what did he put forward as the position of the 
group in regards to their actions? 
 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

911 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I haven’t agreed to talk about what happened 
at the meeting. I simply gave you an answer to your question 
which had nothing to do with any meeting that I was at. And I 
simply told you that your statements were wrong. I said no. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well obviously, Mr. Minister, you’re not very 
anxious to talk about this meeting between yourself and Paul 
Meagher and the minister for rural affairs at which the decisions 
in regards to Redberry Lake were taken. So we’ll come back at 
this another time and another place. 
 
I’ve got a few questions I’d like to ask you regarding some 
information that I think would be of interest to the people of this 
province. Mr. Minister, you’ve got the . . . stood here for the last 
several days ink these environmental estimates, and through an 
explanation of various actions undertaken by your department, 
put forward what you believe is . . . or what I believe is your 
philosophy in dealing with the department. And I would label that 
a non-interventionist, reactive as opposed to a pro-active 
approach, not getting involved in things unless the political heat’s 
turned on you. 
 
(2030) 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, can you state for us whether or not 
you have any background in environment, academic or otherwise, 
that makes you a logical choice for your position as Environment 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I suppose I would say to you that I have no 
formal training that would equip me to be an Environment 
minister. I would suppose that I could also say the hon. member 
likely has no formal training to be Environment critic. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’ve been working for a number of years in 
this province. I’ve been involved in the agricultural sphere and 
have been probably closer to nature than most people in that 
capacity and have an understanding of the environment and the 
needs of the soil, the needs of wildlife that live in the 
environment, and the needs of the people that live in 
environment. So in that respect, I suppose I have some 
background. 
 
But the actual expertise in Environment comes from people that 
are hired and work within the department. And I believe that the 
people in the Environment department are well qualified, do a 
good job for the Government of Saskatchewan, and provide that 
kind of background to any minister of Environment that comes to 
take the job. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — But, Mr. Minister, in response to that, I certainly 
respect the expertise of people in your department, and it’s 
obvious that your role as Minister of Environment is a political 
role. And that’s one we have shown time and time again in this 
House, that in fact your role is to make political decisions 
regarding the environment, not to make decisions which don’t fall 
within the political realm, and that you’ve made a number of 
political decisions in your capacity. Those  

decisions include getting Peter Pocklington off the hook. And I 
don’t refer to you specifically in this, but that’s the way your 
government sees that role, as a political role. So get Peter 
Pocklington off the hook. Make sure Dave Longpré gets his 
houseboats in La Ronge, and make sure you put the screws to 
Mamchur, Meagher up in there. 
 
As a matter of fact, in response to what you say, I’ve had some 
training in the environment, but I’m not in your position right 
now. And I’m sure that some day if I happen to be sitting in your 
chair on the front benches, you will have an opportunity after 
1990 to ask myself or one of my other colleagues our 
qualifications. You may not, you may not have that opportunity. 
You may not have that opportunity, given what’s going on up in 
your area, but one of your decimated crew will have. 
 
I note, Mr. Minister, though that you’re assigned a Legislative 
Secretary, with some sort of responsibility for the water 
corporation — Mr. Martens . . .excuse me, the member for 
Morse. Now I have no doubt whatsoever that the member from 
Morse is of immense value to you in that capacity. But I want to 
ask you: has your Legislative Secretary any duties that involve 
the Department of Environment? Is he paid any allowances or 
expenses or other payments out of the Department of 
Environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — He has represented me at functions when 
I’ve not been able to be available. The majority of his expenses 
would be paid for from the water corporation. I believe there’s 
been one or two expense statements for meetings where he has 
gone to represent the minister and brought greetings or spoke at 
given meetings. But for the most part, he works strictly on the 
water corporation side. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, will you then, given that in fact he 
has drawn moneys from the Department of Environment, will 
you submit to this House a statement of the amount of moneys 
drawn from the department up to July 1, let’s say, by the member 
from Morse in his capacity as representing you through the 
Department of Environment? How much has he been talking out 
of the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The department will bring that information 
for you. We don’t have it here tonight. It wouldn’t be very much 
money, but we’ll provide that information. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well we’ll see whether it’s a big bit or a little bit 
when you provide the information. 
 
Speaking of money and things of that matter drawing form the 
department, I wonder, Mr. Minister, can I have a complete list of 
your personal staff, their names, and their present salary levels. 
 
Okay, Mr. Minister, I notice that we have here ministerial 
assistants’ salaries. First of all is Mr. Conrad Hild, his position 
classification is a ministerial assistant 4, his present salary is 
$3,392 a month. Is that his present salary, as shown here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That was the information that the  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

912 
 

member asked for. It was the present salary. That is his salary. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Has Mr. Conrad Hild, 
in his capacity as a ministerial assistant 4, within the last 24 
months received any increase in pay or any other benefits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In July of 1986 he got a 3 per cent change, 
which was the economic increase that was provided to staff 
across the government. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — When was it, Mr. Minister? When in 1986 did he 
receive that increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I indicated to the member, in July of 1986. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Sorry, I didn’t hear the July part. Another name I 
see here is Lorraine Moffitt, a ministerial assistant class D, and 
she makes $2,518 per month. Did she receive any increase, and if 
so, how much within the last 24 months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — She also received the same 3 per cent 
increase in July. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Did Ms. Moffitt or Mr. Hild receive an increase in 
the 12-month period prior to the July increase of 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Neither one of them would have worked for 
the Department of Environment prior to that time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Would it be fair to say they were working for the 
Department of Social Services prior to that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I really couldn’t tell you which department 
Lorrraine Moffitt was in, but Conrad Hild was probably with 
Social Services at that time, yes. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Given that Mr. Hild was working in the 
Department of Social Services at that time, what qualifications 
does Mr. Hild have to go to work at a salary of $3,392 a month 
for the Department of the Environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Hild has considerable education 
background, but the department advise me that they don’t get that 
information for ministerial assistant. I know he has a degree and 
he’s working on a masters. I think he has one subject to finalise 
his masters. But the total background of his degrees, I couldn’t 
give you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I know that the department 
doesn’t hire ministerial assistants. In fact, the responsibility for 
hiring ministerial assistants is in fact the responsibility of the 
minister. You’re their boss, and we all know that they come and 
go as the winds of political fortune dictate. Did you check Mr. 
Hild’s qualifications? If you don’t know . . . If the department 
doesn’t know, did you check to his qualifications to earn that 
much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Hild was hired on before I became 
minister. He was transferred from Social Services  

to Environment by the Premier and so was Ms. Moffitt. So I 
didn’t hire either one. Ms. Moffitt, I believe, has about 25 years 
of experience here with government and has worked with 
ministers in a variety of different governments, going back into 
the ’60s. So no, I didn’t check because these were people who 
were on staff and transferred to me, and my instructions were to 
use those people for a six-month period, and if I wasn’t satisfied, 
then to make change. And that’s exactly the process that we’ve 
been through, and they’ve both been very satisfactory. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, Mr. Minister, I see that you have another 
ministerial assistant Class C, Brenda Kostiuk, at a salary of 
$1,795 per month. Was Miss Kostiuk a member of your 
department when you took over as minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, she was. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You mention, Mr. Minister, that you received 
orders to keep these people on for six months and then evaluate 
them. Who gave you those orders: 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That was the instructions to all ministers. 
The staff were assigned; these were people who had been 
working for government for some time, and we take them on. If 
they fill the needs of the minister within the department, fine, you 
keep them. If there’s some reason that you’re not compatible, 
don’t work well together, whatever, then you could make change. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I notice in your classification these 
are ministerial assistants’ salaries. Do you have any people on 
staff in your department classified as special assistants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — These are the only people that I have 
working for the Department of Environment within my office. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Good. Mr. Minister, do you have . . . I know the 
members of your office staff have access . . . Do the members of 
your office staff have access to government vehicles either on a 
permanent or intermittent basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, they drive their own vehicles. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — They never, never use government vehicles even 
on government business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — They haven’t up to this time since I’ve been 
minister. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, do you or any members of your 
staff travel by government aircraft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes. I think that’s customary for any 
minister to use the aircraft where it’s needed, and if I travel by 
aircraft, I take the staff members that would be needed for the 
particular event that I’m travelling to. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I wonder if you would mind providing us with a 
list of the, within the last 12 months, of a list of places travelled to 
by the Minster of Environment — and I realise that we’re going 
to deal with two different ministers here — the destinations, the 
cost of the flight,  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

913 
 

and the purpose of the flight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that they don’t have that 
information here tonight, but we’ll provide it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Will you make a commitment that I receive it 
within the next day? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — They’ll do the best that . . . (inaudible 
interjections) . . . Order, please. It’s very hard to be able to 
respond back and forth here. Tomorrow being Friday, we are in 
the House at 10-. The staff will do what they can, but I couldn’t 
guarantee that they could provide it tomorrow. It takes some time 
to go back and pick those figures out of the records, and because 
we will be in House by 10, it would be most difficult to make that 
commitment. We’ll try, but I wouldn’t want to promise for 
tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well if it is at all available, Mr. Minister, I’ll be in 
my office after the legislature sits, till after 5 o’clock. So if they 
are able top provide the material to the office, that will be fine. 
 
I wonder while at the same time that they are preparing that list, 
Mr. Minister, in your capacity, and also within the past 12 months 
the former ministers of Environment, in your capacities as 
ministers of Environment, did you or your predecessor travel 
outside the province? If so, I’d like to know where. I’d like to 
know the purpose of that travelling, the cost of the travel, and 
who went along. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there has been no 
out-of-province travel by either the former minister or this 
Minister for the 12 months. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m surprised by the answer, Mr. Minister, for 
two reasons. First of all, given the government’s record of 
job-riding around the world at taxpayers’ expense, but 
particularly surprised given your role as the Minister of the 
Environment. We had recently a national consultative conference 
on the environment down in Ottawa at which the Environmental 
Protection Act — the proposed Environmental Protection Act 
proposed by Mr. Tom McMillan, the Minister of the 
Environment . . . I’m surprised that neither you nor any members 
of your department, if I’m to listen to what you’re saying, that 
neither you nor any members of your department went along to at 
least that conference, given its importance for the environmental 
future of Canada. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The hon. member is adding to his original 
question. What I indicated was that neither the former minister or 
I made any out-of-province trips as Minister of Environment. The 
staff have been out of the province. There’s many meetings that 
staff are involved with, and so they have travelled. But the 
ministers didn’t. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, will you provide us with the 
following: the destinations of the meetings that your officials 
went out of province; the reason for the meeting out of province; 
the cost of travelling there and return; who went to those 
meetings; the cost of staying there; the length of stay at the places 
where those meetings were held; and the lodgings at which those 
officials stayed. 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that normally the travel for 
ministers has been provided, but it’s not normal to provide that 
kind of information for department staff. As you can appreciate, 
there are a number of trips that department staff must make in 
order to do the job within the department. It would take a 
considerable amount of time. Our staff are busy, and I don’t see 
that you would gain a lot by that kind of information. The total 
amount of travel, of course, is in the annual reports and also in the 
Estimates. I think you’d have no trouble picking it out, but it 
would take a lot of work and I really don’t see the purpose. It 
traditionally is not provided. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, given the fact that neither you 
nor your predecessor left the province, and given the fact that 
there were very many important environmental meetings taking 
place in Canada throughout the last year — and I mentioned one 
of those which was the whole series and consultative meetings 
regarding the new Environmental Protection act, not to mention 
things like meetings in regards to the joint use of waters, or 
meetings in regards to the councils of ministers in the 
environment — would you not submit those expense requests, 
given the fact that you yourself or your predecessor didn’t go, but 
that in fact that there were important environmental meetings 
taking place, and it was important for Saskatchewan to be 
represented there. I think that the people of the province have the 
right to know if, in fact, they were represented at these meetings. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe the meeting that the hon. member is 
referring to that took place in Ottawa was a meeting where the 
federal government invited non-government organisations to 
participate in a meeting dealing with the new legislation that was 
getting put forward by Ottawa. 
 
Under other circumstances and meetings ink different places, 
some of my staff were involved, and there has been a lot of 
correspondence and a lot of discussion on the new environment 
Act that Canada is introducing, or has introduced. So we have 
been very much involved in the time frame leading up to that 
legislation being introduced. But the meeting you refer to, I don’t 
think department staff or ministers were really invited to that 
particular meeting. 
 
I might tell you it’s been a very busy winter. If they’d give me an 
opportunity to go somewhere, I’d love to go. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m quite sure, given what’s 
on the plate and the agenda of the environment for Saskatchewan 
for the people ink terms of their concerns of the environment in 
this province over the next 24 to 36 months, that you will have 
plenty of opportunity to go. One of those places you’ll have an 
opportunity to go, I suspect will be Washington — and given the 
concerns now being raised by the Americans in regards to 
Rafferty — and we’ll deal with that one a little later on. 
 
You still didn’t answer the question, because those groups that 
you mentioned, those non-governmental organisations, members 
of those organisations have told me that Saskatchewan, in fact, 
has played a fairly low-key role in both the setting up of the 
environment protection  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

914 
 

Act, the proposed new federal environmental protection act. and I 
didn’t believe it. I thought Saskatchewan, knowing the officials of 
your department, would be interested in it. I thought that, in fact, 
that Saskatchewan would be playing a much higher, higher role. 
And it would be my estimation that they would be playing a 
higher role. 
 
Will you, to confirm that, tell me and give to us those questions 
that I asked you — the places where your officials went, where 
they went, what meetings they went to, how long they stayed, and 
the cost, as I had outlined earlier — in order to assure the pole of 
this province that Saskatchewan was indeed represented at those 
meetings which you yourself have said were important to the 
people of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the department’s 
opportunity to work, to develop the new environmental Act for 
Canada would normally be done through the Canadian Council 
for Resource and Environment Ministers. And probably your 
non-government officials that you speak of would be likely 
unaware of those meetings when they take place. My officials did 
attend that meetings and did have input at that time along with the 
correspondence and the opportunity to input through that method. 
I was pleased that Canada gave us as much opportunity as they 
did to be involved in the development of that legislation. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, did 
your department pay for any public opinion polls or surveys 
during the course of the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that we did not. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — No polls or surveys of any description 
conducted by your department and paid for by your department, 
or paid for in part by your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, there were no public surveys paid for by 
my department within the last year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, 
as a follow-up to the question from my colleague: did any 
department of government do any poll or ask any questions in its 
poll related to the Department of Environment or any of its 
activities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I really wouldn’t have access to that 
information. I can only speak for what the Department of 
Environment did. If others did, I’m not aware of it, but I couldn’t 
speak for them, at any rate. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me ask another way. Did your 
department receive any information from polling done by any 
agency or department of the government, whether the department 
. . . Was there any information from a polling provided to your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised, no. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Did your department survey the residents or 
the cottage owners at Waden Bay about developments taking 
place there? 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, we did not. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — You conducted no surveys of residents in 
North Battleford with respect to the Gainers plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, we did not. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — A little bit of a change of pace. How much did 
your department spend on advertising this past year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The total for the year: $104,098. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — What does your department have budgeted for 
advertising this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The budget this year is 210,000. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Can the minister explain how it is that 
advertising more than doubles over the course of a year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — A lot would depend on the issues that you’re 
dealing with. We have quite a number of environmental impact 
assessments that we must advertise. We’ve given out quite a bit 
of advertising related to the program for collection of chemical 
cans and the collection of the chemicals from different 
laboratories. 
 
I’ll just run down the list of the different areas the advertising 
covers: it’s the reproduction of publications; the spill control 
program — they advertise in newspapers and provide kits that go 
out for people in industry; the department program brochures; 
advertising dealing with Environment Week; the annual report; 
and newspaper clipping service. 
 
(2100) 
 
An Hon. Member: — What are you doing this year you didn’t 
do last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’re just doing everything better. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — You’re certainly spending the public money at 
a much faster pace on advertising than you were last year. I’m 
wondering if the minister would table that documentation that he 
just referred to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I might advise the hon. member that last 
year’s budget was 218,000, and we spent 104,000. This year we 
are looking at the reproduction of a number of publications. They 
are printed, and when they expire then you have new. Where we 
spent something like 3,500 last year, we are going to spend 
35,000 this year because of the need to replace a bunch of those 
that are used up. So things of that nature, I suppose, occur. We 
budgeted actually less than last year, and what we’ll actually 
spend depends on how the year goes and the needs. But they are 
all spent on fairly straightforward kinds of advertising dealing 
with departmental issues. And . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Can you pass that over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, no, I can’t pass that over. 
 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

915 
 

An Hon. Member: — Why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It has personal comments on it, just for me. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — With all respect, Mr. Minister, that was not the 
question I asked whether you would supply that information and 
pass that over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well I advised the member that, no, I 
wouldn’t pass that information over. You have the estimate book 
which also lists the same. It doesn’t list the detail that I was using, 
but it lists the amount for advertising. Those were my own lists 
prepared for me for estimates and they have personal comments, 
and no, I won’t pass it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, you talk about the fact that that 
sum 30 or $35,000 is to be spent this coming year on replacing 
brochures and other literature that needs to be redone. That still 
would only account for approximately a third of the increase in 
spending over this present year. And I’m wondering how you can 
justify another 60 or $70,000 expenditure for advertising. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the member missed what I said. I told 
you that last year’s budget had been $218,000. Of that we spent 
104. We’re not talking here about money that’s spent. We are 
talking about budget, and it’s 8,000 less than last year. How much 
we’ll spend, we’ll have to wait for the end of the year to find out. 
We may not spend as much as last year; I don’t know at this 
point. 
 
I could tell the hon. member that the kind of figure that I gave 
you, that 35,000, that was exactly what was in last year’s budget. 
We spent $3,488 out of the 35,000. So it depends on the needs of 
the department whether or not the brochures are all used and you 
have to reprint. So the money is there if it’s needed. If it’s not 
needed, of course, it goes back into the general treasury. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, in a time of restraint, how is it 
that you don’t restrain advertising budgets but you budget the 
very same figure, apparently, that you had last year? When the 
public is being asked to bear the brunt of government restraint 
programs, how is it that you refuse to curtail advertising 
expenditures in your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I suppose you can say, hon. member, that we 
did curtail it. We budgeted 218,000 last year and we budgeted 
210 this year, so that is a reduction. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Why is it that you would not budget what you 
spent, or approximately what you spent last year? Why would 
you want to possibly double your budget for advertising in a year 
in which you are asking the public to bear a restraint? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We will be practising as much restraint as 
possible. But I want the hon. members to realise the Department 
of Environment has many environmental impact statements being 
reviewed this year. That demands public advertising. And when 
we go into that process, it does cost money. Some years you have 
more of those statements than others. This time it’s a  

very heavy work year in that division of the department, and they 
will do a lot of advertising. 
 
Some of the other programs you must advertise, otherwise people 
are not able to access the program. So you must do some printing 
and some advertising. I think that all of the advertising the 
department has been doing is very essential advertising to the 
environment of the province — it’s not waste money at all; it’s 
very well spent, and I make no apologies for the amount of 
money that we’ve spent up to now in advertising. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I am asking you more 
specifically about the advertising that you propose for this 
coming year and the doubling of the budget. You talk about the 
expenditure of public funds for advertising the chemical cans 
program. That was advertising that you would have conducted 
last year and would be approximately the same this year. 
 
I’m wondering where the increases in advertising occur this year? 
Have there been reallocations within the budgetary figures for 
advertising — shiftings of priorities within the advertising 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If you go to the 1985-86 actual expenditure, 
the budget in that year was 219,000. When the budget was struck 
for 1986-87, it was set at 218,000. The actual for ‘86-87 ended up 
at 104,000-and-a-few dollars. The budget this year is 210,000. 
 
There are no great escalations; they’re estimates of what you may 
spend. If you don’t need it, you may well find that next year 
we’ve spent 100,000 or 110,000 or something again. It depends 
on the costs of the necessary advertising within the department 
and the number of brochures and things that are requiring 
reprinting. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — You strain credulity, Mr. Minister. I’m 
wondering now if you can tell me how many environmental 
assessments you conducted this past year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There were 65 active projects in ‘86-87. 
Projects that did not require an EIA turned out 37; projects that 
were withdrawn, two; projects still being screened, eight; projects 
requiring an EIA, 18; EIAs completed, three. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And how many assessments do you anticipate 
conducting this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s almost impossible to estimate, but we 
do have on hand and working within the department some very 
major environmental impact statements right now, as you are 
aware. 
 
We have the Shand power development, and the 
Rafferty-Alameda, which just those two, will require 
considerable advertising, but they’re very heavy projects. And 
there likely will be many others, depending on how many 
developments go ahead that require them. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And you anticipate a substantial difference this 
year in advertising for these assessments as opposed to last year. 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

916 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, we do. We’ve done quite a number 
already this year, and we do anticipate that the cost for the 
advertising will be higher than last year. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Which companies handle advertising for your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The advertising is done through the central 
government agency, and they in turn use Dome Advertising. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — How much money was Dome Advertising then 
paid for advertising on behalf of your department last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Approximately 81,000; approximately 
81,000. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Then how would the minister account for the 
other, it’ll be about 25,000, that was spent on advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That would mostly be printing and 
newspaper kind of advertising. The other would be the 
preparation of the annual report, the preparation of brochures, and 
the actual producing of that material for the department. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And which firms would have handled those 
contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That was what I advised you, Dome 
Advertising. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Somehow I’m not understanding. I understand 
that Dome Advertising was paid $81,000 last year, and there was 
still other placements of newspaper advertising for the 
department, preparation of the annual report, and those kinds of 
things. Was that work done by Dome, or was that work done by 
another firm? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — What I’m telling you is that Dome did the 
preparation of the annual report, the lay-out, that sort of thing, 
and then the actual printing would also be done. 
 
The balance over the 81, there would be approximately 4,000 . . . 
Sorry, approximately 2,600 would be for the newspaper clipping 
service, and the balance of it would be for the actual printing. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Who does the newspaper clipping service for 
the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Prairie Print Clipping services. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you. And then the remainder would be 
for the printing of the newspaper ads themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The printing of the annual report, the 
printing of all of the brochures that the department uses — all of 
that type of printing would be included in that. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Who does that work for the department? 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Dome Advertising does the layout, and then 
it’s contracted by tender. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — In other words, all of the rest of the expenses 
above the 81,000 we’ve established for Dome and the 2,600 
we’ve established for the prairie clipping service, all of the rest of 
that would go to Dome Advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No. That goes to the company that gets the 
bid to do the printing. It’s tendered, and whoever gets the tender 
would get that amount of money. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Could you, then, tell me which companies got 
the contracts, won the bids for the printing jobs, the tendering 
there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There are a number of small jobs, but the 
annual report was done this year, or last year, like for ’86-87, by 
Saskatchewan government printers. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And what was Saskatchewan government 
printers paid for the annual report, then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That one would be in the neighbourhood of 
12,000. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And the remainder, then, would have been paid 
to which printing firms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The tenders are handled through a joint 
government format, and so basically we don’t get the answer of 
which particular person does the printing always. They handle the 
tendering and the awarding of the contract, so we don’t always 
have those names. That’s what my officials advise me; they don’t 
have it for the small ones. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well these are for the small ones, but is it not 
possible — you can say it’s for the small ones — is not possible, 
however, that inasmuch as the central government agency that 
contracts for the advertising, and that allegedly contracts for these 
small jobs, could in fact have given some of the printing contracts 
to Dome Advertising themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t believe that they do the printing, but 
my staff advise me that they could get the information. They 
don’t have it, but they could get it and provide it to you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Could that information be provided for 
tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would doubt it because we start at 10 
o’clock. I don’t see that there would be an opportunity for the 
staff to gather the information. We would have to provide it later. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Could we expect the information before we 
finish these estimates — by 5 o’clock tomorrow or by Monday 
morning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe we could do it by Monday, but as 
you realise, the staff will be here tomorrow for  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

917 
 

estimates, and the House closes at 1, so they wouldn’t have the 
opportunity to do very much until after that time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I appreciate your commitment for Monday. I 
think that would be adequate. What we’re looking for, then, is the 
remainder of the expenditure. That concludes my questioning of 
the minister. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you a few 
questions about some concerns that have been expressed to me by 
constituents in the Regina North East who reflect some concerns, 
I think, of people in the city in general. 
 
There are a number of chemical plants located in north east 
Regina, in the industrial park area. Some of them are very close 
to schools, as my colleague, the critic for Environment, has 
pointed out previously. I have written to you at one occasion, a 
letter, in which I brought to your attention concerns expressed by 
a certain person who had written to me, and you were good 
enough to respond. And I appreciate that. 
 
My question to you is, that in light of the fact that these chemical 
plants are a potential hazard — and I’m not imputing anything on 
their operations at this time, but any chemical plant is a potential 
hazard situation — could you tell this House, and me, what kind 
of criteria, or what kind of requirements do you have in the 
department to ensure that all possible safety precautions are taken 
to make sure that a dangerous situation does not arise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that for the most part the 
chemical companies go through the city process when they go 
into an industrial park, and they are given licensing authority in 
that manner. If there are any complaints that arise, then my 
department deals with those and addresses the concerns that are 
raised. But initially, we don’t always get involved in those 
decisions. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m sorry, that doesn’t quite, that doesn’t 
quite come across very well, Mr. Minister. Are you saying that 
your department, which is the Department of Environment for 
this province, has no jurisdiction, has no requirements that have 
to be met in order to ensure that health and life are protected 
when it comes to situations where there could be dangers created 
by chemical spills or chemical leaks or inadequate disposal of 
waste from chemical plants? Are you saying that your department 
has no role to play in this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, we do have a role to play in that area. 
What I was saying was that the initial construction of a chemical 
plant in an industrial park of a major city is normally dealt with 
by the city. If there are concerns and they do not meet the 
requirements of the department, then of course we step in and we 
do deal with the issues. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Do you not, Mr. Minister, have any type of 
inspections that you do from time to time in order to ensure that 
the requirements and regulations are being adhered to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m sorry, I was getting information. I 
missed your question. Would you mind repeating it? 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, my question was, while you 
were getting the information, is: does not your department carry 
out inspections in chemical plants or similar type of installations 
from time to time to ensure that all of the safety requirements are 
being met? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Much of the type of inspection that you 
speak of would be done by the public safety side, if that’s what 
you’re referring to. And yes, those inspections of boilers, and 
electrical hook-ups, and all of the different inspection areas 
would be involved during the construction phase, but strictly as 
an environment department. They would not have, prior, been 
involved to the same extent. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — But I ask: why not? Do you not appreciate 
the fact that in order for the health and safety of the public to be 
protected, your department ought to have some role in ensuring 
that all the safety requirements are being carried out. 
 
I know the role of the city. I made my enquiries there. I’m asking; 
Mr. Minister, what role do you play? And I don’t believe it’s 
adequate if the only role you play is follow-up when somebody 
complains because somebody has died because of something that 
has gone wrong. do you not have a role where you inspect these 
plants to ensure that they are safe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, there are permits issued with regards 
to the methods that they can operate, and there are some 
monitorings of emissions from chemical plants to be sure that 
they’re within the requirements. 
 
The sewage requirements for a chemical plant are spelled out, 
and any spills have to be reported to the department. That’s a 
requirement. So yes, there is that type of monitoring. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — How often do you have your people and 
your officials inspect these facilities to ensure that all the 
requirements are met? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that different types of plants 
have different requirements. The anhydrous ammonia is a 
pressure vessel that it’s stored in, and they’re only allowed to be 
established outside of the city limits, and they are inspected on a 
regular basis, depending on the installation. Sometimes it’s 
annual, sometimes it’s once in three years. It varies with the type 
of vessel. If it comes to fertiliser type of plants, they’re still 
classified as a chemical plant, but those would be licensed by the 
city. 
 
So there’s a different requirement there, and there’s not a 
continuous ongoing inspection, the same as there is in the more 
dangerous type. If it comes to the chlorine type of plant again,, 
it’s a pressure vessel, falls under The Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Act, and is required to be inspected on a regular basis. So it varies 
considerably. When you say chemical plant, it can cover so many 
things. It’s very difficult to give you a definite answer. 
 
(2130) 
  



 
July 2, 1987 

918 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Without in any way reflecting on the 
activities of any plant, let me give you one example, and then you 
can give me an example in response. It might satisfy my needs to 
have the answer. 
 
Let’s take Hoechst chemicals. Do you do a regular inspection on 
that kind of an industry, which is located in the city, and if so, 
how regular? And if not regular, what does it take in order for 
your department to do a check on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that Hoechst Chemicals has an 
air pollution permit, and we try to inspect that one on an annual 
basis. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, from time to time people 
will bring to your attention concerns about what they think may 
not be a good situation. Will you follow up on each one of those 
and provide, then, a response and a report on what your findings 
are? Is that the procedure that you follow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that’s the process that’s used. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And when you do the follow-up, Mr. 
Minister, what are the arrangements? Do you notify the chemical 
plant that your people are going to go and do the inspection ahead 
of time, or do you just show up and do the inspection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That varies on the nature of the complaint, 
but quite often we would just show up and do the inspection. I 
think that’s the best way to catch a company that’s not obeying 
the regulations. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, to the Minister. Mr. Minister, 
can you tell me what you know about PCBs (polychlorinated 
biphenyl)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Let me advise the hon. member that I’m 
aware of the contamination that PCBs cause. 
 
We do have a company in the province who handles the low level 
of PCB-contaminated oils, and they process it and make it 
available back to Sask. Power and other companies who use it for 
reuse. So I’m not just sure what area the hon. member is looking 
at. 
 
I am just advised that we have recently printed a major pamphlet 
dealing with PCBs and the method of handling it. If the hon. 
member would like one of those brochures, we would be pleased 
to provide that. we don’t have it tonight, I don’t think, but we’ll 
send it across. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can 
you tell me what the possible consequences or health hazards 
there are associated with PCBs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We do know that it is a chemical that 
provides difficulty with toxicity,, but when it comes to just the 
effect that PCBs have on individuals, I think it would depend to a 
large extent on the level of PCBs present, and whether it was 
external or internal that a person was involved with them, so it 
would be very difficult for me. I think you’d have to have a 
medical doctor really to give you that kind of background. My 
department wouldn’t  

have that. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, do you know where PCBs are 
used in Saskatchewan, in what sort of industries? Where, in 
Saskatchewan, would PCBs be used? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The biggest part of it is used by Sask. Power 
in its transformers and capacitors. Smaller amounts of it are used 
in other areas, in motors for submersible pumps and things like 
that. And a recent study form Ontario sort of gave background 
information on that, but it’s a fairly new report. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, how many PCB spills were 
reported in the last calendar, or not calendar year, fiscal year? 
Does your department have that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We don’t have that information here, but it 
would be available on our spill reports listings. If the member is 
really anxious for it, we could probably go back and get it, but it 
would take some time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, if I could have that information 
by tomorrow, if it’s easily available, I’d appreciate that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I might advise the hon. member that the spill 
report is a very detailed report and it’s ongoing day after day. I 
don’t think it would be possible to pull that out in a day; that 
would take a considerable amount of work. So I couldn’t provide 
it by tomorrow, but we could provide it in, I don’t know, in a 
couple of weeks probably would be more . . .Yes, they think 
probably by the end of next week but not, definitely not 
tomorrow or in a day; that would be impossible. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I would appreciate it if I could 
have it by mid week because we’ll still be in budget estimates for 
the Department of Health, and it would be useful in terms of 
pursuing some of my concerns with regard to PCBs. I’m 
wondering if it would be possible to have the information 
available by Wednesday of next week? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’ll do the best we can. I would hesitate to 
guarantee you’d have it by Wednesday. We’ll do the very best we 
can. If it can be by Wednesday, we’ll put it across to you by then. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you outline in detail the kind 
of procedure that your department uses once they’ve been 
notified of a PCB spill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Immediately that we hear of a spill, someone 
goes to the site. We try to contain the spill in as small an area as 
possible. Then we try to, at that point ascertain the level of PCBs 
in the commodity that was spilled. Then we gather it up, put it in 
barrels, including the earth that is saturated with the PCBs, and 
try in that manner to gather it and store it until it can be 
processed. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I am wondering if you  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

919 
 

could tell me how many storage sites there are in Saskatchewan 
for PCB spills that the Department of the Environment has 
supervised the process whereby PCBs have been picked up and 
put in barrels. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My department wouldn’t have the 
information of the number of sites. Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, because they are the company that uses the bulk of 
that type of oil, would likely be more capable of advising you of 
how many sites. Now there are a couple of sites in Saskatoon that 
we’re aware of, but I really couldn’t give you the information 
because we basically don’t have it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, are you telling me that the 
Department of the Environment, the Saskatchewan Department 
of the Environment does not know the exact location of PCB 
storage sites around this province, and you don’t know how many 
sites there are? Is that what you’re telling me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that’s exactly what I’m telling you. And 
if the hon. member will realise what she’s asking, if you go into 
rural Saskatchewan and every farm yard that has a transformer 
from the early ’50s will be a PCB site, because these transformers 
were all filled with PCBs, Sask. Power has sites all over this 
province. It would run into thousands of locations. So yes, I’m 
telling you that we, as a Department of Environment, do not have 
that kind of information readily available. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I’m not talking about where 
various transformers are located or various light ballasts are 
located, I’m talking about storage sites that have come about as a 
result of the Department of the Environment’s supervision of 
spills, the collection of the earth and the PCB chemical, and then 
consequently those barrels being stored in various places around 
Saskatchewan. And I’m wondering if you know where those sites 
are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that traditionally Sask Power 
would be the company that has the responsibility to look after the 
product that is spilled, because normally it’s their product. And 
they have sites that they have prepared that have concrete, and 
they’re enclosed so you don’t have the PCBs escaping into the 
environment. So traditionally when the clean-up occurs, we’re 
there and see that it’s done properly and that the site is clean. But 
the actual storage of the product then goes back to the company. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, if you’re not aware of all the 
storage sites around the province, I’m wondering what sort of 
process your department goes through to monitor the storage of 
PCBs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that our department does not 
monitor the storage sites. If there is any complaint raised about a 
storage site that’s not proper, then of course we will have it 
checked. But Sask Power traditionally is the company that we 
deal with. Sometimes there have been others, but traditionally 
that’s the main company that would be storing the product. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I think that I heard you  

acknowledge that PCBs are highly toxic. I think that in your own 
roundabout way you have acknowledged that there are health 
hazards associated with PCBs and contamination. As the Minister 
of the Environment, I wonder why you hold the view that the 
Department of the Environment has no responsibility to monitor 
those storage sites? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that many of the storage sites 
are temporary sites. The product is taken to a site, and then it’s 
transported to be processed and the problem eliminated. So we 
don’t monitor all of those sites. We have inspected the major sites 
that Sask. Power has developed, have approved the type of 
storage that they are using, and we don’t really go back and 
monitor every year or anything, each of those sites. If there is a 
problem shown to be developing, of course we’ll go back and 
review and see that it’s cleaned up. But it would be a major job 
for any department to try and monitor each and every site where 
there has been a product cleaned up and stored for a brief time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I’d be interested in knowing 
your definition of “temporary” or “brief.” What is your 
definition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Temporary can mean different things at 
different times, and I’m sure you’re aware of that. Sometimes a 
temporary site would only be for a matter of days. Other times, it 
could be a matter of several months. But the permanent sites 
where PCBs normally are gathered, they’re ongoing sites that are 
used year after year. 
 
So I suppose the difference between the two: one would be the 
permanent type of site that’s developed and used year after year; 
the other is qualified as a temporary site, and it could be anything 
from days to many months, like most of the year. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, could you give me a list of the 
permanent sites that you refer to. You seem to have some 
knowledge of permanent sites. Can I get that list from you, and 
can I have the list from you by next Wednesday? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, we could give you the listing of those 
permanent sites. There aren’t many, but I don’t have the exact 
locations here tonight. We’ll provide it to you. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I’d be interested in your view of 
PCB storage sites in residential areas. Do you know of any PCB 
storage sites in residential areas in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I couldn’t indicate to you whether they’re in 
residential areas or not. I’m not that familiar with the sites. We 
will provide you with the information of where the sites are, and 
then I guess you’d have to know the city well enough to know 
whether or not they are in a residential area. 
 
Sometimes, you may classify a site in downtown Saskatoon as 
being residential. Maybe it’s commercial,  
  



 
July 2, 1987 

920 
 

you know, so it’s a fairly fine line. It’s residential because there 
are apartment buildings; it’s commercial because it’s city zoning 
that says its commercial. So I have some difficulty with that, but 
we will provide you the locations of those sites. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I take it from the 
Minister’s statement in response to the question from the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana that you’ll provide that information 
within the next seven days, let’s say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, we indicated to the hon. member that 
we’d provide it within the next week. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I was 
following the questioning back and forth here regarding the spills. 
Earlier on, in fact the first day of estimates, I had presented to you 
a list that I’d read into the record, but I’d also provided to you via 
way of letter dated June 26 of a number of things that we would 
like you to supply us for the estimates and during the estimate 
process. I want to see if I can get, now, a response from you to 
each of these items. 
 
The first item we asked for were that two copies of each of the 
environmental impact assessment statements that have been filed 
with the Department of Environment in the past 3 years, since 
July 1, 1984. Will you provide that information to our office and 
to myself within the next 5 days please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Let me advise the hon. member that the 
request you make would be a major undertaking for the 
department. All of the environmental impact statements are in the 
Legislative Library, straight across the hall from your office. I 
believe that they’re readily accessible to the hon. member, and I 
don’t feel that it would be proper to take the time of the staff of 
the department to provide all of those statements at considerable 
cost to the government in both material and time. They’re readily 
available to you in the Legislative Library, and I would ask the 
member to access them in that manner. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, just a . . . and I’m going to get back 
to this question. I guess, depending on your answer to this 
question. Other than the environmental impact assessment 
statement, there were one, two, three, four, five, six, seven other 
requests made in the letter. Will you provide myself, and our 
office, and this side of House with the information requested on 
the other seven requests, or are you going to have the same “try to 
find it yourself” attitude in regards to that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The department comments would be with 
the statement in the library. They’re provided there for the 
purposes of the public and certainly are easily accessible. And 
I’m not asking the hon. member to find it himself; if you ask the 
librarian, she’ll help you. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, there 
has been in recent months certain concern and publicity in this 
country and in North America concerning the problems with 
radon gas and other gases and substances seeping into homes and 
polluting the living environment and so forth. I wonder if you can  

report to us if there have been any such complaints from residents 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I am advised by the department staff that a 
major study was done dealing with radon gas back in 1975-76 
period. That information was made available, and a number of 
ads were put out to the public. Individuals would not be able to 
really recognise that they had radon gas unless they had very 
technical equipment to measure it. 
 
If we had request, we would go out and check, but we don’t get 
regular calls or anything of that nature saying that we have a 
problem. There really is not a significant problem in most homes. 
And if you feel that you have a problem, then ventilate your 
basement or whatever with a fan or two and you likely would 
clear it anyway. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I have received one very specific 
inquiry about what appears to be a rather severe problem with 
some kind of polluting substance which seems to be unidentified 
in a particular home in the community of Willow Bunch, where a 
rather elderly lady is having great difficulty in getting help in 
determining what the problem is. And I wonder, just as a matter 
of information, if her circumstance were to be described in detail 
to you and your officials, if you would be in a position to take 
action to answer her questions and relieve her anxiety, because at 
the moment, for health reasons, because of this pollutant, her 
home is virtually uninhabitable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would ask the hon. member if he has made 
the department aware of that concern. If you haven’t, then I 
suppose we couldn’t correct it. But if you would like to provide 
us with an address and phone number, or whatever, and the name, 
we would be pleased to address the problem 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 


