













































October 13, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 13, 1987 

 

3291 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I would beg leave 

of the House to introduce some guests that we have here this 

evening. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you. I’d like to introduce 29 girls from 

ages 9 to 12 with St. Mary’s Guide Company No. 1 from 

Athabasca School, Mr. Chairman. I think it’s important to note 

that the St. Mary’s Guide Company No. 1 was the first guide 

company established in Regina. The leaders are Eileen Schuster 

and Sheila Wayne, and chaperons Marlene and Joey Baker are 

here as well. I’d like to ask the other members of the House to 

join me in the customary welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Chairman, this evening in this Committee of Finance, the 

review of the PC government’s medicare budget and medicare 

policies, I would like to turn for a moment to the PC attack on 

the prescription drug plan. That PC attack on the drug plan, Mr. 

Chairman, probably symbolizes better than any other single 

thing this government’s medicare policy and their attack on 

medicare. 

 

While we are examining the prescription drug plan estimates 

here in the legislature this evening, Mr. Chairman, the people of 

Saskatchewan will be listening and listening carefully, and 

watching very carefully. They will be watching and listening as 

the PC Minister of Health tries to do the impossible — tries to 

defend and justify his attack on the drug plan and his attacks on 

medicare. And the people of Saskatchewan will be very 

interested to know, Mr. Chairperson, that when the PC 

government introduced their legislation to change and attack the 

drug plan, when they finally gave up their nerve to debate that 

Bill, not one single PC member of the legislature had the 

courage to speak out, with the exception of the Minister of 

Education only. And he’s waving over there. I’d like him to get 

into the drug plan, the Bill, some time in the next couple of 

days. 

 

I believe the constituents of those PC members, especially those 

PC back-benchers, will be very interested to know that their 

member of the legislature supports the attack on the drug plan 

and supports the PC attack on medicare. 

 

Mr. Chairperson, the people who I talked to, or who have 

written to me and expressed their feelings of anger and 

frustration at the PC government, I think that their predominant 

feeling is one of betrayal. They feel betrayed by those members 

over there. They feel betrayed because  

of the destruction of the prescription drug plan, Mr. 

Chairperson. 

 

During last fall’s election campaign, did the Premier or did the 

Minister of Health promise to attack the prescription drug plan? 

Did they tell the people the truth? Elect a PC government and a 

PC government will attack medicare. Did they do that? No, they 

did not. No, they did not, Mr. Chairperson, and it’s no wonder 

that the people of Saskatchewan feel deceived and feel 

betrayed. 

 

Let’s consider, Mr. Chairman, the way the government imposed 

this sudden drastic change in the drug plan. Did they consult 

openly with the medical profession? No. Did they consult 

openly and publicly with the broad range of the health care 

workers? No, they did not. And did the PC government consult 

with the people of Saskatchewan about destroying the 

prescription drug plan? The answer is no. It’s no wonder, Mr. 

Chairperson, that Saskatchewan people feel betrayed, and feel 

betrayed by this government. 

 

Moreover, when we realize that this PC attack on the 

prescription drug plan is part of the larger PC attack on 

medicare generally, it’s no wonder, Mr. Chairperson, that 

Saskatchewan people feel betrayed. For it was the people of 

Saskatchewan who conceived and established medicare in our 

province. It was the people of Saskatchewan who fought and 

won those battles. Those battles were their battles; those 

victories were their victories; and today they are determined not 

to allow this government to destroy medicare. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairperson, I want to stress one final point, and this 

point is critical. The PC government claims it wants to reduce 

costs, but let us be perfectly clear about this. There’s not one 

person, not one family in Saskatchewan, who will have reduced 

prescription drug costs as a result of these PC cuts. 

Saskatchewan people will pay more, and not less; and those 

who pay more will be the elderly, the sick, the disabled, and 

those least able to pay. In short, Mr. Chairperson, the PC 

changes to the prescription drug plan are nothing short of 

attacks on the sick, a PC attack on medicare, a PC betrayal of 

medicare in our province. 

 

As a result of that, Mr. Minister, I’d like you to tell the people 

of this province why you decided to change the prescription 

drug plan and put in a deterrent on sick people and the elderly 

in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member of the 

opposition has raised the points that we’ve heard before, and we 

heard from her and from some of her colleagues earlier in 

another debate here as it relates to the changes to the drug plan. 

The only thing I can add — or maybe a better word would be 

reiterate — some of the points that have been made by myself 

and by other members of our caucus in the last number of 

months. 

 

I’m going to have to put this into the context within which we 

must operate, whether all of us want to admit that or agree with 

it or not, and it is the following. In the first year of the . . . In the 

’76-77 year, the drug plan cost taxpayers of Saskatchewan $16 

million. Last year, our last full year,  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3292 

 

it cost $83 million. Had we not changed the drug plan in the 

way it’s administered, this year the cost would have been in the 

order of 95 million. And, you know, that just projects onward 

and upward and so on up into perpetuity had someone not had 

the courage to look at it and say, look, this must stop. And at the 

same time, a couple of things have to happen here. People must 

know, and it’s very important that they know, the costs that are 

associated with the drugs. So that’s one . . . So there’s an 

element of responsibility for understanding the costs, knowing 

what the costs are. 

 

And the second important thing which we did address and 

which we continue to address is that we must have coverage for 

those people who are least able to pay and so on, and that is 

those on welfare, those people who live in nursing homes, and 

so on. So we have that coverage. That was well looked into. 

 

And the other point on this . . . It’s extremely important to look 

at. Once we made the decision that we must go in and look at 

this supplementary plan which is the prescription drug plan, and 

look at it in terms of what is the case in this country of ours, in 

Canada, and all of the other jurisdictions, we said, here is a 

jurisdiction just to the east of us, our neighbour in Manitoba, 

who has a plan in place which has worked well for a number of 

years. And we said, that is the plan that we will develop our 

plan around. And in fact we did just that. And we made several 

changes, small changes, rather small changes, but frankly for 

better coverage than what is provided in the next door province 

of Manitoba. And we changed the deductible for single seniors, 

for example, to 50 rather than $75 — various aspects of that 

plan which has been in place and which has worked well there 

for a good long time. 

 

So you know, I hear what the member says, and I understand 

the, you know, sort of the political rhetoric surrounding it and 

so on. And I understand how that works, and I know what this 

forum is about. But I will say that the decision that we took to 

change the drug plan was a responsible decision; it was the right 

decision to take. And we believe now that it’s been in place for 

several months, and as people have come to a wider 

understanding of the system — and they have — that the level 

of concern with the system, although I hear all of these things 

coming from members of the opposition benches . . . And that’s 

not to say that I don’t understand that there are some people 

who are concerned about it. There are some people who don’t 

believe there should have been any changes because they don’t 

like to pay when they didn’t have to pay before. That will 

always be the case. 

 

But in terms of having the ability to pay, in terms of having 

coverage for those most in need, in terms of introducing an 

element of responsibility, in terms of understanding how much 

this costs, what it means, there is no question in my mind now, 

after it’s been in process, in place for some months, that it was 

the right decision at the time. It remains the right decision, and 

it was a responsible decision to take. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well the Minister of Health talks about 

responsibility. And I want him to answer us this. Is there 

anybody in this province, Mr. Minister, who is going  

without prescription drugs because they cannot afford the 

up-front costs of those drugs? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What the question is . . . You know, the 

member will say . . . And I’m reminded by my officials that 

even under the former system, I mean, there may be people in 

our province, there may be people in any jurisdiction who will 

say, no, I’m not taking this prescription for whatever reason, 

whether that reason is because it costs 3.95 or that reason is 

because they just don’t take it, or whatever. 

 

But in terms of the definitive question that you asked, if I 

believe that there are people who are not taking their drugs 

because of this plan and the new plan and the way it’s 

constituted, I don’t believe that’s the case. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you are not operating in 

the real world, because that is the case. There are people going 

to their doctor, getting a prescription, going to the pharmacist, 

finding out how much it costs, and they’re leaving, and they are 

not going back. We have had lots of phone calls from 

individuals in this province telling us that they cannot afford the 

up-front cost of those drugs, particularly when drugs are 60, 70, 

or $80 a prescription. 

 

(1915) 

 

So I’d just like to ask you again, Mr. Minister: have you not 

been advised by anybody, by way of letter or telephone call, 

that they cannot afford the cost of their prescription drugs as a 

result of your changes to our prescription drug plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s really hard to 

say what would the reason be. I believe that there may be some 

people who go into the pharmacy and say, I’m so opposed to 

these changes that have taken place, for whatever reason that 

they have, that they won’t buy the drugs that they have. 

 

But I would say to you once again and to the committee, Mr. 

Chairman, that the program that’s in place and the various 

aspects in it that make it, those who are unable to pay, and have 

an option there for them, the various options that are available 

to them. I would say that there is nobody who is going without 

their drugs because they are unable to pay for them. 

 

Now the member will say, oh, but so-and-so wrote me a letter 

and says, I will never pay this much for drugs and so on, and I 

won’t pay the $50 or whatever up front, even though 80 per 

cent of that will be reimbursed. I don’t dispute for a minute that 

there will be people who will say, because there’s a change and 

because I disagree with that change, that I will never buy those 

drugs. There may be people who will say that. 

 

But I will say to the member, as I’ve said to the member before 

in this House, the drug plan as it’s now constituted, which is a 

similar plan to what is in place in Manitoba . . . And you will go 

a long way in the province of Manitoba, in fact, you can’t find 

people in the province of Manitoba who will say, oh, we can’t 

afford to pay for the prescriptions that we have, whether it be in 

Brandon or in  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3293 

 

Glenboro or in Gretna or Souris or Melita or where it is. 

 

You find the community and you go and find people in there 

who say the drug plan there, the way it’s constituted, is so 

onerous for us we cannot afford to buy the prescriptions that are 

given to us by our physicians. That is not the case. 

 

Now if there are cases that you choose to point at in this 

province, I submit to you there are a good number of people 

who say, I don’t like those changes; I don’t want any changes; I 

don’t agree with them. And you can say to them, yes, but do 

you realize how much this is costing your neighbours and 

yourself in your tax dollars and so on? They say, don’t care; 

don’t want any change. Well the responsible decision to make, 

difficult as it may be, was the decision which we took. It is 

responsible for the here and now and for the future. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, all I can say in response 

to you is that you’re not living in the real world, and obviously 

you haven’t been in Meadow Lake very often in the last several 

years, because there are people in every one of our 

constituencies that are not on social assistance. They have very, 

very low-paying jobs — take-home pay of $800 or $900 a 

month and even less, Mr. Minister. And when they have to go 

and get a prescription, and it costs 40 or 50 or $60, they don’t 

have the money. 

 

So they’re not living on your $60,000 a year cabinet salary, or 

they’re not living on my MLA’s salary. They have families. 

They have commitments in terms of putting groceries on the 

table, and they cannot afford the cost of prescription drugs. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, when I reviewed the estimates for last year 

and this year, it appears as though the original estimates for the 

prescription drug plan were about $56.3 million. When you add 

in the supplementary estimates, there’s another 6.4 million, for 

a total of $82.7 million. Can you confirm that that is the amount 

that your government spent on the prescription drug plan in the 

year ’86-87? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod; Okay. Referring to page 49 of the 

Estimates. The estimate last year in the blue book was for 

76,282,000, and there was a special warrant for 6,400,000, total 

of 82,682,000 — very close to the 83 million that I’ve been 

telling you. That’s right. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So then, Mr. Minister, you agree with my 

figure. Then you will also agree that the total budgetary 

estimate for this year is 56.9 million. That’s the figure that you 

put before the legislature some three years ago. 

 

Now would the minister agree that the difference between his 

estimated expenditure for last year and his estimated 

expenditure for this year is the difference between 82.7 million 

and 56.9 million, or about 25.8 million? Would you agree with 

that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The estimated 1987-88 figure which 

you quoted as fifty-six nine fifty-three, which is the number that 

appears there, that number is nine-twelfths of what would be an 

annualized number given that the  

new drug plan came into effect on July 1 after three months off, 

so the difference would be whatever the number, or similar 

number to what you quoted. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Then, Mr. Minister, then you agree with me 

that your changes to the drug plan are going to shift to the 

people of this province at least an additional $26 million in 

additional costs for prescription medication. Would you agree 

with that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, you know, the member 

makes a point that whatever the savings are, and I believe if I 

read it right, that whatever the savings are, you say, is a direct 

transfer in total amount to the folks who are buying the drugs 

rather than from the government coffers or the Consolidated 

Fund. 

 

In my earlier remarks I had mentioned things like a more 

responsible attitude toward the prescription drugs and so on. 

That’s not just among the consumers, that more more 

responsible attitude, without question. And there’s evidence of 

that now among physicians, more responsible attitude — 

pharmacists. There’s several things that have happened here. 

 

For example, there is evidence already that there are what we’ll 

call more responsible quantities being prescribed to people. In 

other words physicians are saying, rather than saying, well 

here’s a prescription, take one of these three times a day for 30 

days; they’re now saying for two weeks or whatever, and the 

same result is there. Those are the kinds of things that are taking 

place, which have taken place in many other provinces for a 

long time, and in other jurisdictions all across the country and 

across North America. 

 

There is evidence already that there is less, or fewer of the 

prescriptions are designated no substitution than what was the 

case when the old drug plan was in place, which is significant 

saving in terms of the cost to whomever pays for those drugs 

over the counter. 

 

So there are some other factors at work here, and it’s important 

that they are. But I don’t deny, you know, as a general 

principle, I don’t deny the fact that there will be some of the 

responsibility, a significant amount of the responsibility will 

now go to the consumer who will pay a certain amount of their 

own drug costs up to an amount that is not too onerous, and 

then they get beyond their deductible and then their 80 per cent 

deductions, and so on. But there are some significant factors at 

work here. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, once again you talk 

about responsibility. And all I’m simply pointing out to you is 

that you are shifting the burden and shifting the cost to those 

people who are sick, people who are elderly and disabled, and 

you’re shifting the cost to a tune of about $26 million in this 

year alone. That’s only for a nine-month period. If you take into 

consideration a projection for next year based on the $26 

million and you take into consideration that amount for a 

12-month period, you’re looking at a saving of $34 million but 

a shift on to the consumer — the person who is ill, the elderly 

person, the disabled person — of some $34 million per year, 

Mr. Minister. 

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3294 

 

I guess, Mr. Minister, I’d like to know this. At a time in 

Saskatchewan when we are losing more jobs than ever before; 

when the farm crisis is worse that it’s ever been in many, many 

years; when Saskatchewan has the highest inflation rate in the 

country; when we have the slowest economic growth rate in the 

country; when there is a lot of financial stress on families in this 

province, I’d like to know why you think it’s fair to impose an 

additional $34 million on to Saskatchewan people in terms of 

prescription drugs. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, one could make 

the argument that, you know, the member has made about the 

reversal in terms of commodity prices and so on. I mean, if you 

listen to the argument of the hon. member from Nutana very 

carefully, what the argument suggests is that the government 

has money. But where does the money come from? I ask the 

question. I mean, where does she think the government’s money 

comes from? The money that we’re talking about in this 

estimate book, where does it come from? Is there some kind of 

a bush out there with red leaves on it that grows money? I don’t 

think so. 

 

(1930) 

 

The money that the government spends, the money that the 

government spends whether it be in this department or in 

whatever other department, it is that blue book and comes from 

the people in some form — a form of taxation. But one of the 

things it does . . . and I go back to my other comments. 

 

I want to quote the hon. member a couple of things. This is 

from the Prince Albert Daily Herald of Thursday, September 3, 

‘87. The quote is under a headline which says, “Drug plan 

generally working well,” from the pharmacists in Prince Albert. 

And it reads this way: 

 

Prince Albert pharmacists say the revised Saskatchewan 

drug plan that went into effect on July 1 is working much 

better than many people thought it would. 

 

And then it goes on for a whole series of things. One of the 

things from a pharmacist at South Hill Pharmacy that she has 

noticed that: 

 

People are more conscious of what they are buying 

because they pay the cost and not the government. People 

are buying a tube of cream now instead of a tub, said 

Sthamann, the pharmacist in question. She said, in the past 

people would get larger quantities when they were 

prescribing prescribed drugs, adding that it led to a lot of 

waste. People couldn’t possibly use all they were buying, 

she said (and it goes on and on). 

 

So I mean, there are a series of these in the various papers 

across the province. And we can get into those in a while, if you 

like, but all I’m saying to the member is that — what I have 

said before. 

 

This decision, whether members on the opposite benches and 

some of their supporters across the province believe  

it or not, this decision was a responsible decision to take. It’s 

not an easy decision to take. It takes courage to make decisions 

like this where there’s a change takes place where people will 

feel it and will be opposed to it in whatever way. But this 

decision was responsible for the future of our plans. 

 

Now the fact is if we had continued on that kind of track that I 

outlined to you earlier, from $16 million just less than ten years 

ago or about ten years ago, from $16 million to 95 this year and 

up to 1990 where $125 million and tracking on that kind of a 

curve on a full-time basis, there is no possible way that this 

jurisdiction of a million people here in the prairie basin could 

afford to pay for it at that kind of a track. No way. 

 

And it’s very interesting to note that quotes from the hon. 

member herself when asked the outright question by the media 

in Regina: if you were in power, would you return the drug plan 

to its original form or to the form that it was in prior to July 1? 

And your answer was very clearly, oh, I don’t say that we’d put 

it back to the form that it was in. That’s the answer that you 

gave, and that’s exactly what it is. And I would like to hear very 

clearly, I would like to hear very clearly what the hon. member 

will say, because it’s important that that be on the record. 

 

I say this is a responsible choice. This is patterned after an 

excellent drug plan which is in place in the province of 

Manitoba. And I would say to the member, this is a responsible 

decision, the right decision to take for the time, and the right 

decision to take for the future of this province. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, once again, Mr. Minister, you talk 

about responsibility. All I want to say to you is this, that you 

had choices. You chose to cut the prescription drug plan. But 

you choose to give money to Peter Pocklington You choose to 

spend $20 million a year on government advertising, propping 

up your sagging popularity. You choose to give Paul 

Schoenhals a hundred grand a year. You choose to give George 

Hill $200,000 a year. You choose to give Sid Dutchak money, 

and Tim Embury, and Gordon Dirks, and how many other 

hacks? You’ve got over have a million dollars worth of aides 

sitting behind you, Mr. Minister, advising you, and I think it’s 

time you started taking some of their advice — some of their 

advice, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now I just want to get back to this. You talk about $100 million 

by the year 1990 or whatever it is. In this year you’re saving 

$26 million. Next year, using your conservative Conservative 

figures, you’re going to be saving some $34 million. Mr. 

Minister, do you agree that the extra $34 million will not be 

spread evenly over the population, Mr. Minister? Who will pay 

the $34 million, Mr. Minister? Will it be the sick or will it be 

the healthy? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, as I said, we were acting 

responsibly in changing this decision. When several things 

begin to take place — and I outlined them just briefly — when 

there are more appropriate quantities being prescribed, that’s 

responsible. And that’s the right thing to do when that happens, 

and that is already a result of it. 

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3295 

 

When there is a greater use of the lower cost options, that’s 

fostering responsibility, and there is evidence that that’s already 

happening in this province. When there’s more consultation 

between consumer or patient and physician about the cost and 

the needs and the effects of these drugs, that’s positive. That’s 

positive when people, for whatever their motivation is, when 

they ask their physician, do I need this many when I do take this 

drug? When I do take this drug, do I need 50 pills? Could I go 

with 30 pills, whatever? Is there a lower cost alternative? 

 

When they ask their physicians those kinds of things, and when 

they ask the same question to their pharmacist about lower cost 

alternatives, those are positive developments just on the basis of 

responsibility and the responsible use of prescription drugs. 

Those are positive, responsible decisions that are being taken by 

people in terms of discussing with their physicians and with 

their pharmacists in a professional way. 

 

Now the hon. member says, who is paying? Under this new 

plan, even though there have been some changes, 80 per cent of 

the cost, beyond a deductible which is not onerous on an annual 

basis, the amount that the people or that the taxpayers are 

paying is 80 per cent beyond that deductible. Eighty per cent is 

still paid by the taxpayer in this fund — in this Consolidated 

Fund that you think grows on a tree out behind the building 

here, and which I know comes from the taxpayers of this 

province of ours. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I know that the money 

doesn’t grow on a tree out behind the legislature. Your rationale 

may grow on a tree out behind the legislature, but I know that 

money doesn’t grow on a tree outside of the legislature. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you didn’t answer the question. You’re 

projecting a saving of some $26 million this year with your 

changes to the drug plan. I project, based on your conservative 

figures, a saving to the drug plan of some $34 million dollars. 

Now that $34 million is going to come from somewhere, Mr. 

Minister, and it is going to come from the consumer, the people 

who purchase prescription drugs, if they have the money to 

purchase them. And I simply ask you this: who’s going to pay 

this additional $34 million? Is it going to be the government? Is 

it going to be that tree out behind the legislature? Or is it going 

to be the sick and the elderly, Mr. Minister? Who’s going to pay 

the additional $34 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member will say 20, 

34, 26 — I don’t choose, you know, I don’t think it’s reasonable 

that we get into a discussion about how much it is. But 

regardless of which number we agree on — well let’s say we 

agree on 34 or 26 — regardless of which number it is that is 

saved in terms of in this plan, in these numbers which are in this 

blue book that we both look at here in this forum, the fact is, 

and because of some of the reasons that I outlined earlier, the 

fact is that all of the . . . there will be significant savings based 

on the more responsible use and the more responsible 

prescribing, the more responsible use by consumers and so on. 

There will be some of that. I don’t know and nobody can 

project that at this stage, no one can, but there will be some of 

that. 

 

For example, in Manitoba prior to this year, I believe the  

number was about 1 per cent, no subs, or 2 per cent, something 

like that. Very low in any case — very low where ours was up 

there somewhere in the neighbourhood of 12 per cent, no sub. 

Why was that? 

 

When you look at the only difference between our two 

jurisdictions in terms of demographics, in terms of so many 

things, it was because in this province it was, who had the 

responsibility? I mean, write out the prescription. I mean, what 

does it matter? And for the consumer, why should the consumer 

ask, how much is this worth? They wouldn’t say how much is it 

worth because the government’s paying. 

 

Well the fact is the people pay when the government pays, and 

the people will recognize that in any case, so it’s a responsible 

decision. So what I say to the member is the consumers of this 

province who use prescription drugs will pay more, and there’s 

no question about that. They will pay more up to a level which 

is a deductible amount which are set. And you know the 

amounts, 125 for a family, 75 for a senior family, $50 for an 

individual senior — those deductibles which are not onerous 

levels, and beyond that, the taxpayers of this province will pay 

80 per cent of the cost of drugs. 

 

Still, Mr. Chairman, even with these changes that the members 

so much oppose, even with these changes, this drug plan is the 

most generous in this country. And Canada as a nation has the 

best, you know, consumer drug plans and so on, there are 

anywhere in the world. And this one in Saskatchewan is the 

most generous in the country. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, your changes will hit 

only those people who require prescription drugs. That $34 

million next year will come out of the pocket of those people 

who require prescription drugs. It will not come out of the 

pockets of all of us. And, Mr. Minister, that is a tax on the sick. 

It’s a Progressive Conservative tax on the sick. It’s unfair, it’s a 

bad policy, and it should be changed. 

 

Now I note, Mr. Minister, that you haven’t yet tabled your 

1986-87 annual report for the prescription drug plan, and I 

understand that legally it should have been tabled by now. We 

note that agencies like the Police Commission, the Department 

of Economic Development and Trade, have tabled their annual 

reports, but you haven’t yet tabled yours. 

 

I therefore have to go on the basis of the 1985-86 annual report. 

Mr. Minister, can you confirm in that year there were only 147 

families in this province that had actual drug costs of more than 

$500? And can you confirm that with your new PC prescription 

drug plan that you’ve put in place for this year, that some 

50,851 families in this province will have up-front drug cots of 

more than $500 per year, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I will say that the 

member refers to table 2 in the ’85-86 annual report of the 

Health prescription drug plan. Under the old plan that this refers 

to, there were 147 families who paid more than $500, which 

would be the accumulation of 3.95. Accumulative 3.95 up to 

$500 or more. So I confirm that  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3296 

 

number. I don’t get your other number. Will you just confirm 

your other number for a moment? 

 

(1945) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Had your drug plan been in place that year, 

there would have been over 50,000 families — 50,851 families, 

to be exact, that would have had up-front drug costs of more 

than $500. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s difficult to 

predict the number of families. I don’t know where the member 

gets the number, but I want to point this out. There will be 

many families in Saskatchewan, obviously, who will now have 

up-front costs of more than $500 or around the $500. There will 

be many families have . . . but that’s before we take into 

consideration any deductibles, which are in fact 80 per cent of 

everything beyond $125. 

 

So without taking that into account any deductibles, yes, 

deductibles or any up-front costs, sure, there could be a number 

of families. But I don’t know where the member gets the 

number that she’s referring to, and I don’t confirm any number. 

It is very hard to make a prediction of that nature prior to the 

year end in this plan. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, also in that year there 

were more than 50,000 families who paid actual costs of more 

than $100, and had your prescription drug plan been in place 

that year, those families would have paid an additional 46 per 

cent more for their medical prescriptions, and that’s even after 

your rebate. Can you confirm that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member looks at it in 

a very simplistic way. I can see what you’ve done. You’ve 

drawn a line at approximately the 125 level which is where the 

deductible for families . . . and you’ve added all of the numbers 

of families there. But I would say to you that it’s a very 

simplistic way to look at it because all of those who go beyond 

the 150 to 200, 200 to 300, all of those will receive refunds of 

80 per cent for everything beyond $125, which you didn’t take 

into account when you quoted that large number. 

 

So in any case, sure, I hear what you’re saying. But I would say 

to you that, please, in whatever you’re doing in discussing this, 

be sure to take into account that there is a rebate of 80 per cent. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I did talk about up-front 

costs. That’s money that people have to come up with to pay for 

those prescription drugs — money that many, many people in 

this province don’t have because of some of your government’s 

economic policies. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just want to repeat that had your prescription 

drug plan been in place in this year — the last year that we have 

any kind of data from your prescription drug, that’s the year 

1985-86 — 50,851 families would have had up-front drug costs 

of over $500 per year, Mr. Minister. In the same year there 

would have been more than 50,000 families who would have 

paid actual costs of more than $100 a year had your new drug 

plan been in place. That’s a 46 per cent increase for their 

medical prescriptions. That’s even after your rebate. That’s 46 

per  

cent higher, Mr. Minister. It’ll be 46 per cent higher this year 

than last year and I’m not taking into consideration inflation in 

the last two years. I’m being very conservative in my numbers. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, we have a situation — and I think that this 

is fair to say — that in the year 1985-86, had your prescription 

drug plan been in place, 50,851 families in this province would 

have paid an actual average of $165 per year and that would 

have been paid after the rebate, Mr. Minister. That’s an average 

cost of $241 under the new plan had it been in effect. That’s a 

46 per cent increase. 

 

That’s a big increase, Mr. Minister, and I want you to justify to 

this legislature, for those families who are paying and will be 

paying this year a minimum of a 46 per cent increase, why 

would you want to change the drug plan and put that kind of 

hardship on people? What did they do to deserve that kind of 

scorn on behalf of your government? Why would you want to 

hurt them? 

 

You talk about senior citizens running around this province 

writing out prescriptions to themselves. I want you to know that 

they don’t; doctors write prescriptions. If you and your 

government had a problem with the no substitution, and I 

recognize it was a problem, Mr. Minister, you negotiate with 

them, yearly fee increases through the medical care insurance 

commission. Why wouldn’t you have taken that issue to the 

bargaining table? Why wouldn’t you have done that instead of 

throwing the baby out with the bath water? 

 

If there was a problem with doctors writing no substitution so 

pharmacists could not fill those prescriptions with generic 

drugs, why wouldn’t you have talked to doctors about that? 

Why would you want to hurt older people, because you had a 

problem with the doctors? Why not take that kind of issue to the 

bargaining table? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of things. I 

mean, the member can say as many times as she likes, you 

know, that we have done this because we want to punish people 

or because it’s, you know, all of the kind of rhetoric that we 

hear from them for a long period of time now. 

 

The fact is, as I have said before, I will not accept that this is a 

bad plan. Support has been expressed for this plan when it was 

in Manitoba, as it was constituted then, and as still is. Support’s 

been expressed by many individuals in groups — pharmacists, 

professionals all across the medical profession, pharmacists. 

Studies have shown, and several of them in all provinces have 

shown the need to monitor the consequences of drug therapy. 

That’s extremely important that we do that. People need to 

know what the cost of their drugs are. 

 

One study in fact concluded that we are becoming, Canada, a 

nation of drug takers. Frankly this has to stop, when drugs are 

used to the extent that they have been. And this province did not 

have a good record in that area. And it leads one to wonder, are 

cheap drugs — you know, at free or 3.95 or whatever — are 

cheap drugs really a  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3297 

 

benefit to people or to individuals? Are they really? That’s a 

very significant question to ask. And all of you who are so 

strident in your opposition to what’s been done should ask 

yourself that question. Are those cheap prescription drugs really 

a benefit to people and to individuals? 

 

So I’ll just say to you, I’ll just say to the member and to you, 

Mr. Chairman, to all the members on the committee, we took 

the decision because we believe it to be a responsible one. We 

believe more than ever that it was a responsible decision to 

take, and it will augur well for this province, not only now but 

into the future. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’ve 

listened and watched our member from Saskatoon Nutana going 

after you, talking to you about your doomed prescription drug 

plan. I’ve heard you use the words that it’s the most generous 

plan. I’ve heard you talking about, no we’re not trying to punish 

people for using drugs. In one breath you say we’re not trying 

to punish people for using drugs, and then in the next sentence 

you say, but I wonder, I wonder if giving people drugs at a low 

cost of 3.95, a dispensing fee of 3.95, if that cheap drugs is 

really of benefit to people. 

 

I’ve heard these things said here tonight. I’m just appalled that 

you would even come forward with such an insane drug Bill. It 

is — there’s no other word for it — it’s insanity, Mr. Minister. 

It is unfair and it’s a tax on the poor and it’s a tax on the sick, 

and the people of Saskatchewan will let you know that just as 

soon as you give them an opportunity to do that. 

 

I want, Mr. Minister, to deal with one specific case here tonight 

that you’ve heard me talk. Members in the legislature have herd 

me raise this issue in the past, but I want to get down one on 

one. We’ve got you in Health estimates. I want to outline the 

case for you. I have written you a letter regarding this lady. I 

wrote the letter to you first, July 15, 1987. I’m not going to use 

her name publicly because if you had the list of health problems 

that this lady has you wouldn’t want your name broadcast all 

over the world either. 

 

This constituent of mine, Mr. Minister, has a total income from 

pension, of $495 per month — $495 per month from which she 

pays her rent, her heat, her power, her telephone. She pays for 

her water bill, she pays for her food — when she can afford it 

— and she pays for her drugs. And now it’s when she can 

afford the drugs. I want to outline to you, Mr. Minister, so that 

you understand the desperate situation that this woman is in. I 

want you to be crystal clear just how desperate it is. 

 

I’m going to list for you, the drugs that this woman takes and 

you tell me or you tell her, better yet — I know she’s watching 

at home right now on the television because I just spoke to her 

less than half an hour ago. You tell her which of these drugs she 

should be eliminating or how she should possibly come to 

afford these drugs. 

 

She takes Sulcrate, 1 milligram, at a cost of $50 per month — 

I’m talking up-front cost. That’s an arthritis medication. She 

takes Clinoril, 20 milligrams, at a cost of $73 per month up 

front; that also is arthritis medication. She also takes Tylenol 3 

at a cost of $10 per month, that too  

primarily for arthritis. 

 

This woman takes Diabeta, 5 milligrams, at a cost of $20 per 

month. Additionally, she takes Capoten, 100 milligrams, which 

is a high blood pressure medication and it is costing $160 per 

month up front. Catarase, 0.1 milligrams, at a cost of $30 per 

month. Apo-Furosemide, 40 milligrams, at a cost of $6 per 

month up front. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is how is this lady . . . Before 

I ask the question, I do want to say, you have already referred 

her to your drug review panel. The result of that, Mr. Minister, 

is that she only has to pay the 20 per cent up front which totals 

$72 per month — $72 per month out of a total income of $495. 

And I’m not saying $495 with her rent looked after or with her 

food looked after. She has to pay all of the expenses out of the 

$495 a month. 

 

It is purely and simply impossible. The hard choices that she is 

facing is, what medications can I cut back and how much food 

can I exist without? Either choice, Mr. Minister, is going to 

drive her into the hospital much quicker than if she could afford 

to eat well, eat good, balanced food, have a balanced diet, and if 

she could take the prescription drugs as prescribed by her 

doctor. 

 

I want to know from you specifically what this woman, this 

constituent of mine, should do. How can she possibly afford to 

live? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I would just like to clarify a couple of 

things because you had said that you had sent it to us and I 

don’t want to . . . we can deal with the individual case in 

another place, if you like. But you say that this is a single senior 

and her income is $495 per month all in? Everything that she 

has is $495 a month. If I could just clarify that. 

 

Mr. Trew: — She is a single pensioner in that her husband is in 

a nursing home. His pension income looks after his well-being 

and she looks after hers. For all . . . maybe not for legal 

purposes, I don’t know, they’re certainly married, but she is 

living . . . or he is living in a nursing home and she is 

maintaining an independent residence. So for all practical 

purposes, yes, she is single. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The reason I wanted a clarification on 

the number is because the information we have in a case like 

this is that her income would be in the order of $700 a month, 

or should be. If it’s not, then that’s the point that we should be 

looking at. In terms of maximum of OAS (old age security), 

GIS (guaranteed income supplement), and Saskatchewan 

income plan, it would be in the order of $700 a month. And that 

should be what her pension is. If it isn’t, I would really like to 

talk to you about that afterwards about why it isn’t — why it’s 

at 495. 

 

And if she’s not in subsidized housing, well then of course 

she’s eligible for the $500 of the heritage grant, which is about 

$41 a month and so on, you know. So she’s in a . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Okay. The member indicates that the individual 

in question is in subsidized housing, so she wouldn’t be eligible 

for that. But it’s in the area of  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3298 

 

$700 a month, and I’ll undertake to get exact numbers for this 

person. And you as her MLA and I as the Minister of Health 

should be talking to the Social Services minister, whatever, and 

make sure that she is getting the pension benefits to which she’s 

entitled. 

 

What we have done in the Department of Health in this case, I 

believe, and you have indicated that, is that we have said to her, 

you can pay the 20 per cent up front. You indicate an amount in 

that, and I don’t know it, and my folks can look at the various 

drugs and if there are lower cost alternatives and that kind of 

thing. But in any case, she’ll pay the 20 per cent up front, will 

not have the up-front costs to be concerned about. But certainly 

one of the things that we should be clarifying here for this 

individual, now that you’ve raised it in this way, what her 

pension income is and what she’s eligible for, because if there’s 

a discrepancy she certainly should get what she’s eligible for. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Her income is $495. I’m hearing what you’re 

saying about, we should be talking to the Minister from Social 

Services. I’m not sure it would do a great deal of good. Frankly, 

I have no confidence in him nor the way he runs his department. 

 

This lady phoned Social Services, Mr. Minister, this lady 

phoned Social Services and was told that what she should do is 

go to the drug store and ask them for credit. That was the sum 

total of the help that the Department of Social Services was to 

this constituent of mine. And, you know, forgive me if I don’t 

have a whole lot of faith in what that particular department is 

doing. It seems to be taking people that are having a tough time 

making it and trying to just beat the heck out of them. 

 

At one time this constituent had an income of $416 per month 

and had a Y card from Social Services. So the drugs were 

provided at no charge at that time. Then she got a raise in the 

disability pension and that bounced it up to $495 and they took 

the Y card away. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is this a senior citizen? 

 

Mr. Trew: — This is a pensioner. I believe she’s on a disability 

pension. The member asks if this is a senior citizen. It’s a . . . I 

don’t believe she’s 65. She’s on the short side of 65 years of 

age, but has a disability income pension. Does that change your 

response of a minute or two ago? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The numbers that I have here as it were, 

or that I outlined to you, are related to what a single senior 

would be eligible for whose spouse is in a nursing home in level 

3 or 4. 

 

It’s changed about three or four years ago. I was informed by 

our people that it’s been changed, through co-operation with the 

federal government, that if one spouse is in the nursing home 

and the other spouse is not, each of them can be treated — for 

the purposes of the OAS (old age security), GIS (guaranteed 

income supplement), and so on, the Saskatchewan income plan 

— as singles. And so they get the maximum benefit. Either of 

them can . . . Each of them would be treated as that.  

Nursing home administrators have that sort of information in all 

of them. 

 

But in any case . . . Frankly the best way that we can . . . 

because there’s a lack of clarification here, whether this person 

is . . . you know, what the circumstances are — I’m not sure if 

this is the right forum. I certainly will . . . While I disagree with 

you in terms of your confidence in the Department of Social 

Services and so on, and I will continue to disagree with you, I 

will say this to you because it is these estimates that are up now 

and those estimates are passed, and you raised the issue. I will 

undertake to deal with you on what is the potential for the 

pension for this individual regardless of what her circumstances 

are — is, I mean — and we’ll go from there, you know, perhaps 

tomorrow when we’re not sitting, or whatever. If that’s 

acceptable to the member, I’d thank him for that. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Just a couple of questions. One, on a 

subject that I think is probably not one that divides us 

politically, and that is the question of . . . It’s the question of 

AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome), Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, a number of doctors have suggested that 

provincial legislation should be changed to require carriers of 

the disease to disclose contacts, as is now done with the older 

forms of venereal disease, syphilis and gonorrhea, although I 

gather that legislation . . . Given the effectiveness of penicillin, I 

gather the legislation is not used very much. 

 

Mr. Minister, you were quoted as saying that’s being 

considered. You made the comments some months ago. Have 

you reached any decision with respect to such legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes. Just to confirm for the member 

from Regina Centre. I did make that comment. We have come 

to a decision, and the amendment is coming forward in the 

House. And that’s our inclination, to amend the legislation so 

that AIDS is a reportable disease as are other 

sexually-transmitted diseases. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — And accordingly, I gather that contacts will 

have to be reported. Is that what the minister is saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. What we’re contemplating is the 

amendment, as I’ve said, and while we don’t foresee a sort of 

mass contact tracing sort of thing going on, although this 

legislation would give the mandate to the medical profession 

and so on, to do that as they have with other 

sexually-transmitted diseases. But the most important thing in 

this in terms of the reportability, is the very important 

educational component and the counselling and so on which 

must take place with the person who is infected. Extremely 

important. And that’s one of the scary sort of aspects of this 

new disease. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well it’s certainly scary enough, Mr. 

Minister. I suppose the good news is, Mr. Minister — and you 

may have better statistics than I, and if you do I’d like to hear 

them — but I suppose the good news is that the disease is not at 

this point in time very prevalent in  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3299 

 

Saskatchewan, at least relative to many other parts of the world. 

 

The bad news is, of course, there’s no known way of dealing 

with it; once a person becomes a carrier or indeed has the 

disease, no known way of doing anything to assist them. That 

leaves, Mr. Minister, the only weapon we have in dealing with 

what some people say may be the worst killer since the Middle 

Ages. That leaves us with only education. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you feel the government’s doing 

enough with respect to education, and I wonder, Mr. Minister, if 

you wouldn’t agree that the government should be doing more. 

It’s a disease in which prevention is our only weapon. There’s 

nothing we can do once a person gets it. All we can do is 

educate them in how to avoid the disease. And the ways of 

doing that, of course, vary with one’s philosophy and life-style. 

But for virtually all peoples there are some steps that could be 

taken. 

 

(2015) 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you don’t feel the province should be 

doing more for education. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, just a couple of points to follow 

up on the member’s questions. 

 

First of all, there will be, and you will hear about it in the days 

to come, announcements about the direction that we will go 

with the information packages, and that’s what they will need to 

be — information and packages of knowledge, basically, for 

people. 

 

It’s been said, and I think it can be no more aptly said than to 

say the only vaccine against this deadly disease is knowledge 

itself. We will . . . We are working with the Department of 

Education. The lead agency is Health because it is without 

question more than anything else a health issue. So this 

department will lead. We’re working very closely with 

Education now for a package which will be into the regular 

school system. Also there will be a need for programs as it 

relates to the post-secondary system out there in terms of those 

young people, you know, and the various other means of 

reaching the population at large, electronic media, etc., etc. 

 

Just to get back to the numbers, in terms of the prevalence of 

this disease in our province, one of the things that we have so 

often — and many of our people will, I think, still believe this 

— is that we’re a rural jurisdiction and we’re here in the middle 

of the continent and we’re not San Francisco or Vancouver or 

Toronto. But there’s no question that we are a very mobile 

society now in the late 1980s, and there is a . . . It’s an issue that 

we must address, that we must address with a very, with a wide 

cross-section of our population, which would suggest that it 

must be far more than just directed at what we will call and 

have been called the at-risk groups. But we must address this in 

the widest sense in terms of our population, and we will. And 

just to give you a number of the last count, as of now, is that 

there have been 18 cases of AIDS in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — The minister would have no idea, I  

suppose, how many known carriers, there are. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The ratio that I could give you . . . And 

you know it’s a wide range and even the best “experts” 

anywhere, to use that term in quotes, would say that there are 

50 to 100 carriers for every clinical case. Now that’s a wide 

range, obviously, from 50 to 100, but that would be a guess at 

best. And I’d just, you know, leave that number with you, but 

there’s no question that there are carriers who have not, you 

know, come down — who are not now clinical cases but who 

will be clinical cases. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, while we wait for your 

departmental educational efforts, there are groups in 

Saskatchewan that are active in publicizing about AIDS and 

informing the public about it. One of these groups is AIDS 

Saskatoon, and my understanding is that they’ve approached 

your department for funding in their educational effort. And I’m 

wondering if you can comment as to whether they will be 

receiving funding from your department. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, they will, and I believe they know 

that. It’s in the amount of $7,000. And it’s in the area of . . . As 

I have said to your colleague, it’s really important in explaining 

this to the widest possible population that we address in several 

ways, one being through agencies like the one that you 

mentioned in Saskatoon and its counterpart here in Regina, 

where we deal primarily with what have been called the at-risk 

groups and where they inform as many people as possible. So 

that’s being done. and that amount of money that I just 

mentioned to you has gone out, I believe, to that group in a 

matter of the last few days; in the case of Regina it went out a 

matter of couple of weeks ago. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Am I to understand then, Mr. Minister, that it 

was just within the last handful of days perhaps that that 7,000 

would have been made available? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, that’s true. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I certainly want to commend you for that 

action. I talked with people over this weekend, with people 

from AIDS Saskatoon, and they had mentioned among other 

things the request they had from people at the University of 

Saskatchewan to provide literature during registration week on 

the university campus. I think the figure they quoted was 

needing some 15,000 pieces of literature. Obviously without a 

grant of the sort that you gave, they were unable to provide that 

kind of literature this fall. But I think that this certainly helps 

enable their efforts, and I think they’re appreciative of that 

funding. We hope that it can continue as they develop programs 

and reach targeted segments of the population through their 

efforts. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I hear what the member’s saying in 

terms of having information available to the young people in 

the various post-secondary institutions. That will be done, and it 

will be available to them — information, the best, most 

up-to-date knowledge about this killer disease. So it will be 

there. 

 

And I basically don’t disagree with what you’re saying,  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3300 

 

except to say that there will be ways to disseminate this 

information. Some of it will come from the groups that you’ve 

outlined — AIDS Saskatoon, AIDS Regina. More of it will 

come probably from the government agencies, Health being a 

leader in that, as I’ve said to your colleague, because it is a 

health issue for the wider population, and we make sure that the 

knowledge goes out in the widest possible . . . spread to the 

widest possible number of our population. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Just one brief observation, Mr. Minister. I 

think part of the strength of having non-governmental agencies 

educate in this area is that they can use language that the 

government might be a little bit reluctant to use in its own 

publications. I think that’s particularly important when we’re 

dealing with young people nowadays, and I’d simply commend 

that for your department consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I hear what you’re saying, once again, 

but I’m not so sure that as the Minister of Health for all of the 

people of Saskatchewan, that I necessarily believe that the only 

information that should go to all of the people . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not what I’m saying. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, and I know that you’re not saying 

that either. But it’s important to make the point that all of the 

information that goes to the people of Saskatchewan should 

come from the agencies like the one you outlined. 

 

So I say that while they have a clientele, certainly, let’s be sure 

that we spread this, whatever funding we have available, in 

such a way to get the best possible information out to the widest 

distribution of people. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, back to 

my constituent. She’s 59 years of age. It is a disability income. 

The total income is $495 per month. Now I am assuming, and 

correct me if I’m wrong, but I am assuming that you thought 

her income was indeed a couple of hundred dollars a month 

greater than that, and I suspect that your review panel assumed 

that too. 

 

In light of the information that I have just given you, where her 

total income is $495 per month, she has total up-front drugs 

costs, according to the list I gave you, of $349 — and I don’t 

believe that that’s quite it; there is occasionally a few other 

drugs extra — what are you prepared to do in this case? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m told we don’t have that particular 

file here. But I’m told if the numbers that you’ve given us here 

are different than from what we had in the original time, in 

terms of whether or not she was a senior — if our people looked 

at on the basis of her being a senior, which would make some 

differences in terms of the eligibility for how much pension she 

is eligible for . . . 

 

But in any case, as I said to you before, I’ll undertake to go 

through it with you, and we’ll go through it in some detail if we 

have the actual . . . No. I don’t have the file of that individual 

right here in front of me, and I don’t think you would want me 

to have to deal with her. Even though you  

say she’s watching on television, I’m not sure that she or you or 

anybody would want to have it dealt with in this wide open 

forum. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, I don’t know whether to look for a 

rotten tomato, or to come across and take you on physically. I 

just don’t know what to do. This woman is desperate for some 

help. Nothing has changed. Your review panel should have — I 

haven’t seen the form — but should have gotten that 

information that I’ve given you today. Nothing has changed for 

her other than she continues to cut her Capoten, which is the 

high blood pressure pill, that when she asked her doctor if she 

could get any substitute whatsoever, the doctor said no, we have 

tried other high blood pressure medication, this is the only one 

that seems to do the job, so no substitution for Capoten at $160 

a month. On her own, because she is so desperate, she has 

reduced her intake from three pills of this a day to two. 

Thursday, October 8, she attended her physician and was told 

that her high blood pressure is terrible. 

 

And you say, well I don’t know what we can do to deal with it. 

Come and we’ll have an old boys’ chat somewhere. That’s not 

what she needs. She needs some help and she needs some help 

now with her medication. Any of you tell me how someone can 

live on $495 a month — subsidized rent or no — $495 a month, 

pay rent, pay food, pay heat, pay telephone, pay power and pay 

your drugs? Tell me how it can be done, just any one of you; 

tell me how that can be done. 

 

The other thing I haven’t told you that I just found out today is 

this lady also has Parkinson’s disease. It . . . Words escape me, 

Mr. Minister, words escape me. I’m not going to go and have an 

old boys’ chat with you somewhere off camera. This lady needs 

help. What are you going to do about it? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I tell you what I’m not going to do 

about it, Mr. Chairman. The member says and makes fun of and 

makes light of the fact that I have given him an undertaking to 

say the two of us, as two members of this legislature, will go 

and talk about it. That’s what I said to him, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I’ve seen this done in the House for a long time, many times 

between members of their group and members of our group and 

on an individual basis, even though people will often look in on 

this forum and say it’s an adversarial type of forum all the time. 

That member who’s a rookie here believes that it’s an 

adversarial forum all of the time, and thinks that if he can yell 

and say to me that he’s either going to throw a tomato or come 

over and deal with me physically . . . I would suggest you throw 

a tomato. 

 

I would say to the member that I have given him the 

undertaking that I will look at this issue. I said I will look at this 

issue, as I will. But I will not, I will not deal with the individual 

case of the individual lady and her circumstance and so on in 

this forum. I don’t believe it’s the right thing to do. I don’t 

believe it is. You can say what you like to do; you can say what 

you like about it. 

 

The member from Regina North can stand and grandstand all he 

likes. I will say to him, I will undertake  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3301 

 

to look at every circumstance surrounding this. I do not have 

this particular case with the particular letter before me tonight in 

these estimates. I don’t have it here, but I will have it. Okay? I 

will have it when I talk to you, and I will talk to you as one 

member of the Legislative Assembly to another member of the 

Legislative Assembly. And if you want to call that some kind of 

a cop-out or an old boys’ chat or whatever, I’m sorry for you, 

frankly, if that’s what you think it is. But that’s not what it is; 

that’s not what it is. It’s an undertaking that I gave to you, that I 

would talk to you about it. 

 

(2030) 

 

Now if you want to bring your witnesses and all of the rest of 

that stuff which some of you silly people in the back row over 

there like to think about, well then, go ahead. But I’ve given 

you the undertaking, and you’ve got it now. Now don’t stand up 

here and holler at me. 

 

I know you’re doing . . . To some extent, you’re trying to look 

after your constituent. But all I’m saying to you is, all I’m 

saying to you is there are other ways to look after your 

constituent than the way in which you’ve chosen to do it. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, you say you’ll look at the case. I 

say to you, if you had a policy, we wouldn’t have to be doing 

this. If you had a policy with regard to prescription drugs, we 

wouldn’t be here. I wouldn’t be telling you that I feel like 

throwing a tomato at you or coming over and somehow getting 

physical with you. I wouldn’t be telling you those things. 

 

I will tell you this, though. Anyone on this side of the House 

would make 10 times the Health minister that you have. And I 

think there’s a good number of people, this constituent of mine 

included, that would agree. And it’s not you who should be 

feeling sorry for me, sir, it’s I who feels sorry for you having to 

come forward with such plans, and then have to defend them. I 

really feel sorry for you, and I feel sorry for any of your 

colleagues that are trying to defend this policy. 

 

You said you have given me your word that you and I can go 

and deal with it. And I accept that, except for this one important 

detail, Mr. Minister. On July 15, 1987 I wrote a letter to you at 

Room 334, Legislative Building: 

 

Dear (and there’s your name): This letter is to draw to 

your attention and ask for special consideration and 

assistance to (the name of my constituent), of (and her 

address in Regina), to obtain necessary drugs. 

 

(My constituent’s name again) is living on the sum of 

$495 per month obtained from the Canada Pension Plan. 

From this amount she pays: (1) rent, (2) heat and power, 

(3) water, (4) telephone, (5) food, and (6) drugs. 

 

With the revised prescription drug plan changes now in 

effect, (my constituent’s name again) will be paying 

approximately $359 per month up front for her necessary 

prescriptions. 

 

As you can see, options are not available for (and I  

use my constituent’s name again). Not paying rent would 

result in eviction. Not paying the heat and power bill 

would result in cut-off of those necessary services. Water 

would also be cut off for non-payment. Telephone is a 

modest cost necessity needed for communication with her 

husband who is in a nursing home, as well as for 

emergency use. Food is a major cost necessity, and for 

(my constituent) so are prescription drugs. Will you 

provide direct help by removing the cost of prescription 

drugs for (my constituent)? 

 

Your favourable response to this urgent request is required 

at your earliest convenience. Thank you in advance for 

your consideration. Yours sincerely, Kim Trew, MLA, 

Regina North. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wrote you that letter on July 15, I got a response 

from you on August 24, more than five weeks later, August 24: 

 

Dear (you’ve crossed out my last name, and put “Kim”): 

I’m replying to your recent letter sent to me on behalf of 

(again my constituent). 

 

You may be aware that I’ve established a review panel 

which will be assessing those people who are having 

difficulty with the changes to the Saskatchewan 

prescription drug plan. Our intention is to then address any 

truly unique situations in the most caring and helpful way 

possible. 

 

I have instructed this panel to review (again my 

constituent’s name) situation, and follow up with her 

directly. Thank you for bringing this concern to my 

attention. Yours truly, 

 

And you sign it. That letter five weeks after my letter to you. 

 

Now reverse the situation, Mr. Minister. If I were minister of 

Health, you were an opposition MLA sitting opposite, this 

correspondence had gone ahead, I had clearly indicated to you 

her income, her drug costs, and in my closing statement, my 

closing paragraph, I’d indicated very clearly to you it was an 

urgent matter. The woman was making daily choices between 

food and drugs, and doing without some of each. You respond 

to be with some pretty bold words. 

 

Our intention is to then address any truly unique situations 

in a most caring and helpful way possible. 

 

I don’t know what those words mean, Mr. Minister. I’m 

frustrated by the things you put on paper because it’s 

meaningless. It’s just absolutely appalling the way you and your 

government treat human beings. It is incorrigible, it is 

wrong-headed. It’s . . . And you end with saying, “Thank you 

for bringing this concern to my attention.” Fat lot of good it did. 

“Thank you for bringing this concern to my attention.” I feel 

sorry for you. 

 

Will you tell me how this constituent of mine, on $495 per 

month, is supposed to come up with up-front money  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3302 

 

of $72 for her drugs? I’ve already outlined to you: one, that she 

has reduced from three pills a day, that the doctor prescribed, to 

only taking two per day. I did not tell you, Mr. Minister, that 

she is not taking two of her arthritis pills, the Sulcrate and the 

Clinoril. She is not taking those because the choice is to take 

those pills and not have macaroni in her cupboard. And I’m not 

making that up because I’ve spoken to the lady twice tonight. 

She’s got macaroni in her cupboard. And if you think I’m 

grandstanding or you think I’m making a big to-do out of 

nothing, well then I invite you to stand up, have the courage to 

stand up, tell me and tell the world that I’m making up this case 

because I’ll tell you, it’s not a make-believe case; it’s not some 

fantasy problem that I’m bringing up. This woman came to me 

with a problem as a result of your prescription drug 

amendments. I didn’t go out and solicit this case. I’m happy and 

I’m anxious to look after my constituents and any of their 

concerns, but I didn’t go knocking on her door. I didn’t phone 

up and say, oh, come, give me whatever problem you’ve got. 

But she knew who to go to. 

 

Now I ask you, Mr. Minister how . . . What advice do you have 

for this lady to get by? Never . . . If you can’t answer till the end 

of the month, how’s she going to get by tomorrow? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I have already told the member, Mr. 

Chairman, that I will go through this with him. Like, the 

member earlier in the raising of this question gave us a list of 

the various drugs and the costs and so on. I don’t know if 

they’re one month’s supply in all the cases and so on. And I 

don’t have the luxury of having the letters before me that the 

member has, and I maybe could have at another time. 

 

But I still say that the best way for us to deal with this would be 

to deal with it in the way in which I suggested. I will do that. I 

will find out from the welfare, I will find out from the welfare 

or from the Social Services department about what the options 

are there — all of that. 

 

If you would like to, though, if you want to deal with this case 

in this forum, that’s your choice. I’m reluctant to deal with the 

individual case, but I will say to you that I will go with the 

individual and will go . . . but what I will need to know from 

you and what I will check back, in terms of the information 

you’ve given us here . . . The case will go through whether all 

of these drugs are one month’s supplies, how much they cost, 

how much these drugs cost that person under the old system, 

3.95 per prescription, what the costs were then, and what the 

costs are now, if they are, in fact, what — you know, what did 

you say, $72? — and that’s fair ball. I will accept your number. 

 

So we’ll go down through that, and you can have your choice 

on how you would like to go through it. I don’t care one way or 

the other. I just would . . . I did give you an undertaking that I 

would deal with it. And if the member from Regina North East 

would just quit babbling away here, you and I can deal with 

this. And we’ll deal with it either here or we’ll deal with it in 

the way two responsible legislators would; you can make your 

choice. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, I have tried it the other way; I  

tried it. What did we get? Nothing. Yes, I made my choice; I 

spoke to this constituent who is so far depressed by you and 

your colleagues that she said, yes, use my name if you have to. I 

don’t propose to because I can’t see why that would help. I’ll 

certainly share it with you in confidence — her name. 

 

The balance of this situation is as I have outlined: total income 

$495 per month, obtained from a Canada disability pension 

plan. Normal, ongoing monthly drug cost of 349 of which she 

pays — it’s actually a little more than that — she pays 20 per 

cent or $72 per month. I may be missing by pennies but I’m not 

missing by very much when I say $72 per month. And I know 

I’m not missing by anything when I give you her income — not 

missing by anything. You can check the figures if you want to 

check them. 

 

I suggest to you that what you’re doing, Mr. Minister, is one of 

two things. First, you don’t want to deal with this situation 

because you don’t have an answer. You don’t have a policy for 

what you do with the people that your drug plan have really 

hurt. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A policy that cuts drugs. 

 

Mr. Trew: — As one of my colleagues say, you do have a 

policy and it’s a policy to cut the drugs and to cause hardship. 

But there’s one of two options, as I see it. One is, you can’t deal 

with this because you just won’t. You can’t deal with it 

publicly; you don’t have an answer. You haven’t thought your 

drug plan through far enough. The second alternative is, you’re 

calling me a liar, you’re telling me that I’m giving you 

misinformation about the lady’s income, and about her 

prescription drug needs. 

 

It’s one of those options, Mr. Minister. I’m asking you if — and 

you can certainly verify this information outside of here — but 

if the information is accurate on the medication she’s taking and 

on her income, what will you do for her? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I have not said anything. You 

know, the things that you attribute to me are not what I have 

said at all or even what I’ve thought about you. I just will say to 

you that I don’t have that letter and the correspondence that you 

read to us here. I don’t have that before me, and as I said to you, 

I’ll take the undertaking that I will go to the Social Services 

department, which you didn’t — or I don’t say if you didn’t, but 

which you have said you don’t have confidence in, and so on, in 

your earlier statement. I will go there and I will deal with this, 

and you and I will talk about it after we have all the facts on the 

table, and have some agreement as to what the facts are. That’s 

the best I can do for you, and that’s the most reasonable 

approach. 

 

Mr. Trew: — That’s just simply not good enough, Mr. 

Minister. The lady doesn’t qualify for welfare. She earns too 

much money. Under your welfare reform, she earns too much 

money. You can go and talk to welfare. You might as well talk 

to the wall, or you might as well talk to yourself. It’s about as 

much good as I’m having talking to you. At least you might 

answer yourself. You’re certainly not answering me. 

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3303 

 

The cost of her prescriptions, the maximum cost of her 

prescriptions before your changes, amounted to $27.65. That’s 

if she was paying the maximum 3.95 on every prescription. 

Seven prescriptions, $27.65. Pretty simply math to do. It’s quite 

a distance from $72 per month. 

 

Will you give me and my constituent, Mr. Minister, an 

undertaking that you will let her have her prescription drugs for 

$27.65 per month? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I said to you that I will undertake to 

look at the circumstances after going to the Department of 

Social Services, between us, and we’ll discuss it with you. 

That’s the undertaking that I will give you as it relates to the 

specific issue that you raise. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Before you gave that undertaking, Minister, you 

said if we want to deal with it here, we’ll deal with it here. And 

I’m calling you on it. I’m saying, let’s deal with it here. We’ve 

tried other manners. We’ve tried. And I have tried others, with 

not just this particular instance, Mr. Minister. I have tried letters 

to you asking for help regarding The Prescription Drugs Act 

amendments, your new plan, your $125 up front and 20 per cent 

cost of every drug thereafter. I have tried writing letters to you 

about it. I have not had satisfaction in a single, solitary case. 

 

(2045) 

 

I am telling you, sir, that Social Services have indicated to this 

woman that she does not qualify for anything. She had a Y card, 

then the disability income from her Canada Pension was 

increased, and Social Services took her Y card away. They took 

it away. 

 

It wasn’t a case of her going to them and saying, look, I’d like 

something more. They took away a benefit she had because her 

income went up about $30 a month at that time. It’s gone up 

one time subsequently, to the point where it’s now at $495 a 

month. 

 

Social Services can’t do a thing for her, or won’t, certainly not 

under welfare reform, Minister. It looks like we might be here 

for a long, long time dealing with this one instance, but I want 

to point one thing out to the Minister of Health, and that is that I 

am raising a concern from one of my constituents. 

 

I can give you an example in the Minister for Tourism, Small 

Business and Co-operatives’ riding of an example even worse 

than this. And what do the people opposite say? Oh, gee, no, 

it’s those crazy New Democrats, those back-row guys of the 

New Democrats that are trotting out every bad example in the 

province. 

 

Well if that’s the case, Mr. Minister, I’ll tell you that you don’t 

know what’s going on, and we do. Move over. Call an election. 

Move over. Let somebody govern this province that cares about 

people. Let somebody govern this province that will help 

people survive and get by and improve their standard of living. 

All we get are platitudes from you. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Be like Hatfield — call an election. 

Mr. Trew: — Member for Quill Lakes says, be like Hatfield 

and call an election. Now please, please ask the Premier to do 

that, because this sort of an example tonight is getting us 

nowhere. 

 

But, Minister, I am prepared to stick with this until you give me 

an undertaking. What can you do in this instance where there’s 

$495 total income, and a total drug cost of $72 — that’s total 

because you’ve already taken away the 80 per cent. What can 

you do in this instance? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I have said to the member, you know, 

we can’t do a social services assessment here in the House, or 

any of that sort of thing. I have already told you. I don’t have 

the stuff before me, you have. I will have, on the basis of the 

information that you’ve given, the base of the information that 

you’ve given. And all I’m saying to the member is that I will 

deal with it through the Department of Social Services and then 

subsequent to that with the member and we’ll see where it 

comes down. 

 

The facts as you have outlined are the following: that her drug 

costs are $360 a month and that she is required to pay $72 a 

month, if that’s what I’m to understand. So she pays 20 per cent 

of her cost and the other 80 per cent is paid by the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Why is it, Mr. Minister, that every sick person 

has to go to the opposition first? It should tell you something 

about your prescription drug plan amendments. It should tell 

you that they’re not working. 

 

You have given me, sir, an undertaking that you’re going to — 

I’ll furnish you with these letters that I’m dealing with — you 

are going to talk to the Social Services department and then 

with me and we’ll see where the chips fall in this case. Frankly, 

I don’t think that’s good enough, but it’s clear that that’s the 

best we’re going to get. 

 

I’m not sure when we’re going to come back at this, but I want 

to tell you, Mr. Minister, that this is just symptomatic. I’ve been 

dealing with one case for an inordinate length of time, just one, 

because I wanted to give you an opportunity to tell us in 

opposition, and tell the people of Saskatchewan, what you 

would do in a humane way. I wanted you tell us what you 

meant when you said in your letter: 

 

Our intention is then to address any truly unique situation 

in the most caring and helpful way possible. 

 

I wanted you, on the record, telling the people of Saskatchewan 

that you meant when you were saying that. I’ve got two other 

examples here with me tonight. I’ve got more back in my 

office, but two that I’m going to just touch on just in passing. 

 

I have an instance where there’s a young family that have 

ongoing prescription drug costs of $435 per month, up front, 

Mr. Minister — $435 per month up front. Now maybe you’ve 

got a lot more rich people in Meadow Lake than we have in 

Regina North, but for an awful lot of my constituents that’s 

more money that they have extra in a month. It’s more money 

than I have extra in a month by a  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3304 

 

long shot. But some of my constituents are fortunately better off 

than I am; but many of them are not. 

 

Four hundred and thirty-five dollars — 20 per cent of that 

amounts to $87 per month. This family has two sons that have a 

permanent health problem that requires medication to the total 

of $435 per month — that’s outside of any extra sickness, or 

flu, or anything like that — and yet they get the same sort of 

responses that everybody else gets from you when the question 

is raised. 

 

And I just want to point out to you this headline: “Review panel 

rejects one-third of drug queries.” That’s your review panel, 

Mr. Minister. You’re getting the people that are desperate for 

help that are applying to you and you’re turning them down — 

turning down one-third of them. 

 

I’ve got another instance here, a retired couple. You have driven 

the cost of their prescriptions up 10 times at the stroke of a pen. 

They’re paying 10 times what they were for their prescription 

drugs. They are now paying up front cost of 13.5 per cent of 

their total income just for ongoing medication. That’s what 

you’re prescription drug Act does. You can talk all you want 

about your government standing up for seniors. Well if this is 

standing up for seniors, they’ve had enough of it. They just 

can’t take any more. They’d like you to sit down for a while. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have outlined one major, major concern with 

you tonight. We will be dealing further with it. I will send you a 

copy of the letters I have referred from, and I just urge you, for 

heaven sakes come up with a policy regarding prescription 

drugs. Better yet, withdraw your insane Bill that is devastating 

and hurtful to the people of Saskatchewan, because it’s nothing 

more and nothing less than a tax on the sick — nothing, nothing 

more or less than that. It is hurting all the wrong people. You’re 

blaming sick people for being sick. You’re blaming elderly 

people for getting older. Well compared to the alternative, 

getting older is pretty nice for most people — pretty nice. 

 

I’m sorry, I don’t have the ability to thank you for your 

attention and so on during the portion of the estimates that I’ve 

been a part of. Frankly, I’m shocked, I’m appalled, I’m 

disgusted and every other thing you care to say for the answers, 

or the non-answers that I’ve gotten tonight, and I know that my 

constituents feel the same way. I can only hope that in the 

future our dealings will be more agreeable, more amenable. I 

sincerely hope that. 

 

But for tonight, I ‘m sorry. I don’t have anything kind to say. So 

I’ll turn the estimates back to the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, my colleague has just outlined 

to you a number of cases that have had some experience with 

this special review committee of yours. I’m wondering if you 

can tell us what income does one have to have in relation to 

one’s drug costs in order to get 20 per cent at the drug store in 

terms of payment or to get these special priority post 

envelopes? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As it relates to the review panel and  

when it was announced — it’s extremely important that you 

hear this and that you understand it — there’s the . . . individual 

cases that are dealt with are just that — individuals cases, 

unique circumstances of an individual, of a family, or whatever. 

And the kinds of things that are looked at; the type of drug 

used, in other words is it for the treatment of a chronic case, or 

is it for periodic use; the brand of the drug, in other words the 

lowest cost alternative, the cost of the monthly supply. We do 

ask for a statement of income, but it is just a general sort of 

statement of income. We don’t have a particular number beyond 

which or below which or whatever, we don’t have a number 

there that we use for that. We ask questions like: are there any 

insurance plans available in your family, group plan through the 

employer, or anything like that? So those are the kinds of 

questions that are asked in terms of the application. 

 

Then the panel, which is made up of a representative of the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons and a representative of the 

pharmaceutical association and one person from the drug plan, 

will determine whether or not the person is eligible for one of 

the various forms of what we’ll call special coverage. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I wrote you a letter about a 

woman from Yorkton who is living on $800 a month. She’s a 

single parent. Her drug costs are approximately $136 a month 

but can get as high as $150 a month. She has a four and 

one-half year old son. He has asthma. 

 

Why wouldn’t she be eligible for 20 per cent at the drug store? 

Why would she only be eligible for priority post envelopes? 

What income would she have to have, Mr. Minister, in order to 

get 20 per cent at the drug store? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — In the case as it’s outlined, her net cost 

per month . . . She’s eligible for the priority post envelopes 

because it was deemed by the committee, I suppose, that if she 

was to have her rebate of her 80 per cent back in time before the 

next month’s cheque or whatever, so long as she was ensured 

that rebate was there, her net cost per month is $27.20 — 27.20 

per month. And I don’t believe that’s too onerous, frankly; 

27.20 per month is what it costs her. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, she has $800 a month take 

home pay. She has to pay for her rent, her groceries, 

transportation, all of those other things that help assist families 

in keeping a roof over her head. She pays approximately 17 per 

cent of her income out each month on up-front costs of 

prescription drugs. I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, what income 

gets a 20 per cent break at the drug store, and what would your 

prescription drugs have to be in relation to that income? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod; You know, it’s key, what you just said. She 

pays the amount that you have outlined up front, and by us 

being sure that she has the priority coverage — priority 

envelope, so that she gets her rebate back very quickly by return 

mail, or that sort of thing — then we think that the $27.20 cost 

. . . And I mean I say we think, but I just . . . That’s the way in 

which that case that you outlined was dealt with, and I think it’s 

a reasonable way to deal with it. It’s extremely important, 

though, I will admit, that a lady in that circumstances get her 

rebate  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3305 

 

back so that she is able to have the money available when the 

times comes to buy the next month’s supply of drugs. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister I don’t think you’re 

understanding this. She has an income of $800 a month. She’s a 

single parent — she’s a parent of a four and one-half year old 

asthmatic child. Each month she has to have 17 per cent of her 

income up front to pay for prescription drugs of $136 a month. 

She has to have the money to buy the drugs. I’m asking you, 

Mr. Minister: where does she get this money? What income 

would you have to have to get a break in terms of 20 per cent at 

the drug store? Would her drug costs have to be $200 a month 

and her income $800 a month; $300 a month for drugs, her 

income $800; $400, half her income? What is it? Tell us the 

figure. 

 

You’ve got this committee that makes decisions about people’s 

lives. They send in information to that special committee; they 

tell that committee what their income is; they tell them what the 

cost of their drugs are. I want to know: what costs would this 

woman have to incur each month at the drug store, in 

relationship to her income, to get a 20 per cent break at the drug 

store. Give us that information. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, what the woman pays is 

20 per cent of her cost of her drugs. But she pays up front and 

she has a priority envelope which says you get a rebate and she 

will get, on a monthly basis, a cheque back from the drug plan 

for $108.80, if the numbers as they’re outlined here are the 

actual numbers. She will get a rebate cheque from the drug plan 

on a monthly basis, of 108.80. Her net costs will be $27.20. 

Now I can’t make it any more clearer than that; that’s where it 

is. 

 

You say, rather than have the envelope and having the rebate 

back, she should have had 20 per cent straight up front. The 

decision was made at the panel that as long as she had the 

money back, she’d have her 108.80. She gets her $108.80 on a 

monthly basis and that comes back. And you’re always very, 

very quick to say her up-front costs but you are very, very slow 

to talk about the rebates that she has coming back from the 

taxpayer. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — We’re going to get into the rebates and how 

long it takes your department to send back the rebates in a few 

minutes. 

 

Now I just want to ask you again, this woman has $800 a 

month. She lives in the city of Yorkton — $800 a month. She’s 

a single parent; she has a job; she has to pay for child care costs 

in order to get herself to work; she has to pay for her apartment; 

she has to pay for food; she has to pay for clothing; she has to 

pay for transportation costs to get herself to her job. 

 

I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, where does she cut back? Where 

does she find that $136 a month to pay for those prescription 

drugs? You tell that woman where she has to cut back to come 

up with that money to pay for those prescription drugs. You tell 

her and you tell her now, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m telling you that she pays 136, 

whatever you’re saying; she gets $108.80 back as quickly  

as possible. Her net cost is 3.4 per cent of her income, if you 

want to get into the percentages of income. Her cost of those 

drugs that you write out is not 17 per cent of her income, it’s 

3.4 per cent of her income. 

 

She pays $27.20 a month for her drugs. And sure, I don’t say 

that it’s not difficult for some people, but I just say because she 

applied and she was given the priority envelopes, priority 

claims handling, and that’s the case. If it’s still too onerous, 

well she can apply again, I suppose. But I would say that the 

panel looked at it in a reasonable way and that’s the decision 

that they came to. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, this woman write that she used 

to pay $11.80 per month. She now pays, Mr. Minister, $136 a 

month up front in costs to buy her prescription drugs. 

 

I don’t think you people are living in the real world. It’s really 

quite easy to sit there on your $60,000-a-year income, with your 

nice house and your nice family and your nice job. But you 

have no idea, Mr. Minister, what it’s like to work for a pittance 

wage and have to take every nickel to just get by. No money for 

the money, no money for a night out on the town, no money to 

go out and eat in a fancy restaurant once in a while — just 

money to make ends meet, barely make ends meet. And, Mr. 

Minister, I will admit, and my colleagues will admit, even with 

the $3.95 dispensing fee which we used to have in this 

province, that that even, Mr. Minister, was a hardship for some 

families. 

 

Now I ask you again, this woman is a single parent — a single 

parent of a four and one-half year-old asthmatic child. She takes 

home $800 a month. She lives in the city of Yorkton. She has to 

pay for an apartment, groceries, clothes, transportation costs to 

get to work, child care costs, and each month — each month, 

Mr. Minister, she has to come up with $136 to give to the 

pharmacist to get the drugs for her child. 

 

Now I want you to tell us now, Mr. Minister, what would that 

woman’s income have to be? What would her circumstance 

have to be to pay 20 per cent at the drug store? When she used 

to pay $11.85 a month, she is now paying every month, up 

front, $136. What is it? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — There is not a particular amount that I 

can give to the hon. member. Each case is looked at 

individually and all of the various circumstances are rolled in in 

terms of the drugs, chronic use, the kind of drugs that are there, 

the kind of drugs that are used by the lady and her family in this 

case. All I can say to you is that her costs are an increase. She 

pays $15.40 a month more for her drugs, I admit that. She pays 

$15.40 a month more for her drugs than she did before. You 

said she used to pay $11.80 and now she pays 27 — what is it? 

— $27.20? So I don’t know, something in that order. It’s 

around the $15 mark. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I have another case, Mr. Minister, I want to 

read into the record. This woman writes on June 17: 

 

I’m writing to you in regard to the changes to the drug 

plan. My husband has a serious heart problem and will be 

on medication for the rest of  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3306 

 

his life. A rough estimate by our pharmacist placed the 

cost of the drugs at a $151 a month plus $5.50 dispensing 

cost for each prescription for a total of $173 per month. 

 

We had to close our upholstery business last month as the 

sales have been dropping steadily during the past three 

years due to the province’s poor economy. That leaves us 

with no jobs, no unemployment benefits, and now an 

increase from $11.80 per month to $175 per month. It 

rather seems as though it will be either medication or food. 

That isn’t much of a choice because my husband can’t live 

without the medicine and we have all become accustomed 

to eating. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, this family is living off it’s savings of $696 

a month income — three people. Their prescription drug costs 

are $175 a month. Why don’t they qualify for 20 per cent at the 

drug store, Mr. Minister? Why do they only qualify for your 

priority post envelopes? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — In this case, if I heard you correctly, 

you say that this family does qualify for the priority envelopes. 

So I would assume then that they’ve been through the process 

and they do qualify for the priority handling? 

 

(2115) 

 

Okay, I think that that’s the case. This is a cost to that family of 

$34.60 a month for their drugs. Their drug cost is a total of 

34.60 a month. That’s the net cost, which is, I will admit, an 

increase. But we have said that it will be an increase to 

consumers on drugs, and there will be in this case. The increase 

is $23 a month — $23 a month increase. And they will get the 

deductible because of the various factors, and one of them being 

the income that you have said or whatever. Because of the 

various factors and the way that they’ve submitted their claim, 

we have said we will be sure, we will ensure that there’s 

priority handling of the claim and so that the envelope comes 

in, which is the system that we adopted from our sister province 

of Manitoba, where they say it has worked well for a good long 

time. And that’s the system of a priority envelope, and they 

send it back out quickly so they have their rebate and are able to 

then deal with the cost of the drugs on an ongoing and a 

monthly basis. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I have another letter here. A 

similar situation, farm family, northern Saskatchewan. Their 

monthly drug costs for their asthmatic three-year-old son is 

$174 a month. They’re farmers, Mr. Minister. And you 

probably know, since you represent a partially rural area, the 

situation in the farming community isn’t that good these days. 

This woman says: 

 

We can honestly say that we do not have $174 to lay out 

tomorrow for our son’s drugs. Are people supposed to 

starve until they can get their refund back from the 

government? 

 

The point is, Mr. Minister, yes, they get an 80 per cent refund. 

They get 30 or 40 or 50 whatever dollars it is, but you’ve got to 

have the money to buy the drugs first. 

And my question to you is this. We have sent case after case 

after case — I have files full of them. And in most 

circumstances, Mr. Minister, one of two things has happened. 

They’ve either been totally rejected by your special review 

committee, or they’ve gotten these priority post envelopes. And 

there is no rhyme or reason. 

 

I know of one case, Mr. Minister, where someone’s paying 20 

per cent at the drug store, and that person’s drug costs are 

approximately $400 a month and his income is approximately 

$1,600 a month. Now, Mr. Minister, what is it? What sort of 

income and what sort of prescription drug costs, relative to that 

income, would you have to have in order to pay 20 per cent at 

the drug store? 

 

Because, Mr. Minister, if you don’t have the money to buy the 

drugs at the drug store you’re not going to be submitting your 

receipts to get your rebate. This is absolute lunacy. There are 

people in this province that don’t have the money. They don’t 

have $170. They don’t have $20. And all I’m asking you is: 

what’s the income relative to the prescription drugs so that you 

pay 20 per cent at the drug store? Give us the answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Each case, as I have said to you, is dealt 

with on an individual basis. There’s no common thread. Well 

you can say that there is. The individual cases, the unique cases 

that we have dealt with and according to this panel have been 

just that, unique cases. And there’s no common thread that goes 

through them all. 

 

Some of them will need envelopes, and they get them, so that 

they can have a rebate back quickly so that they can pay for 

next month’s drugs. Others will have the option of going 20 per 

cent up front for their . . . paying 20 per cent up front for their 

drugs. Some of them will have the option, or will be given the 

option of paying 20 per cent up front for a particular individual 

in a family, if that’s the individual whose drug costs are causing 

the problem. Others will have 20 per cent for specific drugs — 

a particular specific high cost drug — can pay 20 per cent up 

front for that. Those are the kinds of things. And then the 

priority claims envelopes that you’ve talked about and that 

we’ve talked about here tonight. Those are the kinds of things 

that are done in terms of the solutions or the ways in which you 

try to alleviate the problems that people are facing. 

 

I don’t say that people aren’t facing some adjustments in their 

spending and so on. I don’t dispute that in any way, shape, or 

form, nor will I ever dispute that. But the issue that you raised 

before there and another one, the last case again, the cost to the 

family is 34.80. You didn’t indicate whether that family had 

applied and had received any indication at all. But I suggest, or 

I believe that probably the person has received a priority 

handling envelope, and if that’s the case, that’s what the panel 

thought would be the most appropriate way to deal with that 

particular case. 

 

Now you can say this is the case and it’s really onerous, and it’s 

all of these things and yes, there is some adjustment going on, 

but as I have said to you before and as I will say to you again 

and to the citizens of the  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3307 

 

province, there are citizens in the province next door to us who 

have a similar system — a similar system, almost identical 

system — and there is no one complaining about the cost of 

drugs there. 

 

The reason they aren’t complaining about the cost of drugs in 

Brandon — and you say that someone is in Yorkton — is 

because they don’t find them to be a problem with the system 

that’s in place. Now we put the identical system into place in 

this province, and you say someone doesn’t like the system. 

Well people don’t like change by the very nature of how change 

will change the way in which they develop their spending 

priorities and whatever. 

 

All I’m saying is, we’re being as compassionate as is possible 

with the various ways in which we can deal with the individual 

cases. We do deal with individual cases, as you will know. You 

may not agree, but this is the responsible way to go about it. 

This is a responsible plan, and it deals with people in a 

responsible way. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Minister, you remind me of a 

student — that you have a difficult time teaching the student a 

particular concept. It doesn’t matter how you explain it in all 

variety of ways, the student just can’t get it through his head. 

 

I think you’ve got that problem, Mr. Minister, because it 

doesn’t matter what example we give you, what circumstance 

we give you. It doesn’t matter what people have to say, we 

can’t get it through your thick head that your changes to the 

prescription drug plan are hurting people. And I guess the only 

way you’re going to get that message, Mr. Minister, is for every 

solitary person in this province, when it comes to the 1990 

election, to mark X beside the NDP and boot you people out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You know, when some of us came here, we 

thought we were going to come to this legislature and honestly 

change things. We thought that we could stand here and discuss 

with you important issues for the people of Saskatchewan. We 

thought that we could bring our constituents’ problems to 

people like yourself and that you would listen, that somehow 

you’d have a little compassion in your heart and you’d listen. 

But you understand absolutely nothing about the real world and 

real people. 

 

You have no understanding about people who live on minimum 

wage, single parents, families that just eke out a living and just 

get by from pay cheque to pay cheque to pay cheque. And, Mr. 

Minister, you offer them no hope, absolutely no hope 

whatsoever with that kind of attitude, with those kinds of 

responses. You know, it’s beyond me; it’s beyond me. 

 

I met a fellow in a restaurant tonight and he said, I saw you and 

your colleagues today debating the prescription drug plan. And 

he said, you know, those people don’t listen, do they? And I 

said, don’t give up, perhaps they will listen, perhaps they will 

finally learn and come to terms with the fact that their policies 

are hurting people. But you stand up, and you stand up and you 

don’t respond to questions;  

you don’t answer questions, and, Mr. Minister, it’s obvious you 

don’t care. 

 

This unique circumstance program that you brought in was 

obviously an afterthought by the government. It was only after 

you got some very, very bad press did you decide to bring in 

this particular special committee, Mr. Minister. This little 

special committee was not mentioned in your press release 

when you announced changes to the prescription drug plan; it 

was not mentioned in your province-wide advertising 

campaign, with the little message that went to everybody’s door 

in this province — you didn’t tell them about the special 

committee; it wasn’t mentioned when you negotiated this new 

and improved drug plan with the pharmaceutical association; 

and it’s quite clear that this was a hasty effort to deal with some 

political fall-out. 

 

And my question to you is simply this, Mr. Minister: can you 

advise us who is on this committee. Who is the representative 

from the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association)? Who is 

the representative from the prescription drug plan? Who is the 

representative from the pharmaceutical association? And do you 

have someone on the committee, Mr. Minister, someone who 

has felt the serious impact of these changes to the prescription 

drug program? Do you have anybody on the committee that’s 

got a little bit of heart, Mr. Minister, for people who don’t have 

the money to pay for those drugs up front? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. The committee, as I said before 

. . . I’ll give you the way in which the committee is constituted, 

and so on, in a minute. 

 

You said we did not talk about this committee as such before, in 

the very earliest stages. I’ll say to you, and you heard it as 

clearly as anyone in this House, in the earliest stages that we 

said if there are cases . . . And we outlined all of the coverage 

that would be there. Nursing home people will be covered, as 

they were under the old plan. People on social assistance would 

be covered, as they were under the old plan. We went through 

all of the deductibles. We put the plan in place in the same 

format as what was in place in the province of Manitoba, with 

some improvements for seniors in terms of their deductible 

level, I might add — $50, whereas in Manitoba it’s $75 for 

single seniors. 

 

We put that in place, and we said, if there are individual and 

unique circumstances, we will look at them on an individual 

basis. We said that. The Premier said it on several occasions, 

and I said it on several occasions. The result of that, in terms of 

some unique circumstances coming forward, the result of that 

was the developing of this panel. 

 

The panel is made up of the following: there is one 

representative appointed by the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons. Now hear carefully because the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons does not put their name to it if they 

don’t believe that what they’re doing is the reasonable thing. 

and the College of Physicians and Surgeons has one person on 

there whom they will appoint and who they appointed and 

carries on. The  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3308 

 

pharmaceutical association has one appointment, and there’s 

one appointment from the Department of Health. So those three 

people will look at these cases, unique cases, and they will 

make the determination as to which of the special coverage is 

provided in the individual case if a special coverage is to be 

provided. 

 

The College of Physicians and Surgeons, you know, may 

change their person from time to time, but that’s up to them to 

decide who’s on there. I asked the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons to name someone and I asked the pharmaceutical 

association to name someone. They have basically put their 

professional association on the line, and they’ve said, yes, we 

will name someone. They each have, and they may change 

those from time to time, but the fact is, it’s the representative of 

those associations that are doing the choosing. 

 

Because if I had gone the other way and said, these are the 

people that I appoint, you would say, well, you don’t agree with 

my appointments, you don’t agree with the people that I would 

choose or that the government would choose or whatever. So 

this is the way to go, and I chose to go this way. I believe it is 

the responsible way to go. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you know, it’s 

interesting. Earlier tonight, you said we had a problem with the 

old prescription drug plan, we had a problem with doctors 

apparently prescribing too many prescriptions, and there was 

even some problems with the pharmacists. And yet, Mr. 

Minister, who do we have on the committee? We have a 

representative of the doctors, we have a representative of the 

pharmacists, we have a representative from your prescription 

drug program, but we don’t have one consumer representative 

on your committee. 

 

Now I want to know, Mr. Minister, it’s quite a simple little 

question: why wouldn’t you have a consumer on the committee, 

someone who’s got a problem health-wise, requires a number of 

prescription drugs, and who has difficult meeting those 

prescription drugs because of their economic situation? Why 

wouldn’t you put someone like that on your committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the plan is first 

and foremost a health plan. And you have the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons’ representative who will determine 

and who will look at the drugs that have been prescribed, the 

drugs that have been prescribed by one of his or her colleagues. 

They will say, here they are, and they can have a look at the 

appropriateness of that; the pharmaceutical association in the 

same way. They will appoint someone who, in each case, each 

of these professional associations appoints someone who has 

significant integrity in their own association. That’s what they 

have, and that’s what they’ve done. They’ve appointed those. 

I’m please that those two professional associations have made 

those appointments. 

 

It is, above all, it’s a health plan. It’s not a welfare plan, for 

example. This is a health plan — College of Physicians and 

Surgeons, pharmaceutical association, Department of Health 

representative. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you know, you could put a  

group of angels on the panel. It wouldn’t matter one iota, Mr. 

Minister, because it’s your prescription drug policies that have 

caused that committee to come about. It’s your prescription 

drug policies that have caused a tremendous amount of hardship 

for many, many families in this province. It’s your betrayal of 

the people of this province that’s at stake here, Mr. Minister. 

 

(2130) 

 

You promised the people of this province in your little 1978 ad 

campaign in the Meadow Lake Progress — I believe that’s the 

name of the paper — that you wanted to eliminate deterrent fees 

for the prescription drug program, and that you wanted to add 

new drugs to the prescription drug program. And now what do 

we have in 1987 after your government was re-elected? We 

have a government that changes the prescription drug program 

to such an extent, Mr. Minister, that people are making 

decisions: do I put groceries on my table, feed my kids, or do I 

buy prescription drugs? 

 

What sort of a policy is that? What sort of a policy is that? My 

colleagues say it’s Tory policy. Exactly, Mr. Minister. Tory 

policies, Tory betrayal, Tory untruths, Mr. Minister, Tory 

untruths. 

 

Mr. Minister, what do people have to do in this province to get 

you to understand that your little committee is simply, simply a 

little smoke-screen, Mr. Minister? You set up this committee in 

response to case after case that we raised in this legislature and 

that the public was raising in their own media, to cover yourself 

politically. 

 

I just want the people of this province to know three things. 

One, most people are getting nothing — nothing. They’re not 

getting any kind of special consideration. Secondly, they’re 

getting a possibility of these priority post envelopes, and they’re 

waiting several weeks to get those priority post refunds back. 

And thirdly, one or two people have gotten special 

consideration at the drug store where they get to pay the 

druggist 20 per cent up front. 

 

The case that I’m aware of is a $400 a month drug bill and it 

applies to the man only; it does not apply to his children; it does 

not apply to his wife, and on the income that obviously made 

him eligible for the 20 per cent at the drugstore for his own 

drugs of $400 a month. That somehow doesn’t make him 

eligible for 20 per cent for his children and his wife. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is a wrong-headed policy. This committee is 

silliness. It’s silly because it does nothing but cover your 

political hide, Mr. Minister. It doesn’t do anything for people 

who are experiencing real difficulties. 

 

And I simply ask you this, Mr. Minister: if you’re going to have 

this little committee — and it’s obvious that you’re going to 

have the little committee — why wouldn’t you put a consumer 

on it? Don’t give us this welfare stuff. That’s crap, Mr. 

Minister. That is absolutely crap. 

 

You can put someone from the pharmaceutical association on 

the committee. You can put someone from the doctors on the 

committee. You can put someone from  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3309 

 

your prescription drug plan on the committee. Why can’t you 

put a consumer representative that understands what it’s like, 

understands what it’s like to go from day to day, pay cheque to 

pay cheque and barely get by. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. 1 . . . The member makes a couple 

of points, and I will reiterate. The College of Physicians and 

Surgeons, the Pharmaceutical Association of Saskatchewan, 

both of those professional associations, when I asked them to 

put a representative, and I said I will not ask to name the 

representative, all I will say is if your association will name 

someone, that’s the way I would like it to be, that in fact in both 

cases is what they wanted to have happen as well, you know, to 

protect the integrity of their association from the kind of 

innuendo that comes from the member opposite and some of 

her colleagues — and I say some. 

 

So that’s the committee as it’s now constituted; that’s the 

committee that is working; and that’s the committee that is 

making the decisions. And I frankly believe that they are 

making reasonable decisions. 

 

The members will say this is Tory policy. What I will say to the 

member is that it’s a responsible decision and, yes, this is the 

Conservative government that has made the decision. The 

policy which we adopted is an identical policy or very, very 

close to the policy in Manitoba which is not a Progressive 

Conservative administered province. 

 

The Government of Manitoba is an NDP government, and the 

Government of Manitoba administers a drug plan which is very, 

very similar to the one that we have instituted here. And there 

are no complaints in the communities of Manitoba or from 

individuals in Manitoba, all of whom, or many of whom, will 

have similar circumstances to those circumstances which you 

outlined, which your colleagues outlined, and which have been 

you know, brought forward here for many days in the House. 

 

I’ll say to you, it’s not Tory policy, but it is responsible policy. 

It’s adopted from an NDP government to the east of us in 

Manitoba. And frankly, if I find good policy, regardless of 

where it is, we will adopt it. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, in Quebec senior citizens 

don’t pay for their prescription drugs, and I don’t see that good 

policy in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to just talk about these priority post 

envelopes. Mr. Minister, can you confirm that 26 employees 

were fired by the prescription drug plan, or laid off by the 

prescription drug plan, effective August 8, 1987? And can you 

confirm that only 12 to 15 temporary employees have been 

hired to replace the keypunch operators who were laid off? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just a confirmation of the numbers. You 

rightly said there were 26 people affected at the time of the drug 

plan changing its direction, and at present we have 17 

non-permanent people who are there to help us with catching up 

with the backlog and so on. And as you know, there is a 

backlog, and I readily admit that. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I know there is a  

backlog. I know there is a serious backlog of people waiting. 

It’s interesting, Mr. Minister, I also understand that there are 

senior citizens that are sending in money in the mail to the 

prescription drug plan because of some confusion as to whether 

or not they had to pay the $125 and then apply for their rebate. 

 

This program has been implemented in a very confused way. I 

understand that there are 60 or 70 people a day calling, calling, 

Mr. Minister, asking where their rebate is. I understand that 

your people are told to give . . . that the rebate will be out in 

three weeks, when it’s taking months, Mr. Minister. I have 

people that have contacted me who have been waiting since 

July for their rebate. We’re now into October. 

 

You know, we have a totally new situation in Saskatchewan 

when it comes to the prescription drug program. You used to 

process money and return it to the pharmacist. Now, Mr. 

Minister, you have to process, rebate, and return it to the patient 

or the customer, the client. Why on earth would you lay off 26 

people and hire 17 temporary employees to process hundreds 

and hundreds and hundreds of applications for rebate? Why 

would you tell the general public that it only takes three weeks 

to get their rebate back when, Mr. Minister, that’s a falsehood? 

It does not take three weeks; it takes three months, Mr. 

Minister. In fact, we’re told that some pharmacists haven’t even 

gotten the rebates from the old prescription drug plan. 

 

Mr. Minister, I understand that you have a number of temporary 

people who are involved in word processing, and they are 

unfamiliar with the system. I understand you have temporaries 

training temporaries. I understand that you early-retired four 

people, and you’ve now hired two of them back on contract. 

This is absolute lunacy. 

 

Can you explain to me, Mr. Minister, the administration of your 

system? And how on earth do you expect people to come up 

with the money each month when they’re waiting two or three 

months to get their refund back from your drug plan, because 

you’ve fired a whole bunch of people and the drug plan appears 

to be in a total mess? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member, you know, 

gave us a whole series of what her understandings are. But I 

will say to the member, as I said at the initial stages, I readily 

admit that there is a backlog in some of these areas. She stands 

here in the House and says, I understand that there are people, 

senior citizens, across the province that are sending their money 

in because they don’t understand the system. I believe that it’s 

two or three people have done this, and because of a lack of 

understanding of the system, out of a million people in our 

province. So let’s not get carried away with all of these things 

that you understand in terms of all of the people across the 

province that are doing these kinds of things. 

 

I did say before, and I will say again, we want and we will have 

the rebates at the three-week level. It’s extremely important that 

we get to that stage, and I will readily admit to you now, in 

getting the system up and running, that we have not 

accomplished the three-week stage. Most are at 30 days, but we 

have them at five and six and seven  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3310 

 

weeks. But we have none, as the member said, who sent them in 

July and have not received their rebate in October. and if there 

are . . . if you say that there is someone who has not received 

their rebate, it’s because of not filling out the form correctly and 

back and forth because the form or the proper information 

wasn’t given. Some of those kinds of things can happen. That’s 

not something that the administration in the drug plan have any 

control over. 

 

Frankly, what the member could do well, if she is truly 

concerned about the seniors and about the lack of understanding 

in terms that some of them may have of a new system, and 

when change takes place how do we best understand change, 

how can we as a society cope with that change — those kinds of 

things. If you really want to be responsible, why don’t you try 

to help them out with it rather than gloat on the fact that 

somebody doesn’t get their rebate back in time. That’s what you 

want to do. 

 

You say, oh, I hope it doesn’t get back in time, so I can stand 

here and gloat about it. Well I’m saying to you, don’t do that. 

Be responsible and try to help us work the system out because 

the system will work and the system will be back to having 

within that month period of rebate time. And that’s exactly what 

we want to have happen and that’s exactly what we will have 

happen when any little glitches that are in the system are 

worked out, and there are various . . . 

 

(2145) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you’d give us copy of 

the applications so we could have them in our office, we could 

assist senior citizens, but your government won’t give them to 

opposition members of the legislature. We’ve requested them; 

we’ve requested that the applications be given to us, and you 

won’t do it, Mr. Minister; you won’t do it. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, there are senior citizens in this province, 

and I assisted two of them on the weekend in completing their 

application form for the unique circumstance committee, but 

also their application form for drug rebate, drug refunds, and 

they don’t understand all the ins and outs of your application. 

 

As you get older sometimes, Mr. Minister, you get a little 

confused, and I’m sure that people in home care can advise you 

of that. I’m sure that your assistants from continuing carte can 

advise you of that. And I’m just simply saying to you, Mr. 

Minister, that this drug plan change of yours has created a lot of 

personal hardship, particularly for people who are sick, and 

particularly for people who are elderly. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just . . . You didn’t answer a couple of my 

questions. Has there been some problem in the word-processing 

department or in the key-punch department and that’s causing 

some of the delay in terms of cheques coming out but they’re 

not correct and they have to be manually corrected, and that this 

is causing some of the problem in terms of getting cheques back 

to  

people who are waiting for those refunds? Because you yourself 

stated that they were supposed to get this money back in order 

that they could pay for next month’s drug supply. I just want 

you to know that that hasn’t been happening, that people are 

waiting two months and three months before they get their 

refund back from your prescription drug program. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the odd case that you outline in 

terms of the processing system . . . but it’s not the case that 

incorrect cheques have gone out, but it is the case that the 

system has had a couple of, as I used the word before, glitches 

in it, and that system is being worked out now. And that may 

have caused a delay on a very few individual cases. And, you 

know, sure we can raise the individual case, and I have a sincere 

feeling for an individual that would have that kind of a thing 

happen to their particular claim. 

 

But for the most part the claims are going out, and for the most 

part they are getting out on time. But I do admit to you, as I 

have before, that the five and the six . . . but anything over 30 

days is unacceptable, and I agree with that. I mean, we can’t 

have the system in place over the long term when it’s more than 

that because of having the money go back and the 80 per cent 

deductible going back to people so they’re able to make their 

payments for the next month, and so on. 

 

You mentioned that we won’t give you copies of the forms for 

opposition members of the legislature. I want to say to you very 

clearly that none of the members on the government side of the 

legislature have these forms either. These forms are for unique 

cases, for individuals who have a unique problem in terms of 

their drug costs, to go to the drug plan which administers it and 

lay out their case and then have it dealt with. It’s not for 

politicians to walk around with little forms and say, oh, your 

case is definitely unique, here’s your case, here’s the form, 

we’ll fill it out and we’ll send it in. That’s not what it’s all 

about, and that’s not what you should be suggesting. 

 

You should not be suggesting that you should have these forms 

to walk around and in a grandiose way hand them out and say, 

here, your case is unique, send in this form. Individuals who 

have a unique circumstance and unique problem will send their 

forms in. It’s widely known in the province, and it’s widely 

known at the pharmacies, in the drug stores, where it should be. 

And individual are discussing with their pharmacist, as they are 

with their doctor, the various circumstances surrounding the 

drugs which are prescribed to them and the drugs that they must 

buy in order to become well. Those are the people that they 

should talk to, and all of the physicians and all of the 

pharmacies in Saskatchewan are well aware of the circumstance 

around which people can apply. And that’s the say it should be. 

Not for MLAs. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairman, what we witnessed here 

tonight is something truly remarkable. We have a PC Minister 

of Health trying to justify and defend his government’s attack 

on medicare. He’s trying to defend his tax on the sick. The 

minister argues that Saskatchewan people are not angry, they’re 

not bitter, and they’re not concerned. He argues that his attack 

on the drug plan is now accepted by the people of 

Saskatchewan. Mr.  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3311 

 

Minister, you’re wrong, you’re dead wrong. For you have 

frightened people. You have frightened Saskatchewan families 

so deeply that they’re worried about their ability to pay for 

those prescription drug charges, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, they’re angry at you. They’re angry at your 

colleagues. They feel betrayed by you and your government. 

And if that’s not the message you’re hearing, Mr. Minister, it’s 

because you’re simply not listening. Mr. Minister, the message 

is pretty loud and clear. 

 

Tonight this Minister of Health has confirmed that 

Saskatchewan people will pay more for their prescription 

medications that they need. The Minister has confirmed that 

he’s proud, he’s proud, Mr. Chairperson, of his PC erosion of 

our health care system. The minister has tried to argue that the 

actual cost increase is not too much. In fact he has talked about 

$27 a month. In previous conversations he has talked about $1 a 

day or $3 a day. But I want to tell him this, and it’s what the 

people of Saskatchewan have been trying to tell you for weeks, 

but you simply refuse to listen, Mr. Minister. Your attack on the 

drug plan is a betrayal of medicare. It’s a betrayal of 

Saskatchewan people. Worst of all, Mr. Chairman, the minister 

tonight has tried to pretend that his attack on the prescription 

drug plan, his attack on medicare, are somehow part of the PC 

plan for what’s ahead of us. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you’re wrong, you’re dead wrong, and 

you’re going in the wrong direction. This PC government, this 

PC minister, these PC attacks on health care are policies of the 

past. They’re the PC policies of the past, Mr. Chairman. The 

people of this province want us to improve health care. They 

want us to improve health care for the future. They do not want 

us to go backwards. They want us to improve and expand 

medicare for the benefit of all Saskatchewan people, not just a 

few. 

 

And that’s the future of medicare, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 

Chairman, but the PC policies are the policies of the past. The 

PC drug plan changes are nothing short of a tax on the sick. 

They’re an attack on the people of this province. They’re a 

betrayal of what you promised the people of this province. And 

I say simply this to you, Mr. Minister, shame on you — shame 

on you. You aren’t a Health minister, you’re nothing but an 

illness minister, and you’re making a lot of people sick. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll say as I have before 

on several occasions. This system of the new drug plan is not an 

insensitive system. The committee that’s been set up is 

responding to those special needs in a way that they should, 

frankly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, special exemptions, people who 

have health under special exemptions in the drug plan as it’s 

now constituted amount to a minimum of 67,000 people in 

Saskatchewan. if you take into consideration all of these: social 

assistance recipients, 60,000; 1,500 people who have special 

circumstances that are dealt with under the SAIL 

(Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living) program; 6,000 

people in special care homes, which adds to about the 67,000 

mark. Those people, all of those large numbers, are covered 

under special circumstances under this new drug plan as it’s 

now constituted, in a similar way that they’re covered in  

our sister province to the east in Manitoba. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, regardless of what the member says, she’ll 

say it’s an attack on this, an attack on that — and she uses all of 

those kinds of terms which are, you know, well I won’t describe 

your terminology that the member uses often in the House. But 

anyway, that’s the case, and all I can say is that it’s not 

insensitive. The system is a good system. The system is a 

system which is right for this province in the here and now and 

in the future, and we believe that it will work well. 

 

While I admit that there are some glitches in the system in the 

computers and so on, we’ll have that sorted out as quickly as 

possible. And just an example, Mr. Chairman, so the people 

know; there have been 10,727 cheques gone out already, rebate 

cheques, for a total dollar amount of 669,000 — very close to 

$670,000 gone back to Saskatchewan people as rebates, as their 

80 per cent refunds. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, the system is working. The system should 

work better. The system will work better. But in terms of the 

way in which it’s constituted, the new drug plan was a 

courageous decision to take. It was the right decision to take, 

and it’s the decision that’s right for Saskatchewan now and into 

the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I move that we rise, 

report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 p.m. 

 


