


















































June 25, 1987 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 25, 1987 
 

723 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to introduce to members of the Assembly six 
students from the Regina Plains Community College, with their 
teacher, Ruth Quiring. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them immediately after question 
period. I hope you find it informative and interesting. I invite all 
members to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to introduce to the House, and to the members 
here, a person I am sure that many of the members on the 
opposition learned to respect during the past four or five years. I 
want to introduce a young and dynamic new president of the 
New Democratic Party, who is seated in the east gallery, Mr. 
Dwain Lingenfelter. Please join in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I join with the hon. member from Quill 
Lakes in welcoming the former member from Shaunavon, who 
I suspect may be president for a while but will be the former 
member for a very long time. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, I would like to have the legislature 
welcome special guests today. First of all I would like to 
acknowledge Vern Bellgarde, the first vice-chief of the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I would also like to recognize Wayne 
MacKenzie the vice-president of the Association of Métis and 
Non-Status Indians. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — There are many other leaders in here that I 
would like to recognize, Mr. Speaker. There are such people as 
Nap Lafontaine, Ed Nufeld. There is also special guests from 
northern Saskatchewan, and I would like to ask people to give a 
special welcome to Mayor Hegland from La Ronge and Doug 
Eddy. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Also, all the way from south and north of La 
Ronge, William Dumais. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I would also like to give special welcome to a 
person who worked in the race and ethnic relations  

division of the Regina Public School, Glenda Simms. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And of course my sister and brother-in-law, 
Allan and Monica Couture. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And last, but not least, I’d like to welcome the 
Montreal Lake students and their teacher, Brenda Mitchell and 
driver John Hamilton. These students are here to learn about the 
process of our legislative procedures and here also to visit 
Regina. They are aged 10 and 12, and so I would like to ask all 
members to give special welcome to all the people that I have 
mentioned, especially to this group that I have just mentioned at 
the end. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and 
through you to the members of the Assembly, four people who 
are sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, who are from the 
Friendship Centre in Moose Jaw. I’d like you to extend a warm 
welcome to Earl Pelletier, the vice-president; board member, 
George Terry; director Dave Pelletier, and assistant director 
Lynn Janvier. If the members will join me in extending a warm 
welcome to the members of the friendship centre. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize for being a 
little slow on my feet today. There’s a group and an individual 
I’d like to introduce, and I will introduce the individual first. 
 
With us today in the west gallery we have Virginia McElree, 
who is retiring from the public service of Saskatchewan. And 
it’s not often that we introduce retiring public servants, but she 
is particularly special in the length of service that she has put 
into the government of Saskatchewan, and we’ve asked her to 
come here today to be introduced. 
 
Virginia McElree commenced her employment with the 
Government of Saskatchewan under the then premier William 
Patterson on November 19, 1943, and started in the department 
of reconstruction, labour and public welfare. After the 1944 
election of the CCF, she moved over to become a secretary in 
the department of social welfare office, and later moved on to 
government insurance and was a witness to the first purchase 
policy of SGI, oh, back in 1944. She then, on September 1, 
1948, was appointed secretary to the chairman of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, where she served continuously for almost 
39 years. And this year has come to the stage where she is 
retiring from the government. 
 
She has almost achieved 44 years of service to the public of 
-Saskatchewan. She served under 12 chairpersons and acting 
chairpersons, eight ministers, and five different government 
administrations and, as far as we could determine, had the most 
seniority of any public servant in  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

724 
 

Canada when she retired. And this is quite an honour to have 
spent 44 years working for the Government of Saskatchewan. 
I’d ask her to rise and ask the members to welcome her here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 
introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, 40 students 
from St. Henry’s Separate School in Melville, Saskatchewan, in 
my constituency, being grade 8 students. They are here in the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
They usually bring the grade 8 class every year, and usually the 
same teachers, Garth Gleisinger and Phyllis Sanguin are here 
today. Their bus drivers are Rev. Ken Hudson and Terry 
Schappert. And I would ask the members to welcome them here 
today, and I’ll try to meet with them after the delayed question 
period, due to the length of the introductions. Please welcome 
the students from Melville. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Premier’s Quote Regarding AIDS 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for recognizing 
me, and I direct my question to the Premier. And it deals with a 
comment which the Premier is reported to have made at a recent 
meeting between cabinet members and a number of women’s 
groups. It’s reported, sir, that you told the women’s 
representatives, and I will quote the report that was in the press: 
 

If AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) ever 
gets into the native community, it will be hell on wheels. 

 
While, sir, you are reported to have mentioned women and 
young people, no other nationality was mentioned — not Welsh 
or Ukrainian or German or English or French. Mr. Premier, why 
did you single out the native community in your statement with 
respect to AIDS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, when I met, and the 
cabinet met, with women’s groups and with church groups, we 
spoke for at least a half an hour on each occasion with respect 
to social disease, and particularly the problem of AIDS in 
Canada, and in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I referred to the worry that we have, as leaders across the 
country, about the problems associated with AIDS and the fact 
that it is a deadly disease and we have to treat it as such — and 
not just in urban markets, and not just in rural markets and 
constituencies, and not just among the youth, and not just 
among the native, but everybody. And it is extremely serious. 
 
And I talked about all of Saskatchewan — northern 
Saskatchewan, southern Saskatchewan, and various 
demographics that we have to be concerned about. And I am 
very serious and sincere when I say it is an extremely difficult 
problem, and it’s a very serious problem. And that’s why we’re 
taking the time to provide more  

education and more information to people about it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Supplementary, Mr. Premier. The nub of my question was that 
in reporting groups at risk, you apparently singled out native 
people. And I ask you again, why did you single out native 
groups and not mention any other racial or ethnic group when 
you used the colourful phrase “hell on wheels”? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not the facts that I 
singled out groups. I said that it’s a serious concern to all age 
groups and categories and demographic people. 
 
I spoke for at least 20 minutes, if not half an hour, about the 
problem — both groups that were in. And I said is a significant 
. . . And if, you know, if members opposite do not think that it’s 
a significant problem . . . And I’d be interested in knowing your 
view. It is extremely significant, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going 
to treat it as such. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
press report quotes you as follows: 
 

If AIDS ever gets into the native community, it will be 
hell on wheels. 
 

Mr. Premier, did you say that, or something approximately that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what I said: it would be 
extremely serious if it gets into Saskatchewan’s communities. 
And if it hits the young people or it hits natives or it hits seniors 
or it hits anybody in any more than it is today, it will be 
extremely serious. And that’s a fact. And it is true. And it is a 
life and death situation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, he’s taking somebody’s quote. He’s saying 
that it’s somebody said that I . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A 
supplementary then, because I’m still not sure whether the 
Premier is denying that he said this or not. 
 
Mr. Premier, a lot of people have suggested that if any such 
statement was made, it would be uninformed, derogatory, and 
the sort of statement which contributes to racial stereotyping 
which we don’t need in this province. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier, did you make this statement or anything 
akin to this statement which would give rise to the concerns 
which are being expressed to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — What I said, Mr. Speaker was that it was 
a very serious — and I talked for 20 minutes — very serious if 
it hits any part of our community. Extremely serious. And if it 
goes into the community at large — whether it’s seniors or 
whether it is urban people or whether it is people on reserves or 
whether it is people in northern Saskatchewan or whether it’s 
people in any place — now if somebody walked out of the 
meeting and said the Premier singled out one group, that’s not 
fair,  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

725 
 

because I didn’t. I talked about all groups, and I talked about all 
demographic areas, and I talked about all regions of the 
province. 
 
It’s just as serious, it’s just as serious, Mr. Speaker, on a reserve 
in northern Saskatchewan as it is in the city of Estevan, as it is 
any place else in this province. And that’s what I said, Mr. 
Speaker, and I did not single out a group . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would just like 
to make a comment. Unfortunately there are one or two terms 
that are being used in the House which I think we should 
recognize should not be part of the parliamentary vocabulary 
that we use, whether it’s standing on our feet or sitting in our 
desks. I think we all know which term we refer to, and I think 
that in the best interests of the efficient conduct of this 
Legislative Assembly, all members should purge their 
vocabulary of words like lie, liars, and that sort of thing, 
whether they’re standing or sitting in their desks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I perhaps 
have not made my position clear. A good number of people of 
this province are concerned that the first minister would say 
anything such as: if AIDS ever gets into the native community 
it will be hell on wheels. I ask you, sir, to deny that you made 
that statement, if that’s possible. And I ask you also, in the 
absence of the Minister of Health, to give the House any 
information which you may have which suggests that those 
infected by the AIDS virus are more numerous among Indian 
and native communities than any other part of our community. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me repeat. I didn’t say 
what the hon. member says that somebody said that I said. If he 
wants to play this game, I said that — and I might have used the 
word — it’s hell if it hits any part of our community, whether it 
is students, whether it is urban, whether it is rural, or whether it 
is native, or any part. And it’s serious, extremely serious. If the 
members opposite deny the fact that it’s serious, they’ve go 
their heads in the sand. They don’t want to deal with it. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to spend funds to make sure that 
Saskatchewan people are aware, because if it does hit 
Saskatchewan in any increased numbers, Mr. Speaker, quite 
frankly it will be extremely, extremely serious. 
 

Meech Lake Accord and Self-Government of Indian,  
Métis and Inuit 

 
Mr. Goulet: — I would like to direct my question to the 
Premier. This question concerns a lot of treaty Indian and Métis 
people in this province, and that’s in relation to the Meech Lake 
Accord. In the Meech Lake Accord the Premier accepted the 
principle of distinct society in the case of Quebec, but he would 
not accept the principle of self-government as put forth by the 
Indian, the Inuit, and the Métis. 
 
Will the Premier explain why he accepted the principle of 
distinct society in the case of Quebec, and did not accept the 
principle of self-government as put forth by the Indian, the 
Métis, and the Inuit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’m sure, as the hon. member knows, the 
proposal that I put forth in 1985, which was accepted by the 
Métis association, said that I understood and I accepted 
self-government for the native community. And it said if this 
proposal is to be enshrined in the constitution, it has to come to 
the legislature of Saskatchewan. And it was accepted by a large 
number. In fact, if one more group, native group had accepted it 
— because we had seven out of the ten provinces — it would 
have been in the constitution already. 
 
Now I accepted Quebec being part of the constitution, but not 
before it has to come to this legislature, and we will all have a 
chance to debate it, and it will have to pass this legislature, and 
every other legislature, including parliament in Canada. What I 
am surprised about is that in the last round of negotiations with 
the natives they turned it down because they would not want it 
to come to this legislature, which means the people of 
Saskatchewan would not be involved in those decisions. 
 
I can’t allow new forms of self-government to take place 
without this legislature participating, and the hon. member 
understands that. If it’s good enough for Quebec to be part of 
this country, that it has to pass the legislature, it’s good enough 
for other forms of self-government. 
 
And again, I’ll just say, in 1985 I proposed it, and if one more 
native group had adopted it — we had seven out of ten of the 
provinces and the federal government already buying it. This 
time it was denied . . . And I didn’t turn it down, Mr. Speaker; it 
was turned down by the native population. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — You mentioned the involvement of Indian and 
Métis people, and also the people of Saskatchewan. There was 
mention of public hearings in the accord. Will the government 
hold public hearings so that the concerns of treaty Indian and 
Métis, as well as others, can be heard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t made up my mind 
. . . a final, ultimate decision with respect to public hearings. 
I’m inclined not to have public hearings because we can debate 
it here, and each MLA can go back into his constituency and 
have all the meetings they want with respect to the Meech Lake 
Accord, and all the groups they want. 
 
I remind the members opposite that when we had the whole 
constitution brought home, ‘81-82, there wasn’t any public 
hearings when we brought the whole thing here. And members 
opposite did not provide public hearings. But if people want to 
debate it, I mean we will introduce the resolution very soon into 
this House; every MLA can have all the hearings they want to, 
and you can bring information back to this legislature. And the 
MLAs from each constituency, I’m sure, can speak for all their 
constituents at any time. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — In regards to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is it a new question or a supplementary? 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

726 
 

Mr. Goulet: — Supplementary. Will the Premier guarantee in 
the upcoming second round that his government will lobby 
other Premiers and the Prime Minister for some of the Meech 
Lake Accord amendments which have been suggested by treaty 
Indian and Métis leaders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that the heads 
of all political parties, the Leader of the Opposition in 
parliament and the Leader of the NDP, all support the accord as 
it is. And they’ve said so. But that is not to say that there won’t 
be modification somewhere down the road to the constitution 
on the second round or third round and continuously as we go 
through senate reform, as we look at fish, as we look at new 
provinces and so forth. So I wouldn’t rule out changes on this 
particular accord. Each legislature and parliament has to pass 
the identical accord, the identical resolution. So it’s not likely 
that you’re going to see modifications as we go through this 
exercise on this particular round. We can have a second round, 
and if there is modification to be made, certainly could be the 
case. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, again to the 
Premier. In the Meech Lake Accord there will be a clear shift in 
power from the federal government to the provinces. Many 
people, especially treaty Indian people, are concerned that with 
increased provincial powers that the bilateral, treaty-making 
process will be jeopardized. Will the Premier honour the 
existing rights of treaty Indians? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would in all respects say, 
of course I will honour the rights. Again, I put together a 
proposal in 1985 which was accepted by the Métis association, 
accepted by most groups except one, or we’d have had it 
already in the constitution. 
 
And with respect to bilateral powers, or federal powers, 
provincial powers, I remind the members and my hon. 
colleague, the only time the federal government has to talk to 
the provinces in any great detail is in areas of exclusive 
jurisdiction where we have control over our resources or 
anything else that is exclusive. 
 
Under the constitution, if we have exclusive rights, then by 
definition they’re our rights, and if somebody is going to spend 
in our area, they have to come out and talk to us about that. I 
believe that that’s about high time we got it. And not only for 
Quebec. And not only for Ontario, the way it was, but 
Saskatchewan will now have the same power and the same veto 
power as Ontario and Quebec, and it’s about time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — We want one final assurance from the Premier. 
Will the Premier guarantee that the first minister will have both 
Métis and treaty Indians at the constitutional bargaining table 
throughout the second round of the constitutional conference, 
promised by the Meech Lake Accord? Will he assure that? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t say what 
people, or additional new people, will be at the constitutional 
table. We’ve had people there before, and I lobbied to have 
additional people. And I’ve talked with Chief Roland Crowe, 
for example, and encouraged the federal government to . . . We 
funded them to go down. We encouraged the federal 
government to give them a seat at the table. In fact, the FSI 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indians) here in Saskatchewan 
initiated much of the discussion, and then were denied the right 
to sit at the table. 
 
So I’m already on record of supporting them, and I will 
continue to support them in their bilateral relationships with the 
federal government, as I will with respect to the things that we 
have obligations for that are well understood and well 
respected. 
 

Cut-Back on Core Funding for AMNSIS 
 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, it has to do with your government cutting back on the 
core funding for the Association of Métis and Non-Status 
Indians of Saskatchewan. This $750,000 cut, just three months 
ago, was made after you were given a tongue-lashing in front of 
all Canadians on national television by Mr. Sinclair, the 
AMNSIS (Association of Métis and Non-Status Indians of 
Saskatchewan) leader. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, will you now admit that this cut is little 
more than petty personal revenge for Mr. Sinclair’s comments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 
that is not true. The hon. member knows that it’s got nothing to 
do with revenge at all. We have limited the funding or cut the 
funding for advocates from planned parenthood, to pro-life, to 
other groups right across the province, under some difficult 
economic times. At the same time . . . And with respect to the 
status Indian, we even changed the way we funded that 
organization. We didn’t just give the money to the political arm; 
we gave the money to the reserves and to the chiefs. They 
allocated money back up. We’ve changed the way it’s funded. 
And frankly, I’m pretty happy with some of the changes that 
have taken place. 
 
With respect to her allegation, it’s just simply not the case. 
Across the piece in Saskatchewan, we’ve asked people to 
postpone operations. We have limited funding to advocates at a 
time when obviously we don’t have the revenue because of 
wheat and oil and potash prices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
how can you say in one breath you support the concept of 
native self-government and, in the other breath, cut the funding 
for AMNSIS in order to . . . you eliminate their funding that 
will help them promote native self-government. 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

727 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve reviewed this on 
several occasions, but the advice that I receive is that as much 
economic activity, independent economic activity, and success 
. . . and may I give you a list of projects, economic projects and 
jobs and new economic activity that has taken place. That’s 
where we’re putting our priority. And the people of 
Saskatchewan are telling me: build, diversify, manufacturing, 
processing, tourism — those kinds of things are opposed to, Mr. 
Speaker, just funding the groups that want to advocate this or 
that, or whatever. If you want to raise political funds, you raise 
them with your organization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for economic development, I believe at the same 
time, if I am correct, the federal government is giving $9 
million — and the minister can comment in more detail on a 
subsequent question — $9 million in economic activity, which 
is very, very large. 
 

Spending on Native People 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the Premier, and it deals with a comment that he 
made at the first ministers’ conference in March, and he has 
since many times repeated this statement. 
 
Mr. Premier, you claimed at that conference that your 
government is spending $1 million a day on treaty Indian and 
Métis people in this province. They tell me, what million 
dollars a day? And they ask and they say that they’re not sure 
that they have seen any of it. 
 
So my question to you, Mr. Premier, is very specific: how did 
you calculate this figure, and can you table in this Assembly the 
documents which back up your claim that your government is 
spending $1 million a day on native people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe if you go back and 
check the records, it was: I said something that we spend — we 
spend — in the neighbourhood of a million dollars a day on the 
native population in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
All right, the taxpayers’ dollars going into the native 
community in Saskatchewan is, in fact, in excess of a million 
dollars a day. And that’s on about 11 per cent of the population 
— a considerable amount of money — $13 million in La Loche 
alone on an annual basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t have the documentation with me, but I’ll 
take notice of the question and, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite sure the 
hon. member will find that we, as taxpayers, pay, federally and 
provincially, put together over a million dollars — a million 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, a million dollars a day in the province of 
Saskatchewan for the native community. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, here today; not here 
tomorrow. Mr. Premier, you specifically said that you and your 
government spend $1 million a day on Indian and  

Métis people in Saskatchewan. It has become clear to this 
Assembly, in the last week or so, that your ability to deal 
truthfully with any issue is extremely questionable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Did I hear you say, Mr. Premier, and will 
you make it clear to this House, that you will table in this 
Assembly an explanation as to how you came up with this 
figure — how you came up with the figure that the province 
spends $1 million a day because you said, “we”, and will you 
table the documents that support that statement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already said that I will 
bring the documentation to the House that describes the $1 
million a day of taxpayers’ money that goes to the native 
community in Saskatchewan. And I’ll be glad to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Does he want . . . If it adds up to more 
than that, then I’ll just be happy to have the member opposite 
acknowledge that it adds up to more than $1 million a day. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, let us deal with the facts. Let’s talk about 
your own budget estimate. On page 55 of your Estimates, which 
you approved, the budget for the Indian and Native Affairs 
office has been cut from . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Please put the question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In light of the fact, Mr. Premier, that 
along with the cut in the economic development program from 
$3 million to $1 million, and in light of the fact, Mr. Premier, 
that grants to Indian and Métis organizations and women groups 
have been cut from 1.2 million . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Please put the question; it’s 
becoming a long supplementary question. As we all know, if 
you have a question please put it immediately. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, I ask you . . . I ask you in 
light of those facts, which comes out of your own budget, read 
by the Minister of Finance here last Wednesday: how do you 
justify your statement that your government spends $1 million a 
day on Indian and Métis people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 
he’s into estimates, and we’ll be glad to . . . We have lots of 
time. But if I could just take 20 seconds. 
 
In 1987-88 budget, we’re looking at Human Resources, Labour 
and Employment, have targeted $4.491 million to native 
community; Education, 13 million; Social Services, 2 million; 
Saskatchewan Housing, 3 million; Health 1.6 million; Justice, 
1.4 million — 25.977 million in just several departments that I 
can relate to you. And  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

728 
 

we will provide to the hon. member, because he mentioned a 
couple of figures, we will provide, not 29 million, Mr. Speaker, 
but millions upon millions upon millions of dollars that are 
spent in the province of Saskatchewan on 11 per cent of the 
population. 
 

Opportunities for Native People in the Public Service 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan’s treaty Indians and Métis 
people are seriously underrepresented in Saskatchewan’s public 
service. Native people make up more than 10 per cent of the 
total population, yet the jobs they hold are less than 5 per cent 
in the public service. And with the destruction of programs like 
the native court workers’ program, employment opportunities in 
the public service are even less. Can you explain how you 
propose to improve that situation when your government has 
also dismantled the employment equity or affirmative action 
branch of the Public Service commission? Who will now work 
to find new job opportunities in government departments and 
agencies for native people, women, and persons with 
disabilities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, as relates to the 
employment equity branch, I should make clear that that 
function has not somehow been eliminated. What we have 
done, Mr. Speaker, given the maturity of that program insofar 
as the various departments formulating plans and putting those 
plans in place, has proceeded and is on schedule. And now that 
function, Mr. Speaker, for the most part will be co-ordinated out 
of Human Resources, I think which makes some good sense. So 
I ought to advise the member . . . I thank her for her question, 
but she should be clear that the function is not somehow 
eliminated; it’s now in a different department. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Time has elapsed. Order, please. Order. When 
the Speaker is on his feet, there is to be no talking from desks or 
anywhere else. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 
opportunity to speak in support of the Minister of Finance who 
has brought in the budget for the 1987-88 fiscal year. 
 
I want to congratulate the Minister of Finance for his fine effort, 
for taking on the task of managing our economy during really 
difficult times. I want to congratulate him for having the 
foresight and the courage to make the appropriate modifications 
in the Saskatchewan budget  

and in our management system, to make sure that we have the 
future of our programs in the palm of our hand so that we can 
control them. 
 
We want financial flexibility in the year 1990 and at the turn of 
the century. And, Mr. Speaker, this budget will provide it. We 
want to protect families. And, Mr. Speaker, in this province we 
have protected them well in the last four and a half, five years, 
and we’re going to continue to protect them well with some 
very unique programs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we want to diversify and build so that we 
can be strong. The diversification, the processing, the 
manufacturing is extremely important for the province of 
Saskatchewan and builds that framework and that incentive and 
those mechanisms that have been put in place in Saskatchewan, 
not only since 1982 but in this budget, are very important for 
the province. 
 
In the last couple of days I’ve had the interesting and 
pleasurable time of being involved in some unique 
diversification as well as decentralization in Saskatchewan. And 
we’re going to continue that. 
 
With respect to decentralization, we opened the brand-new crop 
insurance building in Melville yesterday. The people of 
Melville are delighted to have it there. The employees are very 
happy. The crop insurance building and the equipment and the 
staff is excellent. And the facility, Mr. Speaker, is in line with 
what the Finance minister is talking about in reaching the 
people, providing the services, and recognizing that there’s 
more than just one community that is up to hosting government 
economic activities and services. 
 
The city of Melville is not that large. It’s just a little over 5,000 
people. And with the crop insurance building going there, 
decentralizing out of the city of Regina, it’s a tremendous boost 
to the urban communities outside the city of Regina. And we 
can provide the service. It’s closer to the farmers, it’s closer to 
the clientele, and it’s well worth the effort. 
 
And I could point out, Mr. Speaker, not everybody agreed. It 
wasn’t without some controversies, I’m sure you know. The 
opposition wasn’t very happy with it; we had some other groups 
that weren’t very happy with it. We even had some church 
groups that said it was not the right thing to do. And when it all 
finishes, and a year later we find that everybody is happy with 
it; the people that wanted to stay in Regain are working; they 
have jobs. The people that want to go into Melville have jobs. 
And there’s new job opportunities for people coming up 
through the ranks, and people are promotions, and it’s 
decentralized. And it’s better service to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of courage and foresight that 
is necessary to make government better and better all the time. 
Many things we do in government are very good. Some things 
need improvement. It’s not always easy to make the 
improvements in health, in education, in crop insurance and 
agriculture, but it works. 
 
Let me give you a second example. I was disappointed that the 
hon. member couldn’t be in his riding today, but I  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

729 
 

was in the riding of Quill Lakes and I went to Wynyard. And 
we opened a brand-new hatchery today and we officially cut the 
ribbon. And it’s the finest technology, will allow 200 people in 
line with the processing plant and the hatchery to work in this 
growing industry of the poultry market, right in the middle of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re using Saskatchewan grain, we’re using Saskatchewan 
feed, but we’re not just selling wheat to Japan or to the Soviet 
Union — we’re processing that wheat into the livestock sector. 
The livestock sector is providing 200 jobs. The 200 jobs are 
adding more services and demanding more services in the 
community, and all of Wynyard is very happy with that kind of 
entrepreneurial business approach. And, Mr. Speaker, what it 
showed is that people are prepared to risk and invest. And the 
board of directors deserve a good bouquet of the poultry 
processing plant — they put up most of the money — to risk 
investing in Saskatchewan and work with the local people to 
diversify the economy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say, it’s good to build and 
diversify and have processing and manufacturing, because it 
creates wealth and it creates jobs, and with jobs people pay tax 
and they pay sales tax. And with that money, you can make sure 
or you can rest assured, you can have the cash for social 
services, for education, for health care, and so forth. 
 
So the culmination of managing the economy today so that you 
can build now and into the future is extremely important, 
because if you didn’t manage today, you’d run out of money for 
health and education and social services. 
 
If you didn’t diversify the economy and you didn’t have people 
investing their funds, you wouldn’t generate the revenue. You’d 
be tied, as they say, put all your eggs in one basket, and when 
the price of that basket goes down, you’re in big trouble. We 
don’t want to just depend on potash prices. We don’t want to 
just depend on wheat prices or on one or two single 
commodities. We want to broaden and deepen our economy, 
and that’s been the fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say at the outset, because some have thrown the odd 
criticism at us, and at the Minister of Finance, that we didn’t 
talk about the problems or the difficulties facing the province of 
Saskatchewan in the last two or three years, or particularly 
during the last fall during the campaign. Well the facts are, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve been talking about them since we were elected 
in ’82. 
 
We were elected, in fact campaigned, on one of the problems — 
high interest rates. We talked about I and we fixed it. And we 
brought in interest rate protection. It was extremely important to 
people on farms and homes and in communities and for senior 
citizens who were frightened about losing their homes. 
 
We did the same in 1986. We got some severe problems, we 
say. We got revenue problems. We’re going to have to have, 
and we introduced, a flat tax. We said we were doing to have to 
make major modifications to down-size government; we talked 
about that. We said we got severe problems in agriculture and 
we’re going to have to deal  

with that. We’re short farm income. We had to make changes in 
crop insurance, we had to make changes in tax systems to help 
people during these difficult times. 
 
I’m sure everybody will acknowledge, most of the campaign in 
1986 was about me talking to the federal government, saying, 
we’re in some trouble. We need some assistance, we need at 
least a billion dollars in cash, and we’ve got to have it here 
because our economy can’t stand it and the farmers can’t put up 
with $2 wheat. Well everybody knows that’s the case. 
 
It takes courage, Mr. Speaker, to face the facts. The truth was 
then, and the truth is now, that we’re short revenue because of 
international prices and subsidies and protectionism. It takes 
courage for the Minister of Finance to say, I’m going to trim my 
operation; I’m going to down-size government. 
 
Now nobody said that would be popular, particularly for the 
employees that you have to say, this position is not there. It’s 
not easy, and we understand that. But the alternative is just to 
let it grow. And that would not take courage; it would just put 
your head in the sand and say, I don’t have the money, and I 
have a deficit now, but I will just continue to borrow and it 
won’t matter. 
 
Well it does matter, Mr. Speaker. And somebody has to get a 
hold of it and say, I will not let the size of this government get 
out of hand. If I can be more efficient and more effective and 
provide good service, now is the time to do it, to protect people 
in 1990 and 1995 and well on into the future. And that’s 
precisely, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve done. 
 
(1445) 
 
And we talked about the down-sizing, and we talked about what 
we’re going to have to do to diversify and strengthen this 
economy. And, Mr. Speaker, I will just spend a couple of 
minutes on how we’re doing that so that people can recognize 
that, in fact, that it is the case. 
 
We’ve encouraged people to expand in the pulp and paper 
business in Saskatchewan, and everybody knows that. We 
didn’t have a paper industry here before. We will now have one. 
And it’s a lot of jobs and it’s a long-run industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We didn’t have an upgrader, but we’re building one right now. 
The largest oil project in the world is taking place in Regina 
right now. One of the largest paper projects in North America is 
in Prince Albert — $500 million going on with PAPCO (Prince 
Albert Pulp company). PAPCO’s finally making money, Mr. 
Speaker, and it feels good for the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
Finally that pulp company is making money and very good 
money and it’s the first time in a long time, through our 
diversification, that it is making that kind of money. And we’re 
building a new paper mill and one of the largest projects you’ll 
find in Canada. The upgrader here is about a 7, $800 million 
project. There will be 1,800 to 2,000 men working in Regina on 
that upgrader this fall. It will be jobs now, in construction, jobs 
at that plant, 1,000 jobs for a long time out in the field 
supplying the oil, 50,000 barrels a day, Mr. Speaker. Building a 
refinery, a co-operative effort, with  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

730 
 

the Co-op and the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And with any reasonable margins we’re going to pay that off, 
Mr. Speaker, because it’s based on the differential. It’s not on 
just the raw price, the difference between light oil and heavy 
crude. And if you run anywhere between 6 and $7 or more, we 
pay it off in about 10 years to 11 years. Then, Mr. Speaker, we 
have major sources of revenue coming in — tens upon tens of 
millions of dollars that we’ll get going through an upgrader 
rather than just pumping oil and send it to Chicago or 
Minneapolis or to Coch Refinery or someplace else. 
 
The diversification in processing, in manufacturing — I’ll just 
touch on a few, certainly in Intercon it is . . . we’re very happy 
with that expansion. We’re happy with recreational vehicles 
expansion in North Battleford and processing of bacon there. 
Obviously we’re looking and working closely with the 
Japanese, with Marubeni and Hitachi on manufacturing 
turbines. We’ve finished a power project. We’re in the middle 
of another one. Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at chemical 
manufacturing. I had good discussions with the President of 
France, François Mitterrand, when we were looking at Cdf 
Chimie and a fertilizer project that we’re doing here, 
manufacturing in the health care field, expanding in tourism. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, these economic activities broaden and 
diversify the economy in Saskatchewan so we can sustain 
ourselves through these difficult times. When the winds of 
international trade say that their prices will go down, we will 
have processed and manufactured goods that can continue to 
provide us with revenue in this province. And the infrastructure 
for that is important. The gas distribution systems so that we 
can have natural gas and that processing plant out there in 
Wynyard is very important. So we can have natural gas to the 
farmers in the hog business out in rural Saskatchewan is very 
important. Top-notch communication, individual line service to 
people all over this province is very important. To bury those 
power lines and manufacture the cable in Moose Jaw is very 
important, Mr. Speaker. Those are the kinds of expenditures, up 
to $1.5 billion, diversifying our economy so that we can build. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you have lots of money and the price of 
wheat is $8 a bushel, and the price of oil is $35 a barrel, and the 
price of potash is 150 bucks a ton, and you’ve got an extra 
billion dollars a year in revenue, it’s not that difficult to find 
where you could spend it and it could be very enjoyable. The 
flip side of that, Mr. Speaker, is when it isn’t . . . or in cast it 
might not be the case in the future, what will you do to manage 
this economy to make sure that you can handle it and have 
top-notch health care and top-notch education and the various 
kinds of social programs. That’s the key. That’s the $64,000 
question. 
 
How will we manage this economy in good times, and in not so 
good times, to make sure that we have the health programs and 
the education programs and the other safety net measures that 
people want to have? Well, I just point out, Mr. Speaker, we 
have set a course for economic activity in Saskatchewan, and 
we’ll compare it with any in North America. We have had some 
difficult times with drought and with prices and some other 
things and protectionism. But we’re not easily intimidated. 
We’re  

elected to govern, to manage, to protect, and to build and 
diversify. And that vision, Mr. Speaker, goes on into 1990 and 
the year 2000, and you will see, Mr. Speaker. Mark my words! 
 
Today in the province of Saskatchewan there isn’t a better 
health care system in Canada than right there. And today in the 
province of Saskatchewan there isn’t a better education system 
any place in Canada than right here. The social services system 
is by far the best in Canada. The tax system is by far the fairest. 
The only province that has lower taxes in Alberta, and I still 
think we have some better provisions, even though they have a 
lower absolute tax. But we’re number two in absolute levels, 
and much more fair, and I’ll touch on that in a minute. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, and to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
the people of this country: you look again in 1990 and you look 
again in 1995, and you look again at the turn of the century, and 
Saskatchewan will continue to have the lead because we have 
planned for it. And we have managed for it, as we did in ’82, 
and said: we need a new agricultural college; we need rural gas 
distribution systems; we need the diversification; we need some 
outside investment. We did. We planned for it. We got it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t only win in ’82, we didn’t only 
win in ’86, we will win again, Mr. Speaker, if we provide the 
kind of vision and the kind of strength and the kind of 
management skills the people of Saskatchewan expect from a 
government. They don’t want somebody who will just say: I 
have no alternatives. They don’t want that. They want to say: 
look at it carefully, make up your mind, and stick with it to 
build into the future to make sure that we can. 
 
I know my colleagues have gone to the numbers, and I’m not 
going to go through them in any great detail, but I want to touch 
on two or three things with respect to education and health care 
and social services and welfare, and then end up with a couple 
of comments about some comparisons that we have in terms of 
the economic base we have here. 
 
Our government is so committed to first- class health care that 
we have increased expenditures since we were elected by 63 per 
cent — from 700-and-some million dollars to 1.2 billion. Some 
would say: yes, but that’s partly of Social Services. Well, if you 
look at the Social Services budget, it’s up, too. 
 
So any way you want to add it up, Mr. Speaker, we have made a 
major commitment to health care, and it’s with hospitals, and 
it’s with nursing homes, and it’s with technology, and it’s with 
equipment, and it’s with the entire package. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s good, but it isn’t excellent. It is not excellent. 
Just money alone won’t solve all the problems. We have to 
learn to administer the regional-wide health care system that we 
have. We’ve got to learn to administer hospitals as best we can. 
We’ve got to provide services, and in the four corners of this 
province, so we all don’t go to just one or two hospitals and 
have the line-ups there that are inordinately long. 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

731 
 

We have to make those kinds of changes. And we’ve got to 
make some decisions to take courage with respect to priorities. 
And I want to just talk about a couple — the drug program and 
the dental program because we changed them, and Mr. Speaker, 
with good reason — with good reason — to provide better 
health care and better dental programs for the province of 
Saskatchewan that will outrank anybody’s in the country. 
 
Look at the drug program. We started that program. We spent 
$17 million dollars. If we had’ve kept it up this year, it would 
have been 80-some million dollars. By 1990 you are close to 
$100 million, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, with the same 
population base. Free drugs — $100 million a year, free drugs. 
 
When they first found out it was free they spent 17 million on 
drugs. And as they got accustomed to the procedures and 
accustomed to the things that can go on with free drugs, it 
would soon be $100 million a year in free drugs. I’m not so sure 
that’s healthy, Mr. Speaker. And I say that in all seriousness. 
The drug problems, and the alcohol problems, and the 
combination so drugs and alcohol in society, is serious, and 
they are serious. The administration costs of our drug program 
have gone up 400 per cent — 400 per cent. 
 
I wasn’t happy with the administration of the program either — 
it could be better — since we initiated it. But the cost of free 
drugs, and obviously the use of free drugs, went from 17 
million to — by the next decade, which is in three years — to 
approximately 100 million a year free drugs, with some abuse. 
 
Now we canvassed the country. What do other people do? We 
looked at the program that our neighbours had, and said: we 
understand that it’s a problem right across Canada. But we’ve 
got a program that we’re not happy with — responsible 
program, that says people are going to start to watch what drugs 
they use. They’re going to start to ask the doctors what drugs 
they use. They’re going to start to ask the pharmacist, is that the 
lowest-cost drug? They’re going to start to ask people and their 
relatives and they’re going to start to ask their kids and they’re 
going to start to ask their parents, are those the right things that 
you should be taking? Is that the amount? That’s healthy, Mr. 
Speaker, not only financially healthy and management healthy, 
but it’s healthy in a generic sense. 
 
A hundred million dollars a year on free drugs because the 
taxpayers is going to just do it. Well, we changed the program 
and we brought in the Manitoba program to Saskatchewan, and 
we made it better; we’ve modified it. We picked up more of the 
cost and more of the protection. But I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll get people thinking about drug use and drug abuse, and 
how much it costs, and how we can maybe manage those costs, 
so we will have a better health care system. Not just more of it, 
but better, and responsible, and manage to 1990 and the year 
2000. 
 
Anybody in this legislature can stand up and say, 200 million a 
year in free drugs and that would be tremendous, and only if 
you did that would you have first-class health. I don’t buy that. 
I don’t even think members of the opposition buy that. Not 
many people in  

the public would buy that. It’s responsible, Mr. Speaker, to 
make very sure that we treat people fairly, and we manage their 
money, and we watch the programs we design. 
 
Let me just touch on the dental program — and they’re 
connected; they’re related. Parents were saying to us, the best 
place to get the teeth fixed, for children from 5 to 13, is at the 
dentist’s office. We train dentists for a reason. It’s a 
professional thing, and they’ve got to go to university for a long 
time, and they have to know how to diagnose the teeth, the jaw, 
the bite, the entire head. It’s a professional that needs to do that 
if you want top-notch care. You can have assistants look at it, 
Mr. Speaker, but an assistant doesn’t have the qualifications, or 
the education, or the training, or the professionalism that 
graduate dentists have, and if they did, we wouldn’t have 
dentists; we’d just have assistants. 
 
Parents said, I . . . And many of them did already, they didn’t 
even go to the program that was in place. For my children — 
and I know that the braces they need, and I know the treatment 
they have, and I know the diagnosis that they have to have — 
my children are going to the dentist. Could you pay for that, Mr. 
Premier, for the very young children from five to 13. We said, 
right on. Let’s do that. Let’s take the children, and mom and 
dad will have to, I admit, take the child once a year — maybe 
more often if they’ve got problems — to the dentist to get the 
professional care, and we’ll pay for it all. There isn’t a better 
system any place in Canada. I don’t think there’s one in North 
America. There might not be a better one in the world. 
 
For a five-year-old to 13-years-old, we pay for it with the 
best-trained people that you’ll find any place. I assume that 
because they are graduates of the dental college. 
 
They will hire employees. I admit, it’s not easy for those who 
were in another program, like the dental assistants, to say, well I 
had it this way, and you’re going to change it. But if it’s right, 
you have to have the courage to change it. You have to do that. 
There comes a time when you have to make up your mind. 
You’re going to fish or cut bait, as they say. It’s right to have 
the children treated in the dentist’s office. 
 
Now the second part of the program is: well, how about the 
teenagers? It’s cost us $3 million or more to fix their teeth if we 
sent them to the dentist. We said, well, fine, we can do that. Do 
we have any other priorities? Well, Mr. Speaker, parents come 
back to us and said, yes, as they did in the drug program. The 
problems with the teenagers aren’t with their teeth, in most 
cases. They got a cavity, they can get it fixed. They can go to 
the dentist. 
 
The problems are education associated with life today, living 
today, with the use and abuse of alcohol and drugs, and the 
combination, and the mixing. I say it is very clear, and people in 
this room know that. I mean, it’s one thing to have a bottle of 
beer, but it’s another thing to combine it with a chemical. This 
new combination of drugs and alcohol can be literally deadly. 
People need to be aware of it. They need to be treated, and they 
need to have awareness programs. 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

732 
 

So we said, we’re going to allocate the money to educating 
young people and treating young people about the social 
consequences of their actions in society today. Social 
consequences — as we talked about in question period today — 
with respect to social diseases, particularly with respect to 
AIDS. Serious, Mr. Speaker, very serious. Deserves our money 
and our attention an awful lot more than having the public pay 
for a cavity for a teenager. Not easy to make the change, Mr. 
Speaker, but by God, the right change to make. 
 
(1500) 
 
When you’re looking at the kinds of things we face and our 
children face, and the problems they get into, the suicide rates 
with young people, and the problems in homes, and the 
chemicals they face, and the unscrupulous people in the streets 
that provide them with this, it’s time we took it on. It’s a lot 
more significant than the dental program for teenagers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — People know that it’s right. They’ll know 
a year from now, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve made the right 
decision putting that brand new treatment centre, alcohol and 
drug treatment centre, in Yorkton, outside of Yorkton. It’s the 
right thing to spend the money on. We don’t have extra money, 
but with the money we have, we will make choices for the best 
health care and the best dental care and the best social services 
programs that you will find in Canada, bar none. 
 
And we’ll stand by that and we’ll keep funding them. And we 
will not put our heads in the sand. And I can say people did put 
their heads in the sand, and people opposite, when they were in 
government. And I mean that. That’s the reason we’re here 
today, and the people know that. And they can ballyhoo all you 
like. When interest rates were 20 per cent, they put their heads 
in their sand — and no help. When people wanted nursing 
homes, a freeze for five years — no help. When people wanted 
tax relief — no help. The record speaks for itself. 
 
They were talking about the polls today. The NDP lost in ’64, 
the NDP lost in ’67, the NDP lost in 1982, and here it is ’87, 
and they’re still over there, Mr. Speaker, for a reason. They 
have no solutions. They go to a convention — no solutions. Just 
put it into government and make it bigger — make it bigger. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I won’t dwell on that, but obviously I very 
much believe in the changes we’ve made, including welfare 
reform. 
 
People opposite said, oh you’ve got to give teenagers a bunch 
more money because they’re on welfare. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know many conscientious parents on that side of the 
House, or any place in the world, that would say, give a young, 
healthy teenager more money on welfare so that they could 
leave home and go downtown and set up shop, light 
housekeeping, and live on the government. 
 
They’re saying, give them $800 or $1,000 a month to go 
downtown as an 18-year-old girl and live there because she’s 
not happy at home. Don’t treat them in drug and alcohol or give 
them awareness or anything like that. Fix  

their teeth and give them $1,000 a month to go live outside the 
home. We said, no! And sometimes you’ve got to say no to 
your children, not because you don’t care; it’s because you love 
them. And we said, you will not get more money to leave home 
and to go downtown. You will not be able to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We’ll give you money to go to school; 
we’ll give you money to get a job. And our welfare statistics on 
young people going back into education and back into the job 
market are the best in North America, Mr. Speaker — the very 
best. 
 
And when people look at the results year after year, not just 
when they want to complain and say, well jeepers, isn’t this 
terrible, because they’ve got welfare reform, ask yourself: why 
does the Premier of Saskatchewan want education reform and 
health reform and welfare reform and tax reform? why? Don’t 
you think that I’m just as competitive politically as anybody in 
the country? Well if not, I’m damn close to it. 
 
I live in a competitive market, and I’ve thought an awful lot 
about the things that we’re about to do and we’re doing. And 
they’re the right things to do. And I firmly believe — firmly 
believe — that in the next year and the year after and the year 
after that, when we get the programs in place, people will say, 
that’s a fine facility that you built in Yorkton. And that’s a fine 
new hospital that you built in Estevan. And that’s a fine new 
hospital that you built in Saskatoon, and a tremendous new 
nursing home you built in Moose Jaw. And we can’t do them all 
at once. I understand that. And the people understand that. 
 
They got farmers who don’t have money. You have people in 
the oil patch that don’t have money, and the potash industry that 
don’t have money, and they’re saying, I understand that you 
have to manage. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to go through all the 
programs that we have, and I would enjoy doing it. But I want 
to make one comparison because the alternatives stand out. 
 
I have a particular aversion to a tax system that is regressive . . . 
regressive. That is, that it will pick on the poor. I think your tax 
system should be progressive. As you have more money, and 
your ability to pay, you should pay more. And we have done 
that over and over and over again When we got elected, the 
government of the day was taxing the poor on gasoline — 
taxing them. They were taxing the poor on clothes — taxing 
them. We didn’t see the tax breaks for people. They were taxed 
on their utility bills. When you had a Sask Power bill you paid 5 
per cent sales tax on it if you had no money at all — on welfare. 
 
And at the same time, the high interest rates were the most 
regressive tax anywhere that anybody had ever seen in the 
history of Saskatchewan. Regressive because those on low 
income trying to make their payments — on your house 
payments if you had $14,000 income, or $8,000 income, your 
payments went from $150 to $300 a month,  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

733 
 

or 400 to 800. And the low income people paid in spades under 
an administration that said: we defend the low income . . . we 
defend the low income. 
 
They talk a lot about it, Mr. Speaker, but talk is cheap. They 
talk and talk and talk and talk, but when it comes time to 
deliver, they hide. They did not deliver. And the truth is in ’82, 
and before ’82, the poor paid all these taxes, and they did. And 
in our budget today — and the minister has gone through it, and 
I can go through it again — all the tax breaks for low income 
people . . . low income. 
 
And for seniors, Mr. Speaker, what did they do for seniors? 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t provide a heritage program; they 
didn’t provide the assistance to senior citizens like you see in 
this province. It is the best in Canada. 
 
Now I can talk a lot about them — I’m not, because they are not 
in power. But obviously I can compare our record to theirs, and 
they don’t stand up. They can talk easily about it, but they don’t 
stand up. But I can talk about the only NDP government that is 
in power, that they keep telling me about is providing such 
great service. When the government and the NDP 
administration is in power today facing the same difficulties we 
face — the same difficulties — what is their choice? Right? 
Because obviously if you have a deficit and you don’t want to 
cut and you don’t want to tax, they are contradictory. You’ve 
got to deal with it. You either have to cut something, or you 
have to raise taxes, or else you’ve got to get lucky and get a 
whole bunch of money from the resource sector some place 
else. 
 
Manitoba faces the same problem. I want to compare, Mr. 
Speaker, how a socialist government deals with the poor, and 
deals with diversification, and deals with protectionism, and 
held up to the whole country in the North America their answer 
to difficult economic times, compared to our answer to 
economic times. And you can find publications that will verify 
all the figures, and their budget is just out. 
 
Well first, a 20 per cent increase in taxes. A 20 per cent increase 
in taxes by the NDP in Manitoba. Now philosophically, Mr. 
Speaker, they are hidebound by it. They’re hidebound by it. 
They’re hidebound by their philosophy. They say, well, if I can 
have more people in government and I’m paying them, more 
people will vote for me; and the bigger the government, the 
more stable I can be politically. And they plan it. They plan it at 
their conventions. It’s the philosophy, the classic Marxist 
philosophy which says if I can have more and more of them 
working in the government, I will continue to have more of 
them on the take. And if you go back and look at Lenin and 
Marxism, and all the others that have done it — from Mao — 
it’s the same thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re philosophically bound to bigger, bigger, 
and bigger government. Now if I can give you the numbers. The 
number, Mr. Speaker, of government employees under the NDP 
administration has increased 43 per cent in the last five years. 
The size of government up 43 per cent under an NDP 
philosophy which says, we’ll make government bigger. 
 

And how do we finance it? Not by trimming and managing but 
by taxing — but by taxing. And then you look at the tax 
increases: a new tax of 2 per cent on net income; additional 1 
per cent tax on sales tax; a land transfer tax that hit Manitoba 
home buyers; a new 7 per cent take out tax on food; a payroll 
tax up 50 per cent to 2.25 per cent; and a new water tax. Hydro 
rates up 9.7 per cent; telephone rates up 11 per cent; Auto-Pak 
premiums up 9 to 30 per cent; workman’s compensation fees up 
20 per cent; all other government fees up 20 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and if you look at the poor. Do the poor pay tax on 
gasoline in Manitoba? I ask every social organization, every 
church group, everybody else — compare the tax in Manitoba 
to the tax in Saskatchewan. Do the poor pay tax on gasoline in 
Manitoba? Yes, they do. Do the poor pay tax on their clothes? 
Do seniors pay tax on their clothes in Manitoba? Yes, they do. 
Do the seniors pay tax on any other items — the sales tax — 
things in Manitoba that are exempt in the province of 
Saskatchewan? Yes they do. Utilities, Mr. Speaker? Food, Mr. 
Speaker? Imagine people paying tax on food in Saskatchewan. 
Do they do that in Saskatchewan? No, Mr. Speaker. You add u 
this tax line, the opportunities, the protection for seniors. Do the 
seniors in Manitoba get $500 apiece or $700 per couple if 
they’re low income? No. You add it up any way you like. 
 
The regressive nature of the socialist tax is clear, Mr. Speaker, 
clear for anyone to look at. Compare Saskatchewan before we 
got into power today, or compare Manitoba today to 
Saskatchewan, and there isn’t anybody in the country won’t say 
the tax system is more regressive in Manitoba than it is here. It 
was more regressive before we got in than it is now. And those 
are the facts, Mr. Speaker. And we will, Mr. Speaker, stay the 
course to protect low-income people, to protect our health care 
system, to protect our education and our social services and our 
agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we trimmed the size of government. It wasn’t 
easy, but we cut the expenditures so that we wouldn’t just have 
to have the massive increases in tax in Manitoba. We cut those 
expenditures. And that’s a good thing to do. And it’s a healthy 
thing to do. It’s not easy, but you have to have the courage to do 
it, and I give the Minister of Finance all the credit in the world 
for taking the bull by the horn and doing it. I give little credit to 
the Minister of Finance in Manitoba who said, well, I don’t 
know. We probably can’t take the heat, I guess we’ll just raise 
taxes 20 per cent, increase the size of government by 40 per 
cent, and tax the poor. And when they have to pay for food and 
tax on everything in Manitoba — no interest rate protection 
program like we did. 
 
Well let me just say this, Mr. Speaker, in summary, in wrapping 
it up. It’s extremely important that when the people of 
Saskatchewan elect public officials like ourselves, that we take 
the job seriously. When interests rates are high, we’ve got to 
deal with the problem. When farm problems are difficult, we’ve 
got to do it. Farmers this month got $675 million in cash in 
Saskatchewan — the first time in history they’ve every got 
anything like it. And they’ll get it again and again and again, 
Mr. Speaker. Nobody’s every anywhere close to it, in the 
federal  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

734 
 

government or a provincial government? 
 
When we have difficult times, we will have the courage to 
manage. When we have better times, Mr. Speaker, we will 
certainly have the best programs you will find any place 
because today they’re the best. 
 
I will conclude my remarks by saying I wholeheartedly endorse 
the courage and the direction, the protectionism, the building, 
and the financial security and the management put forward in 
the budget by the Minister of Finance, and I certainly will be 
supporting it when it comes time to stand in my place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is 
my first opportunity to speak in the legislature since my 
re-election in the October, 1986 general election, and therefore 
my first chance to congratulate you, sir, on the election to the 
very important post of Mr. Speaker. I can assure you that we on 
this side of the House will try to make your life a little bit 
easier, given the give and take of the debate in this legislature. 
And certainly I will try my best to do that for you. 
 
I also want to thank the voters of Saskatoon Riversdale for 
having re-elected me to represent them in the Saskatchewan 
legislature for the constituency of Riversdale. The five years 
that I spent out of public office was salutary, to say the least. I 
learned a lot and I enjoyed meeting many of the friends and 
neighbours on an individual basis — going door to door in 
Riversdale and having other life experiences. 
 
I’m not so sure I would recommend retirement from politics in 
quite exactly the same manner that occurred to me in 1982. But 
I think I can say to a lot of the PC back-benchers, sitting behind 
the Premier who just concluded his address, that they ought to 
start thinking a little bit about it because they too may find it 
salutary. 
 
(1515) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So I thank the people of Riversdale for the 
election and the re-election, and will promise to do all that I can 
to represent them as well as I can here at home, and here also in 
the legislature in Regina. 
 
Well now, Mr. Speaker, we just were treated to a show by the 
Premier in an attempt to defend this budget. And a show, I 
think, is about the best way to describe it. In my judgement, 
about 90 per cent of what the Premier said cannot be believed 
by anybody in this legislature, based on his performance in 
question period and elsewhere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But there are some things that I do believe, 
Mr. Speaker. I do believe that he strongly believes in what he’s 
doing. That, Mr. Speaker, I do believe in. 
 
And that, I think, Mr. Speaker, makes this Premier and this  

government all the more dangerous to the people of 
Saskatchewan. This is not a collection, a motley collection of 
men and women from all over the province of Saskatchewan 
who have sort of been elected and act aimlessly and 
incompetently, notwithstanding what their actions might 
indicate. This is a group of men and women, Mr. Speaker, who, 
as the Premier has indicated, believe in what they’re doing. 
 
I accept that part of the Premier’s message. That’s precisely 
what makes the premier so dangerous to the people of 
Saskatchewan. It’s precisely what makes this PC Party such a 
dangerous threat to the future of 1990 and beyond, to the people 
of this province and this great province of Saskatchewan. I 
believe that. 
 
And I also believe that he has a plan. That plan, Mr. Speaker, is 
to wed his government and to wed this province unalterably, 
irrevocably, to the directions of the market forces which flow 
basically on a national and international basis, and to say that 
the people of Saskatchewan’s fortunes will likewise go up or 
down, depending upon those economic fortunes going up and 
down elsewhere. 
 
And he has said, because that’s his game plan, that he won’t do 
anything using the Government of Saskatchewan to intervene 
on behalf of, and in the benefit of, the ordinary workers and 
farmers and people of Saskatchewan. That’s his plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I believe him that he has a plan. I want to 
say a few words about his commitment and his plan in a 
moment or two. 
 
I said that’s the 10 per cent of the address that I support. But the 
90 per cent of the address, some of which I will talk on very 
briefly, is pure shibboleth, jingoism, it’s pure sloganeering, it’s 
purely a question of saying anything almost any time to 
anybody in order to get over a very disastrous or difficult 
political circumstance. That’s exactly what the budget in 1987 
has put this government in. 
 
The Premier talks about facts. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier wouldn’t know or recognize a fact if it hit him in the 
face over and over again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — He talks about Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. He’s 
fond of talking about Manitoba; he’s fond of talking about 
every province in Canada. I say to the Premier, it’s about time 
that he stopped talking about Manitoba and every other 
province and started to look after the people of Saskatchewan, 
and talking about he problems here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Why in the world would he compare 
Manitoba? Manitoba, as everybody knows, doesn’t have the 
wealth, the good fortune that mother nature has given to us with 
respect to uranium and oil and potash — does not have all these 
opportunities that we, in the 1970s,  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

735 
 

building on the traditions of this province, built to the point 
where the province of Saskatchewan broke out of the have-not 
shackles that had been place don it by the last free enterprise, 
committed government of the Liberals — broke out of those 
shackles and developed a combination of private and public and 
co-operative economic activity, and a scheme of social policies 
and programs that were the envy of every other Canadian and 
every other province in ?Canada. That’s exactly what we did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And we did it because we had this resource 
base; we’re blessed with that. We were also blessed, if I may 
say so, with a premier and a leader, the Hon. Allan Blakeney, 
who had the foresight and the wisdom to build on that tradition, 
to use that largess, to use that bounty that was given to us in 
order to build that greater Saskatchewan. 
 
Look, you don’t have to accept my words. I can ask . . . you ask 
any business man, you ask any farmer, you ask that person how 
their pay cheque compares in 1987 to 1978 or at any other time 
of the Blakeney administration, and the answer will be a 
resounding yes — yes, to the wealth and the opportunity that 
was created during that period in the 1970s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So to compare the province of Manitoba, 
given the obvious disparities and their opportunities, to ours is 
false and misleading. It’s not even a good debating point. 
Manitoba has never had the opportunities. If one can recite the 
litany, the so-called litany that the Premier has given to us about 
Manitoba taxations — which I don’t believe for one moment, 
Mr. Speaker, and I tell you nobody in Saskatchewan does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But even for the moment, assuming that 
you believe the statements, it is ever been thus in Manitoba, it 
was twice, 2.5 times worse under the administration of the 
Conservatives in Manitoba. At least 2.5 times. In fact that was a 
one-term administration in Manitoba, because not only did they 
not have the largess and the wealth, they brought to their 
government the same kind of sterile, cruel, outdated, 
antediluvian policies that we’re seeing the Devine 
administration bring to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — One term, Mr. Speaker, one term. So I say, 
to compare Manitoba to the province of Saskatchewan, is 
irrelevant. 
 
In fact, I say more than that, Mr. Speaker, I say that the Premier 
of this province insults the intelligence of this House. The 
Premier of this province . . . forget about this House, he insults 
the intelligence of the people of Saskatchewan by those kinds of 
specious comparisons. I say to the Premier of Saskatchewan, 
stick to your knitting. Look after our interests right here in 
Saskatchewan and  

defend your actions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now there are many, of course, statements 
taken by the Premier which are subject and must be subject to 
some very careful scrutiny. But I tell you that of the many 
outrageous ones was an outrageous attempt to defend what his 
government has done, or is doing, to medicare. That is 
outrageous, his speech. 
 
All one has to do is to pick up the budget and go through all of 
the cuts, now well-documented: dental technicians, the drug 
plan, the waiting lists two to one, vis-à-vis any other province. 
We don’t have, for example, the Alberta ones to confirm that 
yet, but we’re working on it. That will come up in question 
period. The jam-up of people trying to get entry in hospitals and 
the Premier rather flippantly says, oh well, that’s because 
people are going out to have abortions elsewhere or doing this 
elsewhere — all factually and statistically wrong. 
 
All that one has to do is take a look at what the Hon. Minister of 
Finance has done in his budget, and we know exactly where this 
government stands on the issue of medicare. It’s not building on 
medicare, Mr. Speaker, it’s not building on that foundation. 
What it is doing is it is dismantling that foundation. It is not 
giving us a little nick here or there in medicare or 
hospitalization to improve it. What this government is doing is 
firing 420 dental technicians. That’s not a nick, that’s a slash. 
That’s a destruction of a program which has served such an 
invaluable job to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And then I think this most specious 
example of false arguing — false arguing, Mr. Speaker, by the 
Premier just a few moments ago — was his defence of the 
doing away with the drug plan. His argument was: well, you 
know the drug plan shows that a lot of people are using drugs. 
And from there he leaped logically to say, and our young 
people are using drugs, and that’s why we cut out the drug plan 
in the province of Saskatchewan. He said, you know a lot of 
people have gone from $17 million expenditure in drugs to 
$100 million in drugs, and that’s why we’re cutting out the drug 
plan, because our young people and some others are abusing 
drugs. 
 
Now I think that the general attitude that one should take, that 
we ought to b e leery about the medication that’s prescribed to 
us by doctors and ask doctors, is something I don’t think we 
need Premier Devine, with the greatest of respect, lecturing us 
on. I think most people in Saskatchewan do that. Nobody wants 
to take a drug when they see a doctor. 
 
But how fallacious, how insulting it is, I say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, that this Premier would make that kind of leap to 
logic, supposedly — or if you will, leap to illogic — to try to 
defend the dismantling of a drug plan which gives hundreds of 
thousands of -Saskatchewan people necessary assistance when 
they’re ill, when they’re suffering from heart disease, when 
they’re suffering from diabetes, when they’re suffering from all 
other kinds of diagnosed illnesses, and their doctors say that 
they’ve got  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

736 
 

to take this kind of medication. What kind of illogic, specious, 
fallacious reasoning is that to do away with a plan? 
 
And in any event, who prescribes these drugs? It’s as if my 
mother at 82 years of age goes around looking for drugs to get a 
fix on some sort done. It’s as if the sick people walk from 
White’s drug store to some other drug store, even to Pinders 
drug store, if I raise that to the hon. members opposite, and say, 
I need any annual fix, or I need my medication. It’s the doctors 
who do the prescribing of the drug plan. It’s not Grant Devine. 
It’s not the individual patients. If those . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would ask the member 
not to refer to other members in the House by their name. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — If it is Grant Devine, as leader of the PC 
Party, on the hustings who says this, he is saying an untruth on 
the hustings, Mr. Speaker. If the Premier of Saskatchewan is 
saying this in legislature, he is equally telling an untruth to the 
legislature of Saskatchewan in this area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then he goes on to say: and you know we don’t have any 
money. We don’t have money to fight this battle of drugs. Well 
I know something about this issue of youth and drugs. I happen 
to serve on the board of directors of PRIDE (Parents Resources 
Institute for Drug Education Inc.) on an honorary basis, and I 
think it is a major problem. I have already pointed out the 
fallacious notion of connection between the two. But then he 
says, we don’t have money. Why don’t we have money? If we 
don’t have money, why don’t we have money? I ask the people 
of Saskatchewan to ask that of every PC back-bencher. Why 
don’t ‘we have the money? I’ll tell you why we don’t have the 
money, Mr. Speaker. We don’t have the money because this 
Premier and this government deliberately and wilfully gave 
away billions of dollars to their large corporations outside of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I tell you something else, Mr. Speaker, 
not only because we don’t have that kind of money because of 
their tax policies; I’ll make a prediction; not only do we not 
have a drug plan for those people who are phoning me almost 
on a daily basis; not only we’re not going to have a drug plan, 
we’re not going to have a drug plan for drug abuse by our 
teenagers and youth either, because we don’t have that money. I 
make that prediction to you as well. 
 
So the record is there. These people have launched a wholesale 
attack on medicare and the other social institutions in our 
province. I’m not going to recite, because other members have 
talked about it already: the native court worker program, the 
John Howard Society, battered women . . . (inaudible) . . . 
programs and on and on. The litany, the sad litany, the tragic 
litany of cut-backs has been documented by everybody here. 
What this amounts to, Mr. Speaker, is an unprecedented attack 
on the very fibre that is Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I tell you something else, Mr. Speaker. 
Not only is it an unprecedented attack, I tell you something else. 
Mr. Speaker, there is more to come. This is not the end of what 
they’re doing to medicare. There is more to come. 
 
First of all, in the budget address, there the Minister of Finance 
says the ominous words, which the Premier attempted to defend 
a few moments ago, about something called “rural hospital 
rationalization.” I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been 
around in this legislature long enough to have heard that phrase 
before, rural hospital rationalization. You know, the last time it 
came forward, it was when the Liberals, under the premiership 
of Ross Thatcher, the great Ross Thatcher, the late Ross 
Thatcher — great Ross Thatcher in the mind of the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and maybe even in the minds of some 
of the members opposite there. They introduced a program of 
rural hospital rationalization. Don’t take my word for it, check 
the record. It’s a fact. 
 
And the hon. member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the Minister 
of Finance, was in those days a very important actor in the Ross 
Thatcher Liberal government in this program of rural hospital 
rationalization. He was there. He was there defending it, he was 
there advocating it, and in fact, he even urged it in subsequent 
elections. And now in his budget speech of 1987 he is talking 
about rural hospital rationalization again, 20 years later to the 
day, almost, on the same kind of a buzz-word. 
 
(1530) 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’ll say not too many good things about 
the Ross Thatcher government, but Ross Thatcher as premier, 
and his government, has the competence-level, and at least the 
sense of decency in the pursuit of its goals, which out-matches 
this bunch to your right, five-fold, at least. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And even with his buzz-words, even with 
his rationalization of rural hospitals, and even with all of his 
abilities, Mr. Speaker, what it translated to, pure and simple, 
was: rural hospital closures. That’s what it was, pure and 
simple. 
 
I’m telling you that what the Minister of Finance today, in 
1987, the same deputy, the same executive assistant in 1967, 
has in mind is the same approach in 1967, rural hospital 
closures, pure and simple, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to ask some of the members back there, the silent 
back-benchers, the member from Redberry, the member from 
Pelly, the member from Wakaw — you tell me, have you given 
the Minister of Finance, the member of Wakaw, your list of 
hospitals that you think should be rationalized? How about the 
member from Wadena? Where’s he seated? Member from 
Wadena, tell us what list of rural hospitals you’ve given to the 
Minister of Finance to be rationalized. I tell the member from 
Saltcoats, has he given his list of what rural hospitals are  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

737 
 

to be rationalized? How else can it work, Mr. Speaker? 
 
If you’re going to concentrate regions of health care in some 
regions of rural Saskatchewan, it stands to logic that even the 
Minister of Finance can understand that in that regionalization a 
whole shack of rural hospitals are going to be closed, make no 
mistake about it— closed. 
 
I tell the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I tell the rural 
communities in Saskatchewan, beware. I tell the rural 
community leaders and the hospital board leaders right now 
what this government has in store is phase two of its 
unprecedented attack on medicare. 
 
There are other phases; I’ll come to this in a moment. But this is 
phase two which rural hospital shut-downs, not rationalization. 
The scheme is half-baked, it’s concocted scheme that the 
Minister of Finance has advocated and the Premier attempts to 
defend. The scheme is the same as it was in 1967, because I tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, the Gary Lane of 1967 as the deputy 
executive assistant to the Liberals is the same Minister of 
Finance to Grant Devine in 1987 — nothing changes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The only thing that’s changed, Mr. Speaker, 
with respect to the Minister of Finance, is that the sweaters have 
changed temporarily on the team that he supports. But that’s the 
only thing that changes. 
 
And then there is something else. Not only, Mr. Speaker, can 
they not do anything else but move to this rural close-down of 
hospitals, but I tell you something else, Mr. Speaker, they can’t 
be trusted with medicare, and the Premier’s speech identified 
that. 
 
I’m not in the habit of mentioning members who do not sit in 
their House because of other duties. I won’t be in my House, 
the chair, from time to time, and I realize that all the people 
who can’t be here all the time is the Premier. I understand that. 
I’m sorry, however, that he left right after his speech. I’m sorry 
because I tell you what I would’ve challenged him to do when I 
say in this area the Conservatives can’t be trusted with medicare 
— and there’s more to come yet. 
 
This budget is being dribbled out, Mr. Speaker; it was dribbled 
out before June 17. And you know something? It’s being 
dribbled out after June 17, outside the budget. The Minister of 
Finance is still dribbling along in telling us what’s coming in 
the budget — now there’s going to be an increase in the flat tax. 
 
But I tell you this — and this is why I’m sorry the Premier is 
not in his chair. I’ll tell you this: the people of Saskatchewan 
can’t trust the PCs on medicare, not only because of their past 
record — many of them were involved in the “keep our 
doctors” committee fight of 1962 — not only for that reason, 
but I tell you there’s another reason — their statements are 
inconsistent. Their statements are inconsistent, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re inconsistent and they’re unbelievable. 
 
Let me give you one example on a very important issue. This is 
the issue of medicare and hospitalization  

premiums. Yesterday, the Minister of Health got up in his chair 
in defence of this budget — I don’t know how in the world it 
can be called a defence — but that’s what he endeavoured to 
do. And he tried to tell the House that we don’t need to worry 
about a return to the premiums for medicare and hospitalization, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what he tried to say. 
 
Yesterday, the day before that statement, I have here in front of 
me from the Moose Jaw Times-Herald. The headline tells it all: 
“Tories want to see medical care premiums restored” — one 
day before the Minister of Health’s statement. Here’s what the 
body of the statement says; this refers to the minister of 
consumer affairs who is not in her chair. She says this, quote: 
“If there was strong support in the province for premiums, the 
government would certainly look at it again.” 
 
That’s what she said. The member said, quote: “It was 
surprising that when we had premiums people on social 
assistance and seniors did not have to pay these (premiums).” 
 
Then she says, and I underline these words to the Premier and 
to the Tories opposite: “Premiums could still be an option to 
us.” End quote. I repeat that, Mr. Speaker: “Premiums could 
still be an option to us.” 
 
Well, the hon. members laugh at that; they laugh at that. But 
how is it, how is it, Mr. Speaker, that they say, how is it that 
they say — the Minister of Health gets up yesterday and says, 
no, no, don’t worry about premiums being re-injected, 
re-inserted. And his colleague, the consumer affairs, almost 
desk mate right next door says, yes, premiums could be injected 
again. 
 
How is it that two differing concepts can be stated so obviously 
flagrantly contradictive to each other, in this legislature, with a 
bald face as the two minister have done? No wonder the people 
of Saskatchewan don’t trust anything that the PC government 
says about medicare. No wonder they don’t trust them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I tell you, this premium tax is regressive. 
We heard the Premier talking about fair taxation. If premium is 
$100 a year for a $20,000 a year wage earner, it’s something. 
For a $100,000 a year wage earner, it’s something entirely 
different, $100 — a lot less. 
 
I say these Tories are going about the task of getting premiums 
injected back into hospitalization and medicare. That’s why the 
Minister for Consumer Affairs raised this. And I tell you 
something else — and this is the part that I say why the Premier 
is not in his chair and he should’ve been, because he could have 
proven me a liar. If he says that I’m wrong, that premiums are 
not going to be re-inserted again, he has one easy solution — 
and I still challenge him to do it — he should tell either the 
Minister of Consumer Affairs to resign or the Minister of 
Health to resign, because they both can’t be right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But, Mr. Speaker, he’s not going to tell  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

738 
 

them to resign because I don’t think he’s discharging his duties 
as Premier, He allows this kind of fundamental policy 
dissension which raises the doubts about medicare to float out 
there in rural Saskatchewan, either because he’s not caring — 
which I suspect is the case — or because he believes in a 
philosophy of medicare which is totally different to ours. He 
wants to compare the philosophies. Well I’m proud and pleased 
to compare the philosophies. 
 
When they take apart dental care; when they take apart the 
dental technicians’ program; they take apart the drug plan; they 
put the jam up on hospital waiting beds; when they make these 
statements that premiums are next on the chopping block; when 
they made the statements about hospital rationalization, that is a 
philosophy of privatization of medicare. It’s a philosophy of 
privatization based on some notion that this is being efficient or 
being forward. That’s where the commitment part comes in on 
his statement. 
 
Oh yes, he believes what he says in this regard. They are out to 
privatize the medicare and hospitalization system. And I tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, I tell the Premier and the government 
opposite, they’re not going to succeed. The people of 
Saskatchewan will see to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Of course, Mr. Speaker, we should be 
looking at new programs in health. We should be looking at the 
old programs. Of course we need to look to the 1990s about 
financing them. We should be looking at wellness models in 
health care — something the Premier didn’t mention. We 
should be looking about de-institutionalizations — something 
the Premier did not mention. We should be looking at 
community clinics controlled by the consumers of health care 
— the Premier didn’t mention. We should be looking at 
life-style, cutting back on the kinds of life-style things which 
destroy health. Not this government. They don’t cut back on 
life-style issues; they spend more money, or are allowing more 
money, in the advertising of booze on television and radio, 
which destroys our health, than they do for a lot of other 
programs. Of course we should be looking at those kinds of 
things. But that’s not what they’re talking about. 
 
Make no mistake about it, Mr. Speaker. What they’re talking 
about is privatization. What they’re talking about is the old free 
enterprise ethic to medicare and hospitalization. And I repeat to 
you again, sir, it’s not going to happen. It didn’t happen in 1971 
and it’s not going to happen in 1987 or 1990. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The Premier also goes on to talk about the 
question of agriculture and agriculture policy. And I want to say 
a few words about agriculture and agriculture policy . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, it’ll take a little longer than a 
minute, and I hope that you stick around to listen for a little 
longer than a minute because there is another myth about. The 
other myth about, Mr. Speaker, is that the Premier understands 
farmers and farming needs. The myth is that this farmer from 
Albert Street South understands farming. The argument is, he’s 
the  

only Premier with a permit book. I want to speak to that for the 
moment because I don’t care if he’s got a permit book or not. I 
tell this Premier-cum-Minister of Agriculture that the job that 
he’s done in five years as Premier has been lousy when it comes 
to protecting family farms and agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Look, you don’t need the statistics from me. 
You don’t need it. The hon. member from Kindersley, he 
ignores the fact of 4,000 farmers less since the Devine 
government has entered this government position — 4,000, 
that’s not even counting what’s happening in 1987. That’s how 
this Premier, with a permit book, acts. 
 
I tell you why it hasn’t worked, Mr. Speaker. It hasn’t worked 
because this philosophy of privatization, this philosophy of, in 
effect, selling off Saskatchewan — which I talked about in 
medicine — is exactly the philosophy that he’s bringing to 
agriculture problems; exactly the policy that he’s adopting 
there. This is the part that I do believe. 
 
He has a coherent plan for farming, Mr. Speaker, there’s no 
doubt about that. And I tell you what that plan is. It is his belief 
that the Government of Saskatchewan must be tied, irrevocably, 
to the free market forces in agriculture, and that the province of 
Saskatchewan and the governments of Canada, basically, can’t 
do anything about it. We know what’s going to happen and 
what is happening under those circumstances. We know right 
now, with the green revolution and the glut of agricultural 
products, what’s happening to prices; we know what’ 
happening to costs on the other hand; we know that farmers are 
being squeezed out and driven out by the droves; we know the 
circumstances that are facing our community. This man, this 
government does not want to commit the resources of the 
Government of Saskatchewan to defend the family farmers, the 
backbone of Saskatchewan. That’s what this government is 
doing. I say it’s a myth that they defend the farmers. 
 
Take a look at what’s happened . . . what’s happened, Mr. 
Speaker, right here even in the last little while. Just take a look 
at the budget. I have the figure in front of me here. In the year 
where farmers in Saskatchewan are facing the most serious 
crisis probably since the Dirty Thirties, this Minister of 
Agriculture, who happens to be the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan, permits a slashing of the budget of over 22 per 
cent in income in the most desperate year. 
 
Let’s take a look at another matter. This is the most difficult 
year for farmers in the history of Saskatchewan since the Dirty 
Thirties. We need somebody, Mr. Speaker, to be looking after 
the concerns of the farmers, full time, Mr. Speaker, not part 
time. We’ve got a Premier who’s a part-time Minister of 
Agriculture. The House is coming down on a fire, in 
agricultural terms, and the Premier is out there with a bucket of 
water, trying to put out the flames. That’s what he’s trying to 
do. He’s part-timer — part-time Premier, part-time Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
(1545) 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

739 
 

I’ll give you another example. We have hundreds of Crown 
tenant farmers. These are farmers who have leases for farm land 
owned by the farmers — hundreds of them. And just a few 
weeks ago this Premier and this government, in the most 
difficult years for those land tenant farmers, has cut off their 
leases and is forcing them off the farms. Why? Because the free 
market forces say that that’s what’s got to happen. 
 
What about the farm protection legislation, Mr. Speaker? That’s 
a sham. Why? Because he doesn’t want to monkey with the free 
market forces of the banks and all the other financial 
institutions that are involved. 
 
What about the debt adjustment legislation? The farmers’ debts 
are climbing. There is a crying need for a policy by the 
provincial and federal governments to deal with this issue. 
What have we heard by the Premier? Absolutely nothing on 
farm debt adjustment. Absolutely nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Why? Why? Because it’s going to tinker 
with the market-place, that which something he slavishly 
adheres and devotes himself to. 
 
What about the variable freight rates, Mr. Speaker? CN comes 
in and says they want to get variable freight rates; now they 
want to be able to jiggle the rates and thereby jiggle the 
communities and the delivery points for all the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. Not a word by our Minister of Agriculture in 
opposition to that. Not a word about our part-time Minister of 
Agriculture. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because he’s allowing the 
market forces to run — again the way he wants to do it. 
 
What about the support for the farm communities? Take a look 
at all of the grants, the municipalities, large and small; by every 
statistic they’re down. I don’t mean marginally, but they’re 
down drastically. Not a word even for those little towns that are 
struggling to keep a little post office alive. We may not be able 
to keep all of them alive, but in Aylesbury this Premier 
arrogantly, that Prime Minister in Ottawa even more arrogantly, 
have told the Aylesburys of the province of Saskatchewan: 
forget it. We’re not even going to meet with you. That’s how 
much support we’re giving to the farmers and the farm 
communities of this province. 
 
And then, of course, the ultimate commitment to the 
market-place in farming: the ultimate commitment, of course, 
Mr. Speaker, is free trade — the free trade negotiations which 
this Premier is avidly, fervently pursuing, the free trade 
negotiations that this Premier is content to play the role of 
singing the Hallelujah Chorus to Mr. Mulroney as he begins to 
sell out Canada to the ultimate place of the free market-place, 
the United States, without any consideration of what that’s 
going to do to the Canadian Wheat Board; without any 
consideration of what that’s going to do to the poultry 
industries, the feather industries; without any consideration to 
the eggs and egg marketing agencies, or the egg producers; 
without any consideration even to the wheat farmers. 
 
What in the world does the Premier think he’s going to achieve 
by a United States free trade agreement, entering  

— locking, not entering — locking Canadian farmers, who are 
fighting for their lives, into a trading arrangement with 
American farmers who are also fighting for their lives? What 
kind of economic sense does this person and this government 
adhere to? 
 
But you see the strategy that I’m trying to say to you. They 
have a plan. They have a plan. It is a plan of this devotion to — 
devotion to — this market force which will, in effect, reduce the 
capacity and the independence of our family farms that survive 
in our communities to survive in doing it. And there is such a 
job out there to be done. 
 
Do we hear anything about soil conservation? Not one. The 
Minister of Agriculture had a chance to give an address in this 
House a few moments ago. Anything on soil conservation and 
management in spite of all the crises that have been identified? 
Not a word. 
 
Did he come to this legislature and tell us what he is doing 
about variable freight rates? Did he come here — not a word. 
Did he come to this legislature — the Minister of Agriculture 
— this was his time to speak. Did he tell the farmers what he is 
going to try to do about pricing for farm products? Not a word. 
Did he tell us what he is doing to do to Mr. Mulroney and what 
he is going to try to do internationally, through Mr. Mulroney, 
to get an international pricing agreement and some sort of sense 
on the international market? Not a word. Not a word. Not a 
word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I repeat again what I said at the very outset: this 
Premier and this government has led us to believe that it is a 
government for farmers. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that 
proposition is a lie. This government is not for the farming 
community of Saskatchewan, it’s for the big farmers; it’s for the 
big agri-business, and it’s for a free trade association, but 
there’s nothing there for our farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And there is something else in this whole 
thing which I think is appalling. Something else which is 
appalling and which will get the biggest of condemnations — 
much sooner maybe than 1990 or ’91 the Premier might expect 
— and that is, this callous policy in the 1986 election of 
dividing, or attempting to divide — I’ll put it that way — 
farmers from the city people. I saw that everywhere that I went 
on the campaign trail. In fact, I suspect that this is still what 
they hope will be their last card of survival in 1990 and 1991, 
this playing off of farm versus rural. They, the members 
opposite, do this all the time. They give us the catcalls about 
where your farm policy is and so forth, and they get up here and 
talk about how their Premier, how the member — the farmer 
from Albert Street South — is the permit book holder. That’s 
what they keep on doing. They divide . . . they seek to divide. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I can’t think of a lower objective in 
public life than to seek to divide a small community like  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

740 
 

Saskatchewan. I can’t think of anything which could be worse 
than dividing our farmers from our workers, from our youth, 
from our small businesses, which is the political strategy of 
these people opposite. Nothing works. 
 
The role of the Premier should be to heal; the role of a Premier 
should be to get the people together, to unite them, not to divide 
them. The role of a Premier should be to explain the problems 
of farmers to the people in the cities, and the problems of the 
people in the cities to the people on the farms. Not a word in 
that regard. Their strategy, I predict, when they introduce the 
legislation for the boundaries, will be to further exacerbate that. 
 
Well I’ve got news for the Premier and the PC government — it 
won’t work — it won’t work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And not only that, I’ve got more news. I think the people of 
Saskatchewan want a government that does work to heal these 
divisions. I don’t think they care about people coming from the 
cities or from rural Saskatchewan. Obviously the farmer from 
Albert south is evidence of that. What they want basically is 
men and women who have a forward vision and a determination 
to grapple with what is probably the most awesome crisis in 
farming facing us since the Dirty Thirties, if not even greater 
than that in the Dirty Thirties. 
 
What they want is a government which says we’re not tying our 
policy to the United States. We’re not tying our policy to some 
free market slavish devotion of principle and philosophy. What 
they want is a government and a Premier that says, I’m elected 
to stay in Saskatchewan and to fight for the farmers everywhere 
because that is what Saskatchewan’s about. That’s what the 
people of this province want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And then of course the Premier, in what I 
think is yet another abject example of absolutely fallacious 
remarks in this debate, Mr. Speaker, incredible debates, talks 
about he open for business policy. Well he didn’t mention it as 
open for business. Got rid of that slogan. There’s a new one 
coming up — an abject failure. He says we’re diversifying to 
get jobs. I’m not going to go through the litany of the record 
here, but it’s clear. 
 
Let’s compare the economic performance here in Saskatchewan 
with other provinces. You know, Mr. Speaker, we’re 10th in job 
creation — 10th out of 10 provinces. Economic growth? 
Virtually no growth according to the economic council and 
other authoritative bodies. What about manufacturing? Over the 
last two years the value of manufacturing shipments have barely 
increased. In fact, they’ve really decreased when one compares 
them. That’s where we are, at the bottom. 
 
But we’re also at the top on some things, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
almost number one in bankruptcies. That’s what we are. We’re 
almost number one in farm bankruptcies, and we are certainly 
getting very close in business bankruptcies. We’re second best 
in driving people away from Saskatchewan. We’re second from 
the top there.  

Only Alberta, another PC government, has lost more people 
than the PC government here. And I tell you where we are 
number one. I can tell the Premier it’s the only statement about 
being number one that he’s correct on. We’re number one 
because we have the largest per capita deficit of any province in 
Canada. That’s where we’re number one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — What a shallow, superficial argument about 
jobs. Who do they expect would believe them on this? Again, 
Mr. Speaker, I could take the next balance of the afternoon 
going through the business closures alone. GWG in Saskatoon, 
my riding, gone; Intercontinental Packers in Regina, gone; 
Dad’s Cookies at White City, gone; Pro-Star Mills in 
Saskatoon, gone; Dominion Bridge in Regina, what happened 
to that? Gone. Molson Brewery in Prince Albert, what happens? 
Gone. Saskana Sausage, gone; Ward Johnston Electric, gone. 
What about the Supercart International? What about that great 
announcement? Where is it? It’s gone. How about Central 
Canadian Distilling company in Weyburn — what happened 
there? Gone. McGavin’s Bakery, where’s that? It’s gone. And I 
could go . . . Yes, indeed, the members go like this, that’s right, 
they sort of mock it and it’s gone. That is five years, that is five 
years, that is five yes, five years, five yeas of open-for-business 
economic policy. 
 
That unemployment rate is high. It is now double what it was 
prior to 1981-82. Those businesses are closing down. But you 
know who is not gone, Weyerhaeuser, multinational. They’re 
here. They’re here. Oh yes, the Deputy Premier applauds. Peter 
Pocklington, he’s here from Alberta. Yes, he’s here from 
Alberta. They’re not gone. The upgrader; they’ve got that on 
the go, to be fair. That is here. The upgrader up in 
Lloydminster, it’s not here. Just weigh this out. Look at all of 
the Saskatchewan business men who have been gone, forced 
out by these open-for-business policies of the Devine 
administration. This slavish devotion that somehow 
Saskatchewan is going to hitch her star to the United States of 
America and that the private market forces and private capital 
are going to determine what our future is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the history of this province is Saskatchewan 
businesses working together with their government’s help to 
build jobs. It’s not some large megaproject idea of these large 
corporations coming in to rape our resources and exploit our 
workers and take our profits and then when they do, what 
happens then? They’re gone. It’s a joke. It’s a joke, Mr. 
Speaker. But it’s not a funny joke; it’s a cruel joke that the 
Devine administration is making on the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I want to make just one other point 
about this philosophy, this private enterprise philosophy 
unbridled . . . Oh, they believe that when the Premier says it. I 
know he believes that, and they’re committed to that. I want to 
say one thing about free trade. 
 
Just ask yourself, Mr. Speaker. . . I ask the people of 
Saskatchewan to ask themselves this: do they know what’s on 
the table or what’s not on the table? I invite the  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

741 
 

Minister of Economic Development to tell us what is on the 
table, because I say that the Canadian Wheat Board is on the 
table and if I’m wrong, he can tell me that it isn’t. Nobody 
knows what’s on the table. 
 
I ask the Hon. Minister of Economic Development and the 
Premier: what provincial input is there into the negotiations to 
protect this province’s interests? I say to the Premier — not 
Manitoba’s, not Montreal’s, but this province’s interests — 
what provincial safeguards do we have in those negotiations to 
protect our interests? You know what we do? We send the 
Premier down once every three months to Ottawa and they get 
together in some hotel room, smoke-filled back room, all the 
boys, the Premiers and the Prime Minister. He gives them, Mr. 
Mulroney, a three-hour dissertation on what happens on free 
trade and, with the exception of one or two of them, they come 
out singing the Hallelujah Chorus — at least our Premier comes 
out singing the Hallelujah Chorus. That is the input. 
 
Oh, we had a puny little committee travel up and down the 
province of Saskatchewan for a month. Selected invitations, I 
might add, Mr. Speaker; wouldn’t invite the ordinary people 
because they knew what would happen there. Just selected 
people to make their presentations on the free trade thing. And 
even there, the results were that there’s a great deal of confusion 
and upset. That is the sum total of input on what could be the 
most important economic and political initiative that could 
affect Saskatchewan and Canada in our history. And then 
there’s a third problem. 
 
(1600) 
 
I ask you to imagine this, Mr. Speaker. And I ask the hon. 
member from Kindersley back there in the front bench to 
consider this too. And I ask him to tell me about this. Let’s 
assume that Mr. Reisman and Mr. Murphy negotiate a free trade 
pact. Can he tell the Minister, can he tell this House and the 
people of Saskatchewan what guarantees we’re going to have to 
make sure that if something that’s been negotiated in that free 
trade pact isn’t going to harm significantly the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Let’s assume, for example, that the Canadian Wheat Board is 
either damaged or done away with. Let’s assume that a social 
program like medicare or hospitalization or unemployment 
insurance is damaged or done away with because, in exchange, 
the Canadians think they’re going to get access through the 
Congress in the United States to U.S. market. Supposing that 
happens; that would be clearly to the detriment of 
Saskatchewan farmers. What safeguards does the province of a 
million people or less have? What ratification process? 
Absolutely none? Well I guess we can say the safeguard we 
have is fighting Grant Devine, the Premier, coming down to the 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. This is the 
second time I cautioned the member not to use another 
member’s name. Please refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — What do we expect? Do we expect the 
Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party, Mr. Grant 
Devine, and the Premier in this legislature to come forward and 
to defend . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Beauchesne’s, paragraph 319(1) 
says: 
 

It is the custom in the House that no Member should refer 
to another by name. 

 
There isn’t a list of exceptions to the rule, in what capacity they 
may serve or where they might be. It just says that: 
 

It is the custom in the House that no Member should refer 
to another by name. 

 
And I think we should try to abide by that rule. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I abide by your ruling. I 
promised at the outset of my remarks that I would abide by your 
rulings where possible, and I abide by your rulings. 
 
I repeat again the third point. 
 
An Hon. Member: — All rulings. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, all rulings. I abide by all rulings. And I 
would invite the hon. member of everything there, from 
Melville, to start abiding and learning the rules. That might help 
a little bit, as well . . . all rulings. 
 
But my point is this, Mr. Speaker. How do we know that what’s 
being negotiated is going to be safeguarded — for 
Saskatchewan, I mean? We’re only a province of a million 
people. Deputy Premier says that Premier Devine is going to 
safeguard our interests. Well I tell you, the way Premier 
Devine, the Premier, has negotiated . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The hon. members know why I want to 
interrupt. I’m sure he won’t use the Premier’s name again in the 
course of his speech. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Did you say not to use the Premier’s name 
in vain again? That I will not do, sir. But I want to say this 
about the Hon. Premier. If they think that anybody on this side 
of the House, or the Government of Saskatchewan, is going to 
be safe in the knowledge that our Premier is going to be the 
safeguard of our interests on free trade negotiations, they’ve got 
another thing coming. This is the person who negotiated 
Weyerhaeuser. This is the person that negotiated Pocklington. If 
he can’t negotiate in the interests of Saskatchewan, those 
relatively small deals, I’ll tell you one thing, he’s going to sell 
out Saskatchewan’s interests. That’s what I say he’s going to 
do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I tell you one other thing, Mr. Speaker, 
if I may, on free trade, I oppose free trade as recommended by 
the Prime Minister and as supported by the Premier, not 
because we shouldn’t be trading from other countries. Far from 
it. This is a trading province. We’re a trading nation. We’ve got 
to have a trading policy. What we don’t have to have is a 
trading policy which locks us in totally to one country. What we 
don’t need. 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

742 
 

Mr. Speaker: — The member for Rosthern is on his feet and I 
believe he wants leave to introduce some guests, so if you ask 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How do you know that? How do you 
know? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Just a minute. Just a minute! Let’s have some 
order. I think we’re making a big issue out of nothing. There’s a 
gallery of students and I was just assuming that’s what he 
wants. But if it’s going to please hon. members . . . and I don’t 
want any heckling or talking from your desk. If you have 
something to say, stand up and raise a point of order, but don’t 
heckle from your desks when the Speaker is on his feet. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And yes, 
I would like to confirm that I would take this opportunity on the 
behalf of my colleague, the member of the Legislative 
Assembly for Biggar, to stand in for him in introducing on his 
behalf through you, Mr. Speaker, to this Assembly, some 
students, some 60 students from the town of Asquith. 
 
And I’m assuming, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member asked 
me because I do have some relationship with the town of 
Asquith, mainly in the form of my brother Abe who has lived in 
Asquith all his life. And he has taken seriously the admonition 
to Abraham to go forth, to multiple, and cover the earth, 
because he has produced an even dozen children that have gone 
through the school of Asquith. I can see some smiles from the 
kids up there, so they must recognize some of them. 
 
It gives me great pleasure to introduce to the Assembly all of 
the 60 students from Asquith; their teachers, Verona Stack, Lois 
Keller, Mona Brooks; and their chaperons, Sharon Rice, Lorie 
Klemkie; and the bus driver., Orville Augustine. And I would 
ask all members to join me in welcoming the students. I’ll be 
meeting you in room 218 as soon as you leave the gallery, in 
the west end. 
 
Please join me in welcoming these students. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too join with the 
hon. member from Rosthern in welcoming the students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was saying before the intervention, to close off 
on this portion of my address with respect to free trade,  

I say to this House, Mr. Speaker, that I believe in trade. I 
believe in a Premier who pursues trade policies. I believe in a 
government that has a trade policy. I do not believe in trade 
policies, as I said, which link inevitably and irrevocably this 
province’s trading programs to one country. That is what 
essentially a comprehensive free trade package, so far as we can 
tell, is attempting to do. 
 
I don’t agree with that, not only because pragmatically we 
ought to be searching for markets elsewhere with other 
countries. I don’t agree with that, not only because the United 
States itself is now moved to being the largest debtor nation in 
the world — higher than Brazil or Argentina — followed by the 
way, very closely by Canada, which strikes me as some sort of 
odd economics and odd reasoning to link two countries like 
this, with the grave economic problems that they have on 
international banking and marketing and production and 
efficiency. Not only do I oppose it for that basis, but I oppose it 
for another basis. 
 
I oppose it also because this government and the federal 
government have not given the Canadians a chance to tell us 
what they want to achieve out of free trade. They’ve kept the 
talks secret. They have not trusted the people to be 
knowledgeable to make an opinion . . . an informed opinion on 
free trade. 
 
And I oppose it for another reason, Mr. Speaker, as I close this 
segment of my address. I oppose it because given these two PC 
governments with their slavish devotion to the private 
enterprise, market-driven systems of North America, cannot be 
trusted to negotiate a deal which will still leave Saskatchewan 
and Canada a sovereign independent and unique country and 
province in which to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I want to say to every farmer who 
might be watching this address, or to any small-business man, 
or anybody else who’s watching it, look carefully at what this 
PC Devine, PC government is doing with respect to free trade, 
and everything else. Because, Mr. Speaker, it is the final ribbon 
on the package of a government which has a reactionary, in my 
judgement, right-wing commitment to these private enterprise 
forces which will, in fact, I believe damage Saskatchewan 
irreparably, which brings me to the final point of my remarks 
this afternoon, and why I’m going to oppose this budget. 
 
Because I tell you, Mr. Speaker, and I tell the Hon. Minister of 
Health, we’re at a crossroads in Saskatchewan. Right now we’re 
at a crossroads. There’s no doubt about that. We’re at a 
crossroads because of two radically different visions of what 
this province is about in histories. 
 
I argue that the history of the province of Saskatchewan is this. 
Partly forged by the necessities of climate and geography and 
indifferent governments in Ottawa, and the exploitation in the 
early 1900s and ‘20s by railroad companies and by grain 
exchange companies and by banking institutions, what the 
people of our province did is they banded together by those 
forces to try to build a  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

743 
 

unique province called Saskatchewan. 
 
And they didn’t do it from any blinders or any ideological 
blinders on them, they did it as matter of pragmatic necessity. 
They did it also because of vision. They did it because they 
wanted to break that exploitation. And they set up their own 
co-ops, and we set up our credit union movements, and we set 
up the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. Many of the same people 
involved in those were also the same people who were involved 
in the political movements of the day, the CCF and now the 
NDP. And we attained office here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We did it. 
 
And working that principle of co-operation and that sensitive 
balance of private enterprise and the role for small business, 
with the role for co-operation and the limited role of 
government, we built a province second to none. We built 
medicare, and hospitalization, and Saskatchewan government 
telephones, and Saskatchewan government Insurance, and the 
whole variety of Crown corporations aiding and working with 
private sectors. Because to do otherwise would have left 
Saskatchewan 400,000 people, just like they are in North 
Dakota, who didn’t do the same thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And what men and women of vision they 
were. When they got the Depression, they didn’t say, we’re 
going to look to the United States or somewhere else. They 
said, we’re going to tackle these problems here with the wheat 
pool and the co-ops and the credit unions. When those banks 
started to foreclose, the farmers, my relatives, and other in 
Saskatchewan, they didn’t say to the banks, yes, come on in 
because we’re open for business, they organized to fight back 
and they set up the co-ops and the credit unions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — What men and women of vision they were. 
They said that we’re not going to be a situation where there’s 
not one head office, not one head office of a major corporation 
in Saskatchewan. We’re going to organize a little bit of our 
economic activities so that not only can we provide jobs, but we 
can provide this province with independence; that we can 
provide this province with the freedom to innovate and to do 
things which is not only Saskatchewan, but things like medicare 
which now means a part of being Canadian. That’s what they 
did. 
 
They did it because we believed in that sensitive mix of private 
enterprise and small businesses, Saskatchewan-based, and 
co-operatives, and government involvement. And we did it 
from ’44 to ’64, and we did it from ’71 to ’82, and I guarantee 
you we’re going to do it from 1990 to some time for a long time 
thereafter again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, you don’t have by accident 
SGI headquarters in Regain. That’s because we did it. We, the 
people, working together did it — the  

elected men and women. It’s not by accident that we have the 
head offices of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and 
other head offices, some now of which they have dismantled. 
We did it. 
 
In 1964 to 1971, under Ross Thatcher, the last great big free 
enterprise government, there wasn’t one major head office in 
Saskatchewan. And I invite the members opposite to tell me 
where the major head offices are in Saskatchewan after five 
years of open for business. Absolutely none, Mr. Speaker. 
None! And not only that, but what they’re trying to do is to fly 
in the face of history because what they’re going to do is 
they’re going to not only do nothing in terms of working for 
ourselves; what they’re trying to do now is they’re going to 
destroy that which our pioneers set up to make an independent 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1615) 
 
Now they’re going to sell off SGI, Mr. Speaker. Now they’re 
going to sell off STC. Now they’re going to sell off SaskTel. 
Now they’re looking at selling off Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Actually, they don’t have to sell PCS. They’ve 
in effect given PCS to IMC. That’s the most friendly take-over 
going. Why? Because they are flying in the face of the history 
of this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They are betraying the vision of those farm leaders and farm 
business leaders and farm people and the small-business leaders 
and some of the grandfathers; they’re flying in the face of that 
because of their slavish devotion. You see it in medicare, as I 
said. You saw it on open for business policy. You’re doing it in 
farming policy now, by the Premier’s approaches. That’s what 
they’re doing. They’re flying in the face of this kind of an 
approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What they have done is they have put us so much in debt, Mr. 
Speaker, that our people no longer have the freedom to innovate 
socially to recapture that spirit of growth and building for 
Saskatchewan. They’ve made us a debtor province of the 
highest order. 
 
They are trying to reverse that history. They don’t believe in the 
proper mix of co-operation and private enterprise and 
government. And I want to tell the Premier and the ministers 
opposite that the people of Saskatchewan appreciate that kind of 
a mix. They don’t want any government going too far one way 
or the other. I tell you that when a government slips over the 
right-wing edge, as this government has in privatization and 
allowing all the large corporations to come to Saskatchewan, it 
is going to be defeated in the next election because it flies in the 
face. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No longer. Mr. Speaker, put yourself in the 
Premier’s chair. I ask any one of the back-benchers to dream for 
the moment and to put yourself in the Premier’s chair. You 
want to innovate. You cannot innovate. Yes, I’ll dream. 
Everybody in this House should dream. To be a leader of any 
political party, that’s an important objective today. 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

744 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I invite any one of them, I invite any one of 
them to dream about that, and I ask them now: what can you do 
by way of innovation in that history and spirit of 
Saskatchewan? You can’t. You have a $3.4 billion debt. You 
have bankrupted this province. You have no freedom there. 
You’ve sold out. You’ve closed down all these businesses that 
I’ve talked about. Now you’ve got all the foreign multinationals 
that are in. the Weyerhaeuser’s. I don’t know whether 
Pocklington is a multinational, but he’s certainly foreign to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Who is going to decide the economic policy of the province of 
Saskatchewan? Now you’ve said to the CN Railways, no longer 
are we going to fight the railways as our pioneers did. You 
come in and implement variable rates as you want to do it. 
That’s what they’re going to do. You do whatever you like with 
it. It’s the market force . . . the conviction of somehow that an 
unbridled, continentalist, North American economic policy is 
going to work. That is exactly what they’re doing. And I tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, they are flying in the face of history; and 
they’re flying in the face of common sense. In the next election 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So the result is clear: a budget of $600 
million deficit after all the wreckage and carnage which has 
been imposed upon us by the Minister of Finance. They 
evidence is clear. I’ll tell you what else is clear, Mr. Speaker, 
out of this. When we don’t have that flexibility, we lose our 
freedom. 
 
This Devine, this government, this PC government, Mr. 
Speaker, has taken away this province’s freedom. We don’t 
have the freedom to innovate in any new programs because 
we’re broke. We don’t have the freedom to start new economic 
policies because the decision-makers are in Tacoma and New 
York and Denver. We have no freedom. 
 
Our young people don’t have the opportunities to go to school 
because they’ve virtually slashed all the post-secondary 
education programs and the elementary and secondary 
educations. They have no freedom. 
 
Our women, those others who need special actions of support in 
a society — which still has, unfortunately, stereotypes and 
discrimination — have been cut back in policies and programs. 
They have no freedom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is the legacy of this administration: no freedom. And I tell 
you what else, Mr. Speaker, when you have no freedom and 
when you have fear reigning the land, you have no hope. And 
that’s what I’m getting, no hope. 
 
They want a government and politicians to give them a hope, 
not lies, not phoney figures, not illogical arguments, not 
shibboleths, not public relations firms, not polling agencies. 
They want hope. And what they want is a hope based on that 
dream, that dream that we can work together, that we have to 
work together, that there is a room for Saskatchewan business 
and for farmers and for  

our young people and for the workers. 
 
And I tell you that what we are offering this side is hope. I tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, we, because they’re not going to do it, are 
going to stand up for that history and tradition, and come the 
next election in this province of Saskatchewan, you won’t see a 
conservative elected anywhere because they’ve betrayed our 
pioneers and they’ve betrayed the province’s history and 
traditions. I guarantee it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I want to make one or two other points, 
Mr. Speaker, about these people over there on the right. They 
will do almost anything and say almost anything to achieve 
their goals. You know in October of 1986 what they told us, 
and what they did now. The Premier says, oh, we levelled with 
the people of Saskatchewan, he said. I won’t spend the time 
because I’ve taken a lot of time. I can go through those — all of 
my colleagues have done this — those 1982 books, 1986 
promises of how they were telling the people about the truth. I 
just don’t believe that. I don’t think anybody believes what he 
says about this. But they deceive us. 
 
And then medicare premiums. Oh, the Minister of Health says, 
no, you don’t have to worry about medicare premiums. Of 
course the Minister of consumer Affairs gets up at a PC panel 
and says, we’re going to introduce . . . they’ve deceived us. The 
party has lied to us. Pure and simple. The PC party has lied to 
the people of Saskatchewan, and I don’t mean in any minor 
way, not that that makes it any better, but in a major . . . In 1986 
and 1982, that when you lie of this magnitude, you destroy the 
credibility of a government once and for ever. And I guarantee 
you, this Premier and this government will never recapture the 
confidence of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Because, Mr. Speaker, they’re prepared to 
say and do almost anything. How bitterly ironic, in this October 
of 1986 election, the Premier got up and he said, you know, he 
said . . . this is an example of what they’ll say. You know, he 
aid, if Tommy Douglas was alive today he’d be PC. How 
bitterly ironic that would be. How bitterly and so cruelly ironic. 
By this cavalier — and I don’t intend to spend much more time 
— rather insignificant in some ways, except for his actions, 
minister from Melville. How bitter that statement is. 
 
What person would say this in the light of what this government 
has done? What person would say this in the light of what 
Tommy’s history has been in the sense of building up the 
province as I’ve described it? How bitterly ironic and how 
bitterly hurtful those comments are, not of us, but of all the 
people who worked to build up this province of Saskatchewan. I 
tell the Premier, and I tell the PC government, that statement 
will come back to haunt you just as much as your budget 
actions are going to come back to haunt you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

745 
 

Mr. Romanow: — And up to now, Mr. Speaker, they’ve done 
it with very little critical review by some in the media, and 
some in the public — very critical review. But no more. Those 
statements and half truths, that kind of action in question 
period, these kinds of performances of the Premier this . . . No 
more. Those kinds of ideas that the Premier can throw out, of an 
identification, so false and so bitter, about Tommy Douglas — 
no more. Because I tell you, Mr. Speaker, we are going to 
determine and make it absolutely certain, in question period, 
and in this session, that what I say is right. No more is that kind 
of story going to be put out by the PCs — none whatsoever. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, they’re at 27 per cent of the polls 
— before the election. That’s before the election, That’s why 
they are at . . . they are, tomorrow . . . today, at an 
unprecedented 28 per cent, nearly 30 per cent gap between them 
and the next party. That’s before the budget — unprecedented. 
 
Oh they can laugh. I don’t think this has ever happened 
anywhere. They can pretend a bit, force it; they worry it. Some 
of them say, some of them say, oh, it’ll change; oh, it’ll change. 
You know they say, we did this before. Yes, they did it before. 
They did it in October of 1986. They were down in the polls, 
and then they came in and they made statements, and they did it 
before, and they got elected. And then the PC Party lied. And I 
say to you, Mr. Speaker, they’ll never ever be able to do that 
again; no sir! They did it once before, but not again — 28 per 
cent. 
 
And I want to say just before I close here, Mr. Speaker, that I 
think that there are some PC back-benchers who know that 
what I say is correct. Not on all things, but they must know 
what I say — some of the things that I say — is correct. They 
know it. And they themselves must feel bitter. They themselves 
know how bitter the circumstances and the results are of the 
situation. I know that to be the case. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve never done this in my political 
career here, I don’t believe. It could be checked in the records. I 
can’t remember it. But I invite those back-benchers, if they got 
any sense of decency, any sense of commitment to 
Saskatchewan’s history and culture, I invitee them to try to do 
something about it . . . to do something about it to try to save 
Saskatchewan. It’s not too late yet. We can stop — maybe not 
this budget because we are voting tonight — but it’s not too late 
to stop this government dead in its tracks. Look, I’m not even 
asking you to come over to our side. I’m not even asking you to 
come over to the Liberal side. I don’t care whether you set up 
your own political party. I don’t care what you do — whether 
you resign, or what you do — I’m just asking you to stand up 
and show some guts for your constituents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I’m asking you — those back-benchers — 
you can stop these people dead in their tracks. Everybody 
knows what’s going on in the corridors of this legislature. 
You’re mumbling and you’re murmuring about the possibilities 
of defeat next time round; you’re worried about what’s taking 
place; you don’t like the way they treat you; there is no 
consultation on the budget;  

they are going to be closing down your rural hospitals; they’re 
going to be attacking medicare; they’re defeated. 
 
Look, what is it worth? Is three years more sitting here worth 
that, in order to see the province of Saskatchewan be destroyed? 
Come on, I say to some of you. Show your leadership. Show 
your guts. You don’t have to come here or to the Liberals. You 
can set up your own party. Mr. Speaker, I challenge them to do 
that. 
 
I want to tell you one other thing, Mr. Speaker. Maybe I’m 
hopeful, but I’ll make one other prediction; that none of them 
does have the guts. That’s the prediction I make. That’s right, 
end up the way I started off. Because they are determined, that’s 
what the Premier says — you’re doggone right, they’re 
determined. They’re determined, they got the determination, 
and they go that game plan. They’re going to do this — direct 
Saskatchewan. But maybe, just maybe, some one or two or 
three of them have got the guts. 
 
And so the clear choice is before us. The clear choice in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, and the clear choice I say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, is before us. The clear choice is here. We can 
take the Premier’s plan and determination, and undermine out 
history, and turn back the clock — as reactionaries would have 
us turn back the clock — fifty years or more. We can see 
medicare torn apart, we can see us linked to the United States, 
or, Mr. Speaker, the choice is to chose a party which is steeped 
in our tradition, which is going to work from that tradition to 
solve the problems of the 1990s and beyond. 
 
That’s a choice. We have a choice. We can have a premier go 
down to New York, begging the New York bankers to ease the 
noose that they have around this province’s debt, or we can 
have a premier and a government that is going to be free and 
independent and stand-up for the people of Saskatchewan. 
That’s a choice that we can have. 
 
(1630) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh yes, there is a choice. There is a choice. 
We can have a premier going down, cap in hand, to the Prime 
Minister of this country, timidly and quietly begging the 
Saskatchewan interest behind secret doors, or at 5:30 in the 
morning on the deficiency payments. Not a matter of policy, but 
a matter of political survival that that money came through. We 
have a choice. We could have a premier going down timidly 
begging for the crumbs from Ottawa’s table, or we can have a 
premier and a government that is going to stand up for 
Saskatchewan and fight our case in Ottawa, regardless of 
political stripe. That’s a choice that we’ve got. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh yes, and we have another choice. We 
have a choice of giving our young men and women hope. We 
have a choice of building on the traditions and building the new 
hopes, the new economics, the new farming; to assist our family 
farms; to build some respect to this institution and give it 
fidelity; to tell the people  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

746 
 

honestly what the situation is, not to lie to the people. We have 
that choice, or we have a choice of continuing on with the kind 
of shell game and sham which has destroyed the credibility of 
this government as to put it down to 28 per cent. That’s another 
choice. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’ve made that choice, and my 
colleagues on this side have made that choice. And I tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, 56 per cent of Saskatchewan people, at least, have 
made that choice. And that choice is for that caring, sharing — 
it may sound like cliché, but it is true none the less, more true 
today than ever — caring, sharing, co-operative, 
forward-looking, exciting province that we once were. And that 
choice is by defeating this budget. Vote for the amendment, I 
say to the opposition back-benchers. Vote for the amendment, 
bring this government down, and all of Saskatchewan will be 
the winners in the process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. I think that 
clapping for a colleague, shaking his hands, and those sort of 
things are all very, very parliamentary and, in fact, becoming of 
members. But I do feel that members standing — however 
many of them were doing it, I’m not sure — and singing in 
unison: no more lies, no more lies, in this legislative Chamber, 
is certainly not the parliamentary way for us to conduct 
ourselves. 
 
Quite frankly, I’m very distressed at that particular aspect, and I 
would hope that that performance never repeats itself again. It 
actually took way from a very, very excellent speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s a 
Chinese proverb around and it has been around a long time, and 
it says simply, may you live in interesting times. I want you to 
know that I and all members in this House have indeed been 
blessed with living in interesting times. I might add, today we 
had the privilege of hearing a leadership and a campaign speech 
just finished. Mr. Speaker, I want you to know I wasn’t looking 
for a leadership speech from the opposition. I was looking for 
reason and logic. And what I got was the October 1986, 
anything for the farm vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was looking for some solutions to come from the 
infamous member from Saskatoon Riversdale. And what did we 
get? We got the member fighting 1967 issues when we’re into 
1987 — pure and simple. I want to give the member, Mr. 
Speaker, the assurance, the member from Riversdale, that we on 
this side of the House will express his regret that our good 
Premier was not in his seat to hear his speech. But, Mr. 
Speaker, in the interests of fairness and co-operation, I want the 
hon. member from Riversdale to express his regret, and our 
regret, that 21 members in the NDP caucus were not in their 
seat to hear the Premier give his address before that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — We’ve had some fairly good challenges, 
Mr. Speaker, from the member from  

Riversdale and, I might add, the other members within the NDP 
caucus. The member from Riversdale talks about decency. Do 
we, in fact, know the culture and the history of this province? 
You bet I do. I was born and raised in this province. And I want 
to tell the NDP that it is not the family of Crown corporations; 
it’s not the nationalization of uranium, potash, oil, or whatever 
they may want to nationalize; and it’s not the New Democratic 
Party. It’s people — for the better part, most of them apolitical 
— wanting to carry about their business without some of the 
rhetoric that we get going within this House. 
 
He’s also challenged our members on this side to come across 
the floor, and he has the pure audacity to stand in his place and 
say, I have never in my entire political career — and I will 
admit it goes a long way back, Mr. Speaker — ever done this 
before. Well I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, prior to 1982 
and prior to 1978, I had the good fortune of being a guest in the 
Speaker’s gallery and listening to the member do exactly the 
same thing that he did today. But he says he’s never done it 
before. Maybe there’s a credibility gap. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having listened to the opposition members now 
for several days on the budget address, I have to admit that I 
quite frankly wonder often, many times, what the public thinks. 
We seem to have strayed away from some decent parliamentary 
rules within this House over the last week. I’m like my energy 
critic across the way. I have great faith that that’s not going to 
carry on, and that we’re going to work hard to make sure that it 
doesn’t. I also have a great deal of faith in your authority, Mr. 
Speaker, to bring some of it back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in this Assembly arrive in this Assembly with 
the vote and the respect of our constituents to represent all 
constituents once you get here. I would suggest they have some 
very clear expectations of what we do in here. One of them is 
that they want us to be constructive and they want us to be 
co-operative. The energy critic I’m sure agrees with that. 
 
I would also suggest that they want us to be open in manner and 
honest in actions. To do otherwise is to fail in our 
responsibilities to our respective constituencies. And to do 
otherwise only serves to add to the cynicism of this institution. 
To do otherwise, Mr. Speaker, creates a fear and an uncertainty. 
And for what? May I suggest, for political expediency. 
 
The opposition members have challenged our back-benchers 
and even our cabinet ministers to speak out on this budget. Tell 
us what you really think of it, comes the cry from across the 
way. Well, Mr. Speaker, just so there’s no mistake about my 
position or misconstruing my words, let me make it very clear 
to my hon. colleagues across the way, I will vote no on the 
amendment and I will be voting for the budget. And why? I 
have heard absolutely nothing constructive from across the way 
to convince me otherwise. The other day I heard the member 
from Moose Jaw North try a solution with the statement that all 
we had to do was put Social Services back the way we found it, 
and everything would be okay. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the member from Moose 
Jaw North of some of the things that we found.  
  



 
June 25, 1987 

747 
 

And you know what he was really saying with that statement? 
What he was really saying was things like, take away the skills 
development program that’s in the welfare reform program. 
People on welfare don’t need education; they don’t need jobs. 
 
He was really saying we’re going to put it back to prior 1982 — 
battered women outside of Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw 
don’t need the services of transitional houses, support services, 
or anything like that. And that statement, Mr. Speaker, goes one 
step further and it suggests that communities like Melfort and 
Yorkton and even organizations like the YWCA should not 
have the moneys that they have for support to battered women. 
 
If I took it another step further as the member from Moose Jaw 
North has suggested, we on this side of the House would say, 
why do foster parents need a million dollars? They don’t ‘need 
a million dollars to look after the children of Saskatchewan. 
That’s what he’s saying with that statement. Is he asking us if 
we’re putting too much money into day care with that 
statement? More money, more spaces. I have to assume that he 
is, when he says, put it back the way you found it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the moneys allocated for Social Services are fair 
and just. While no one can ever be all things to all people this 
budget ensures security and protection to those that require it 
the most. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much has also been said on the health budget. 
There’s been a deliberate effort by some to create the 
impression that medicare has been dismantled. That’s the quote, 
medicare has been dismantled. They want us to talk truth in 
here; we should talk truth in here. What they haven’t said, or 
what perhaps they have forgotten in all their rhetoric, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the basic foundation of medicare is there. The 
access to a doctor, access to a hospital . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ten thousand in Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, the member . . . Yes, that’s true. We 
have a problem there. Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that 
Canada and the provinces face a challenge in maintaining a high 
quality health care system. And the member from Saskatoon 
South, if he would listen, I will get to his problem of his 10,000 
beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to look at the dollars spent in health. 
We’re over $1 billion. We know we have a problem when at the 
same time you look at the rising costs and the rising revenues 
going in — 63 per cent in five years, Mr. Speaker. And yet at 
the same time, and the member from Saskatoon South is 
correct, there is a waiting list supposedly of around 10,000. 
Now surely it is reasonable to ask why. Why the waiting list? 
How can it be? Well, he says, it hasn’t been run correctly. Is he 
saying that they don’t know how to run the hospitals in 
Saskatoon — the board, the administrators? I’m not sure what 
he’s saying, Mr. Speaker. Surely it’s reasonable to expect a 
voice of reason in finding some solutions. 
 
Many of the members from across the way have brought forth 
letters and complaints on various health issues over this last 
week related to people in their constituencies. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want to do the same thing because I don’t 
believe any of us on this side of the House have taken that 
opportunity. And I briefly want to tell, in particular the member 
from Saskatoon South, about two of my constituents and some 
health problems, as it relates to the problem that we have in 
ensuring a strong foundation for the basic premise of health 
care in this province. 
 
Some time ago I had a constituent come to me with concern for 
his young teenage daughter. And she had simply not been 
feeling well, and she’d been to a doctor, and she’d been 
diagnosed as having a polyp in her throat. She was to go to 
Saskatoon, and she was put on a waiting list for surgery. Now 
all of that in itself was of not great concern, because the parents 
had basically been told that what she’d been diagnosed with 
was not . . . was usually benign, not malignant, and that it was 
not urgent, nor was it life threatening. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
girls’ health deteriorated, and badly, and quickly, while she 
remained on the waiting list to get into Saskatoon. 
 
(1645) 
 
The polyp grew, she had difficulty breathing, she lost weight, 
she lost her appetite. She was very active in school, in music 
and athletics, and she could no longer sing, and she no longer 
had any energy to participate in the extra-curricular activities. 
And she finally started missing school And with that, Mr. 
Speaker, her grades started to drop. 
 
And with her listlessness was dehydration to the point where 
her lips were cracked and bleeding, and still there was no bed. 
And two very scared parents, with nowhere to go, finally came 
to the government, and they said, we don’t understand. They 
keep telling us that this is not a problem, that she will get in. she 
isn’t in, and yet her health keeps going down. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, after some serious discussion with the 
Minister of Health and the hospital concerned in Saskatoon, she 
went in for surgery, and unfortunately it was found to be 
malignant. 
 
On a more positive note with it, Mr. Speaker, she is responding 
well to treatment and is back to her normal activities. 
 
The other constituent, Mr. Speaker, is my husband. And I 
consider him a voter and a constituent. As most of the members 
in the House know, Ed is a paraplegic. Mr. Speaker, from time 
to time that requires ongoing medical treatment to ensure that 
good health is maintained. He visits Saskatoon hospitals on a 
regular basis for some very normal medical procedures with his 
condition. 
 
And what started out to be a very normal check-up over this last 
year, with a bladder procedure in January, turned into 
something else. Everything was fine and he was back home 
after two or three days in Saskatoon. And then he received a 
notice that he was to come back to Saskatoon for another 
check-up. So he thought, well, somebody knows what they’re 
doing, and he went back. However, the doctor was quite 
surprised to find that he was actually there, and didn’t 
remember, I suppose, that he had given the order for him to 
come in. Then we received another 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

748 
 

notice, Mr. Speaker, two months later, and he was to go back 
for his hospital visit to Saskatoon again. And I said to myself, 
oh, for what? His check-up was fine — the very first one — so 
why is he going back? He didn’t go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I raise that one along with the one, the young girl that did 
not have the good fortune that Ed had, andI point them out, Mr. 
Speaker, because they are so totally contradictory with what is 
happening. On one hand we had a young girl with cancer who 
could not get into the hospital and was kept on a waiting list. 
On the other hand we had a very healthy man who had the 
opportunity to be in that hospital three times within the span of 
four months. He had no problem with the waiting list. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as my 70-year-old father would say, there’s 
something out of whack in the system. And it’s not a simplistic 
view of dollars. That has nothing to do with it, and you know it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to see in this budget that the Minister 
of Health is going to be looking at rationalization of the hospital 
system. And while the member from Riversdale says the 
rationalization of the rural, I suggest that the urban system 
needs to be rationalized also. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, the issue of utilization, of 
regional based hospitals, are important not only to where I live 
in this province, but to everybody, and the health care system as 
a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the decision taken on the drug plan and the dental 
plan were not done in haste. And it was not done without a 
great deal of discussion. Those kinds of decisions, and yes, 
choices, are not easy to make, but in the interests of the basic 
premise of medicare, they were made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to touch for a moment on education. Much 
has been said by the opposition on the issue of the 
amalgamation of the two departments. As a long-time trustee, 
serving for about a decade for the Swift Current school system, 
and then having the opportunity to serve as minister of 
Education for three and a half years, I am pleased to see the 
amalgamation taking place. 
 
For many, many years the K to 12 system has struggled, and 
has complained about how the post-secondary is the one that 
drives the K to 12 when, in fact, it should be the other way 
around. Mr. Speaker, there was concerns when we did the 
public consultation on Directions, that said if changes were 
actually going to happen within the K to 12 system, changes 
first had to take place within the post-secondary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest that would never happen if you have two 
separate departments, two different ministers, run by two 
different bureaucracies. It simply will not happen. 
 
As you recall, this province adopted, with support by trustees, 
teachers, and parents, a new set of goals for education— goals, 
Mr. Speaker, that have not previously  

been reviewed for over 20 years. And one of the goals that this 
province adopted for our K to 12 children was that education 
shall be lifelong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amalgamation of the Department of Education 
and the department of advanced education is simply a step 
towards being able to work towards that goal. 
 
My friends across the way have had a lot to say about choices 
— we made the wrong choices. They say: tax the oil 
companies; that’s a solution. The Leader of the Opposition, the 
other day in the Leader-Post — that was his statement: tax the 
oil companies. And members across the way, including the 
member from Regina North East, a past minister of Finance, 
has charged the give-away of 1 billion. I believe it started out at 
1 billion, and every time a new member gets up, it goes a little 
bit higher. 
 
An Hon. Member: — About 1.5. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — One point five, the member from 
Saskatoon South says. Mr. Speaker, I want to talk briefly about 
energy and to some of the allegations and accusations made by 
the members opposite. Coming to this portfolio in November, 
Mr. Speaker, my first thought was that there are better times to 
be Minister of Energy. But there is probably no better for a 
challenging time, in order to make the system work and to see 
this province grow in an area that it has not been particularly 
active outside of the last few years. 
 
Revenues, or the lack of them, are very much a part of any 
budget, whether it’s your budget at home, or the government’s 
budget, or the Department of Energy. I believe that it’s very 
important for all members, including opposition members, our 
back-benchers, and cabinet ministers, to understand the 
magnitude of the impact of those revenues. 
 
I also believe that every elected member should understand 
their party’s position and philosophy on resource development. 
And why do I say resource development? Because it is a major 
component for extra revenues for this province. Quite frankly, 
I’m not sure that they do understand it. I know they don’t 
understand the impact and I’m beginning to wonder if they even 
understand their own position. 
 
I wonder if the old guard along the front here has brought the 
new guard at the back up to date on how the NDP has 
responded and might respond in the future. I’ve heard a lot of 
new members respond on this budget debate with a lot of vigour 
on oil and royalties. But I wonder if, in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve done their homework. 
 
I’ve never been one to dwell on the past. But I also believe that 
you must know where you came from in order to chart a course 
for the future. And I want to have a quick look at where we 
came from in the oil and gas industry, for starters. Prior to 1982, 
Mr. Speaker — 11 years of NDP rule — this province, in fact, 
had a dying industry. Not only was the industry dying, but the 
reserves were being depleted. 
  



 
June 25, 1987 

749 
 

It was an industry that in fact was propped up because of 
transfer payments through the Trudeau government. One of the 
worst things that happened in that period of time in this 
province was that we lost an infrastructure, technology, and 
worst of all, the people that go with it, the people with the 
know-how. And they left the province. Today it would be my 
guess that you could go across Canada and the key figures 
within the energy industry, by far the majority, would have 
come out of Saskatchewan — born and raised and educated in 
Saskatchewan. And they had to leave because they could not 
find work. Quite frankly, our loss was Alberta’s gain. 
 
And we know what happened to the energy sector in Alberta 
during the ‘70s. They thrived and we withered. Mr. Speaker, I 
often say that the window of opportunity for Saskatchewan was 
slammed shut. And if I think it was slammed shut on oil, when I 
look at our gas industry, they didn’t even begin to open it. We 
were in a situation where we actually had to import gas when 
we had gas to be developed in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
today that positions been reversed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1982 when we came into office . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . yes we are doing well, for the member from 
Quills Lake, in the gas industry. Very well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In getting an industry going, Mr. Speaker, one of the main 
questions became: if you are in a catch-up position, and you 
have a main competitor, what are the factors that you put into 
place to make it go? How could we possibly compete with 
Alberta? How do you convince people that Saskatchewan, in 
fact, is a good place to come home to and a good place to 
invest, when they didn’t have that under the NDP? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what we did, and I will let the record and 
the facts speak for themselves: July 1982, this government put a 
drilling incentive — and they’ve had lots to say about an 
incentive — into place for oil. Not bad. 
 
It paid off, Mr. Speaker, in jobs, in taxes for the municipalities, 
growth for communities, and revenues for the province. And in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, it worked so well that in 1986 Alberta . . . 
And NDP Manitoba to the east adopted an incentive program in 
Manitoba along with the royalties. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, 1986 came along and we had a downturn, 
price of oil — 5,000 people out of work, the possibility of 
another 5,000 to go. And we reviewed the incentive program 
again, Mr. Speaker. And along with the royalty rates, the price 
of oil was moving up and down. Mr. Speaker, we moved to a 
price-sensitive system similar to Alberta’s, I might add. 
 
And for the member from Regina North before we go for 
supper, I want to tell him what a price-sensitive system is. It 
simply means, when the price is low, the royalty rate will be 
lower; when the price is high, Mr. Member, the royalty will be 
high. And in fact under this system, when the price of oil gets to 
a certain level, the royalty rate kicks in at a higher level than 
under the NDP. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that was part of it for our goals on the oil 
policies. And I can get into the policies after supper but being 
that it’s near 5 o’clock, Mr. Speaker, I will quit here. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


	ORAL QUESTIONS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS

