













































September 17, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 17, 1987 

 

 

2619 

 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Consumer Affairs. 

 

An Hon. Member: She left. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I saw her a 

moment ago. I must say that I’m taken aback, Mr. Speaker, and 

I will relinquish my place to somebody else. 

 

Salary of Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Consultant 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. My question this 

afternoon is to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation. Minister, since early this year when the 

Minister of Finance suddenly discovered a 200 per cent 

miscalculation in his budget deficit, your government has been 

increasing taxes to ordinary people, cutting services, and 

throwing thousands of people out of work, all in the name of 

restraint. But at the same time your government found the 

money to pay defeated PC cabinet minister, Sid Dutchak, nearly 

$7,000 a month to act as a consultant to you at the housing 

corporation. 

 

Can the minister confirm that was a higher rate of pay than the 

former president of SHC, Calder Hart, and the current 

president, Mr. Little, had received and is receiving. And also 

can he tell Saskatchewan taxpayers how he justifies this kind of 

political patronage and wasteful spending in a period of 

economic restraint? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, we very thoroughly discussed 

Mr. Dutchak in Crown corporation hearings for the past couple 

of days. And as I said in those hearings, and as I say today, 

clearly I suppose it would appear that Mr. Dutchak’s 

appointment was political. I suppose that if you wanted to cry 

patronage, and had we made a permanent president out of MR. 

Dutchak and given him some exorbitant salary, that claim might 

have been true. But you have to understand, Mr. Speaker, that 

Sask Housing Corporation at that particular . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order! Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve explained it 

to them before, but every time I start explaining it, they don’t 

seem to want to listen. But I think perhaps the people of the 

province would want to listen. 

 

But as I was saying, the corporation was without a president, 

and we were entering one of the most exciting and dynamic 

programs in the history of any government of this province. 

 

And the members again, opposite, Mr. Speaker, seem to  

find it humorous that as a result of the home improvement 

program that has put almost $1 billion of economic activity into 

this province in the last 12 months, is responsible for creating or 

maintaining up to this present point about 14,000 jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were embarking on one of the most successful 

programs of any government in history. Clearly the corporation 

needed some direction. Clearly Mr. Dutchak, who was the 

former minister, who knew the senior management . . . We did 

not have a president. He had the expertise of the program. I 

couldn’t think of a better person for the corporation to have 

hired for a short period of time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has just confirmed 

that this expenditure of nearly $7,000 a month had little to do 

with public policy and everything to do with political 

patronage. And I think the taxpayers of this province are going 

to have a real important message to give to you next time they 

have an opportunity. 

 

Minister, you confirmed at the Crown Corporations Committee 

this week that the $7,000 a month was just Sid Dutchak’s 

consulting fee. You admitted also that he was allowed to submit 

expenses. Can the minister tell this Assembly and the people of 

this province what those expenses were? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I have before me a piece of 

paper that indicates that one Mr. Alex Taylor, a defeated NDP 

MLA constituent and former NDP cabinet minister, conducted a 

study for the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation between 

January of 1981 and December of 1981. This Mr. Taylor was 

paid $48,000 plus expenses of $4,230. I can tell you that Mr. 

Dutchak’s expenses were nowhere near that $4,200. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister didn’t answer my 

question. But at least when Mr. Taylor was providing a report, 

he provided . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. There is no room for a debate, 

so please give a short preamble to your next supplementary. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the minister 

in charge of the housing corporation. Minister, when a 

government hires a consultant, that consultant usually provides 

a written report with recommendations, as Mr. Taylor did. Yet 

at the Crown Corporations Committee meeting earlier this 

week, you were unable to provide the taxpayers with Mr. 

Dutchak’s report. 

 

Do you now have that report, and can you table it today to show 

what taxpayers received for this large expenditure? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2620 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, this same question in Crown 

Corporations sparked quite a controversy, unfortunately 

between myself and one of the members opposite. Because 

although Mr. Dutchak’s contract with the corporation was now 

for the year under review, in a spirit of co-operation I was 

prepared, as I said, and I’ll quote from Hansard, if I can just 

find it offhand: 

 

. . . I am prepared to discuss Mr. Dutchak’s situation 

because we have nothing to hide and nothing to fear. 

 

Clearly in there. The following day, and I’ll quote from 

Hansard now, I was asked by the member: 

 

You have a report from them and recommendations. Is 

that not correct? 

 

He was . . . I’ll read the whole quote. 

 

Uniformly when you retain outside consultants, at the 

conclusion of their consultancy period you have a report 

from them and recommendations. Is that not correct? 

 

My response, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Generally speaker, I could tell the hon. member that this is 

the case. But depending on the nature of work at any given 

time - depending on the nature of work - it might be such 

that a report wouldn’t be required. 

 

I made it very clear. Now then they went on and they . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

The member is answering a supplementary. Order. Order, 

please. Order, please. The member is answering a 

supplementary, and I know that there is a great deal he could 

perhaps say about the supplementary in his answer, but I think 

he should try to keep his answer reasonably short. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make it very 

clear about . . . They asked me the question about the tabling of 

a document, and I explained that in all instances this report 

from a consultant is not always required and not always asked 

for. And I think that I made it very clear that in Mr. Dutchak’s 

case that was not specifically the situation. 

 

I did, however, make a statement that it is my understanding 

that he did provide me with a final report at the conclusion of 

his work. I have since checked with my officials to see if that is 

the case. There is no formal consultant report. As I explained in 

corporation hearings, it was not required, and therefore there 

was nothing to file. But I did discuss his appointment in great 

detail because, as I have said on many occasions, we have 

nothing to hide. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Advertising of Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a  

question for the minister in charge of Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation. Mr. Minister, information which you tabled in the 

Crown Corporations Committee also shows that you spend one 

quarter of a million dollars in the month of September to 

advertise the home program, which was advertising for the 

Conservative Party, and you did it at taxpayers’ expense. 

 

On the one hand, Mr. Minister, you’re preaching restraint; on 

the other hand you find lots of money for your political party 

advertising. And I say to you, that’s bad management and that’s 

unfair. 

 

And in view of that, I ask you the question: — if you can 

somehow find a quarter of a million dollars a month for this 

kind of thinly disguised political advertising, why can’t your 

government find money to fix our roads, to provide adequate 

staff in our hospitals, and to do something about the huge 

waiting lists at our universities and our technical institutes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, it never ceases to amaze me 

how members of the opposition can play on words. Now it’s a 

quarter of a million dollars per month to advertise that. Quite a 

statement. It wasn’t a quarter of a million dollars per month. In 

one given month of a billing period it may have been that 

quarter of a million dollars, but by your own admittance it was 

only . . . It’s not . . . To laugh at me and say that it is per month 

is . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. Please allow the member to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I say, every 

time I get up to respond it seems that they have a great deal of 

concern with my response. 

 

We were embarking on one of the largest programs in the 

province’s history, as I said. And when you consider that the 

total advertising cost of that program which has presently done 

$600 million worth of direct activity, and in terms of percentage 

the advertising portion of it is one-tenth of one-half of 1 per 

cent. I can’t even transform that into the digits, but it’s 

one-tenth of one-half of 1 per cent. And you’ve got a new 

program. 

 

There was so much excitement about that program when it 

started, Mr. Speaker, our telephone system couldn’t handle it; 

we had to put in a new telephone system; we had 250,000 

phone calls. I think we were obligated to the people of this 

province to advertise a new, exciting program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — A supplementary to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. The fact remains, and the minister has confirmed it in 

his report to the committee, that he spent a quarter of a million 

dollars in the month of September to advertise this program. 

That, Mr. Speaker, is restraint for the families of Saskatchewan, 

but it’s patronage to the PC Party and the friends of this 

government. 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2621 

 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, in view of this, I ask you: 

— will you do the right thing? Will you take this quarter of a 

million dollar bill and send it to the Progressive Conservative 

Party of Saskatchewan where it belongs, because it was spent 

on their behalf? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I think about the only thing 

that I can say in response to a ridiculous statement like that, 

because it’s not a question, and to even begin to say that that 

was a PC election advertising, borders on the ridiculous. 

 

Clearly the advertising indicated the context of the program. 

Some 200,000 people that have already applied for this program 

- several of which, I might add, are members opposite that 

enjoy the result of that program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Surely any government of the day would 

be entitled to spend advertising dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Renewal of Licenses of Investment Companies 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 

Minister of Consumer Affairs. On July 13 in this House I asked 

you a question, Madam Minister, as follows: 

 

According to my information, in 1985 the Alberta 

Securities Commission rejected a prospectus filed by First 

Investors because they said too many mortgages were in 

arrears. 

 

(And) I ask you: — did your department have that 

information? If not, why not, and if so, why did they not 

investigate to see whether or not these companies (and in 

particular First Investors) were in difficulties . . . 

 

You answered: 

 

. . . I (will) have to take notice on the specific question . . .  

 

Later on you said: — I did take notice to the member and tell 

him “that I would get the information on the specific questions 

he has asked, and I shall do (so) forthwith”. 

 

It is now two months later. Have you done so, and will you 

advise the House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the reason the department 

didn’t have that knowledge is that the securities commission is 

not under the jurisdiction of the Department of Consumer and 

Commercial Affairs; it’s under the Department of Justice. 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. My 

question, Madam Minister, was: — in 1985 did the Securities 

Commission have filed with it a prospectus from First 

Investors? Are you telling me that in 1985 the Securities 

Commission was not responsible to the Department of 

Consumer Affairs? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — It was in 1985, Mr. Speaker, but the 

question should have been directed to the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I asked 

the minister whether or not she, in 1985, had available to her 

the fact that a prospectus had been filed and rejected in Alberta. 

I am asking you again, Madam Minister: — did you have that 

information available to your department, which at that time 

regulated both investment contracts and the Securities 

Commission? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in 1985 the Securities 

Commission of Alberta did not share that information with the 

Securities Commission of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the 

minister admit that the same prospectus was submitted in 

Saskatchewan to the Securities Commission of Saskatchewan, 

then under your jurisdiction? Do you admit that that was 

submitted; do you admit that that was submitted, and do you 

know whether or not it was accepted? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 

prospectus was withdrawn and was not dealt with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Madam Minister. Did 

you or anybody in your department make any inquiries as to 

whether the prospectus was withdrawn, and if so, why? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, if an investor or a 

company wishes to withdraw a prospectus that they have filed, 

that’s within their jurisdiction, and it happens fairly regularly 

that they will withdraw a prospectus, fix it up and resubmit it 

for perusal. There’s nothing unusual about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I might also say, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition 

misled this House in his questioning earlier on when he stated 

that the Ontario Securities Commission had refused to grant a 

licence to the company when they filed a prospectus in Ontario. 

That is simply not true, Mr. Speaker. The Ontario Securities 

Commission asked for further information, at which point the 

companies withdrew their prospectus. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Madam Minister, what I said is a 

matter of record. I now ask you . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I ask you now this question. You 

advised on July 17 that your department received no notice of 

pending problems and therefore continued to  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2622 

 

 

licence the two firms, that is, First and Associated, to do 

business in the province - no notice prior to June 30 or 

thereabouts of this year. Do you say that that statement is true? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — That statement is completely true, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Madam Minister. Did 

you receive a financial statement of First Investors for the 

calendar year 1985 early in 1986, and do you agree that the 

financial statement showed that the company was insolvent? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we received their 1985 

audited report, audited by Deloitte Haskins & Sells, in early 

1986. There was a qualifier in there, but not unlike many 

qualifiers that are added to audited statements. 

 

I think you must realize, Mr. Speaker, that all three firms are 

headquartered in Alberta. The Alberta economy did go through 

somewhat of a slump. There were many incidences of external 

auditors and companies not agreeing on the qualification of 

certain assets. 

 

What the member did not indicate, Mr. Speaker, was that, yes, 

Deloitte Haskins did put a qualifier in the annual report stating 

that they were in disagreement with management over the value 

of certain assets listed, but they go on to say, Mr. Speaker, that 

except in he loss and value of certain properties, that the 

company audit was done under normal auditing principles. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Madam Minister. Do 

you agree that the financial statement you received is the same 

one, in the same form, as distributed to certificate holders in the 

plan of arrangement information circular recently distributed? 

And if so, do you agree that even on the company’s figures, 

even on the most charitable interpretation of the value of their 

assets, the company was still insolvent? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, with regards to the 1985 

audited report: — the primary regulator, which in this case is 

the Government of Alberta, did, in fact, in the normal course of 

his duties, did question the management of Associated Investors 

and First Investors over the qualifying statement in the . . . by 

the auditor. And as I understand it, more information was given 

to the primary regulator, and they continued to licence the 

company, as we did. 

 

I think what the member should understand, and I’m sure he 

does understand, Mr. Speaker, that with regards to 

extra-provincially licensed companies operating in 

Saskatchewan, it is the practice, the accepted practice right 

across Canada, to rely on the primary jurisdiction to see that the 

regulations are enforced, that regulations are being met. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan we have over 500 firms who do business 

in the province as extra-provincial corporations. And what the 

member is actually saying is that we should  

have an army of auditors and that every company in this 

province, or any other province for that matter, Mr. Speaker, 

should open their doors to as many as 13 audit teams to come in 

and audit their books. That’s physically impossible, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, you say it’s normal practice. You admit that there 

have been investment contract firms operating in this province 

since the mid-1950s, so licences had been renewed some 90 or 

100 times. 

 

Can you give me one instance, just one, in which the licence of 

an investment contract firm was renewed after you had, or the 

minister, had, in their possession a financial statement showing 

that the company was broke, on the rocks, insolvent — just one 

example? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I do not accept the 

member’s premise that by virtue of losses, operating losses in 

one year, that the company or companies were insolvent. 

Clearly, the companies had listed assets, shareholder equity, 

that though they did suffer an operating loss in 1985, they 

certainly were not completely insolvent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Madam Minister. I 

want you to tell this House whether you are saying that this 

company suffered losses in 1985, which we all know, and 

whether you are denying that at the end of that year the 

company owed more than it owned, that it was insolvent, that it 

was broke - are you denying that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — What I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is in 

the eyes of the Government of Alberta, the primary jurisdiction 

in this case, the companies were not insolvent in 1985. 

 

Hunting Rights of Treaty Indians 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I direct my 

question to the Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture. As 

you know, Indian people have the clear right under treat to hunt 

at any time on unoccupied Crown land. Recently your 

government has been posting a wide corridor on either side of 

northern roads and highways, declaring this land to be off limits 

for anyone to hunt, including treaty Indians. A number of 

people have been charged for hunting within these new 

corridors. 

 

This is being done without any consultation with Indian people 

in the North, and makes it much more difficult for treaty Indian 

people to hunt along northern roads and highways. Mr. 

Minister, will you now consult with the Indian banded affected 

by these corridors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to point 

out to the hon. member, and I’m glad he raised this issue, that 

we in fact did put together a native conservation committee to 

discuss precisely the type of  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2623 

 

 

issue which he has raised, and we have had several discussions 

on that nature. 

 

I would say that right now the issue is: — what do we do with a 

diminishing resource in Saskatchewan, namely the moose and 

the elk, which are prevalent in our forest regions. And my 

responsibility, while it is to make sure that treaty Indians are not 

infringed upon in their hunting rights, my responsibility is to 

ensure that we have a viable resource for future generations in 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

knows that treaty Indian people do have special hunting rights. 

Will you instruct the resource officers to stop charging Indian 

people who are hunting under their rights granted by treaty? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking about 

snowmobiles, and we’re talking about high-powered rifles, and 

we’re talking about nigh hunting with spotlights, I have a 

responsibility not only to protect that resource but to protect the 

lives of everybody who may be out there hunting, including 

treaty Indians. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Alternative Forms of Farm Financing in Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to make 

a very brief statement with regard to the initiatives pertaining to 

alternative forms of farm financing in the province of 

Saskatchewan, that, I might add, may lead to alternative forms 

of farm financing across the country. 

 

In the budget on June 17, 1987, the Minister of Finance outlined 

that this government would be proposing new initiatives 

regarding alternative forms of farm financing for public 

discussion. He indicated that these initiatives would require the 

co-operation and participation of the farming and the financial 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all members of the House will know that our 

farmers have been caught in the middle of a full-scale 

international grain war and its over-market share, and it’s very 

serious. This war has followed a period of high interest rates 

and inflated land prices, plus difficulties created by drought, 

insect infestation in our province and throughout western 

Canada. 

 

As a result, farmers’ net incomes without such programs as the 

production loan program, the Canada special grains program, 

and the western grains stabilization program, would be 

substantially below zero. At the same time, farm debt has risen 

to a record high of over $5 billion, and many farmers are 

experiencing extreme difficulty meeting their obligations. 

 

In its first term, our government’s approach to assist farmers as 

to provide substantial relief for such problems as high interest 

rates and drought, with short-term solutions for their pressing 

needs. Today, Mr. Speaker, our agricultural problems are 

international in  

scope, and our government alone cannot resolve low grain 

prices and the large farm debt that exists today. 

 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, all governments of Canada agreed to 

specific principles in a national agricultural strategy. One of the 

corner-stones of that strategy is farm finance. We are committed 

to develop ideas to create better alternatives in that area. 

Exploring those alternatives is one of the strategy’s priority 

issues, and several financing options have been identified as 

viable alternatives. 

 

This government has elected to continue its agricultural 

leadership role to explore farm finance for the future. The idea 

requires in-depth study and analysis, plus considerable input 

from farmers, farm organizations, financial institutions, and 

from the public at large. 

 

To ensure that we have maximum participation and contribution 

from the agriculture and financial community, the government 

will do two things, Mr. Speaker. First, we will organize a 

symposium to be held in Regina, October 29 and 30, 1987, on 

farm financing. Representatives of agriculture and financial 

organizations will meet with government officials to analyze, 

evaluate, and recommend a direction which may be undertaken 

to deal with the financial crisis here in agriculture. Local, 

national and international speaker, Mr. Speaker, well-known for 

their farm finance expertise, will address the group on the 

history of Saskatchewan farm debt legislation, guaranteed 

individual mortgages, guaranteed operational loans, interest 

stabilization, and various forms of equity financing. All options 

- all options, Mr. Speaker - outlined by the finance committee 

for the national agriculture strategy will be discussed in depth. 

 

Presentations, workshops, plenary sessions will allow for 

maximum participation. 

 

Second, Mr. Speaker, the government will arrange a provincial 

tour of a five-member government committee who will host 

public meetings in a number of Saskatchewan communities 

November 16 through December 4 to ensure that individual 

producers have input into these discussions. 

 

The committee will prepare a report on both segments for the 

government, which should be completed in the spring of 1988. 

 

All Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker, and farm organizations 

will be advised of these meetings by mail immediately. Further 

details will be announced in the immediate future. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly welcome 

anything that will be of benefit to the farm families of this 

province. And a symposium, as you’re suggesting, certainly 

can’t hurt. 

 

Unfortunately, again your timing is a little bad. Where was your 

government before? We need action now. You  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2624 

 

 

keep . . . I enjoy this initiative, but why are you starting to study 

. . . When did you discover this problem, Mr. Premier? 

 

First of all, if you’re serious about this, why not a non-partisan 

committee of government and opposition members? That would 

ensure that the farmers’ interests, the best interests of the farmer 

would be adhered to. But no, we don’t . . . So I would invite 

you, Mr. Minister, to think about having a bipartisan committee, 

or an all-party committee. 

 

I have a couple of problems. I hope that the equity financing is 

studied very carefully. It’s something that you and the federal 

government have been talking about. And I think that’s another 

reason why we have to . . . it has to be scrutinized. 

 

I’m afraid that although I will never speak against an initiative 

like this, I’m afraid, Mr. Minister, again you are showing that 

it’s too late for your government to help farmers, and the right 

time for your government to play politics again with farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

Ms. Simard: — - Mr. Speaker, I have here in my hand another 

document that has been signed by some 70 customers of Lorne 

St. and 14th Avenue drug store here in Regina, a petition that 

was not prepared formally in anticipation of tabling in the 

legislature, so I table it as a document. 

 

It reads: 

 

We, the undersigned, request the maintenance of Lorne 

and 14th Ave. Drugs as a collection agent for SaskPower. 

 

And I’d like to add that to the other documents that have been 

tabled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Constitution Amendment, 1987 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Devine, and the proposed amendment 

thereto moved by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I spoke briefly the other day in respect to the proposed 

amendment raised by the Leader of the Opposition. And I want, 

for the purposes of continuing my remarks, to  

indicate that what the Leader of the Opposition, his amendment 

asked for. He asked, in essence, that before the Meech Lake 

accord be ratified by the Assembly here, that the people of 

Saskatchewan be given an opportunity to voice any concerns 

they may have; in other words, to have a public hearing which 

would be, in fact, under the control of the Executive Council. 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that seems to me to be a 

very reasonable approach by the opposition. 

 

And I want this afternoon to be able to indicate that throughout 

Canada a number of people are asking exactly what we have 

been asking for here, is public hearings. And so I say . . . we 

want to ask ourselves here this afternoon why, in fact, don’t we 

need a hearing? Well I’ll tell you that articles have been written, 

numerous articles indicating that Meech Lake was put together 

behind closed doors and that they have virtually shut off any 

process of public hearings. 

 

I have here the editorial from the Star-Phoenix of September 3, 

’87, and I want to refer to a portion of the comments made by 

Verne Clemence of the Star-Phoenix, forum editor. This is what 

he says in respect to the Meech Lake accord. He says: 

 

The hearing process was mainly a facade, as was made 

clear at the outset by the government. It was never 

intended that the fundamental democratic principles would 

apply in the sense that public input might result tin 

alteration of the accord. This whole issue had a different 

agenda. It was primarily a no-holds-barred battle for the 

hearts and minds of Quebec voters. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

It was an irony of sorts that the final pronouncement on 

the hearings was made by Senator Lowell Murray, a 

conspicuously non-elected member of the government’s 

Meech Lake hit team. 

 

Yes, this is the same government that has been making all that 

noise about the undemocratic antics of the unelected senators 

who dared to quibble about the drug Bill. 

 

Those are the comments from The Leader-Post in the editorial 

indicating that the whole process of putting together the Meech 

Lake was done primarily on a political basis by 10 premiers and 

a Prime Minister, without consultation with the public and in 

fact demonstrating a sham in so far as public hearings. Because 

while they’re having the joint House of Commons and Senate 

hearings which were completed last week, and indeed which 

report will be filed and made public on Monday, during all of 

those hearings - and there was hundreds of briefs and many, 

many people that went before the joint committee - it was clear 

from the outset by the Prime Minister, he indicated that none of 

the wording of the accord could, in fact, be changed. 

 

And this is the situation that we have here in Saskatchewan. 

This article here, I want to read one more paragraph. 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2625 

 

 

It is important of course to keep separate the concepts of 

what the people might think and feel and the aims and 

objectives of the various political players. There is nothing 

to suggest ordinary Quebec citizens demanded any of the 

things Meech Lake offers. 

 

Those are the comments indicating Meech Lake hearings’ 

repulsive abuse of power. 

 

And so what we are asking here is with a very important 

document, a document which is going to in fact set the course 

of our country, and for years to come will dictate in no small 

way what our country will in fact . . . how it will develop. 

 

And here we are going with a process which we have excluded 

the people of Canada to put forward their views. And I say that 

what we’re asking for here, Mr. Speaker, makes eminent sense. 

And I would think that the members opposite, the Premier, and 

other members of the cabinet, would indeed welcome such 

hearings so that the people of Saskatchewan could be heard. 

 

Certainly it has been the case in some of the provinces. In fact, 

we were given a time frame of some three years in order to get a 

ratification of the Meech Lake accord in the legislatures. And 

Ontario and Manitoba and New Brunswick all have called for 

public hearings, some sort or the other, but not here in 

Saskatchewan. And I think that’s regrettable that the people of 

Saskatchewan should be indeed bypassed. But this is not the 

only article that indicates that there’s been Meech Lake 

hearings, a repulsive abuse of power. We have other experts 

also indicating . . . Here is one from the Star-Phoenix; it goes on 

to say in the headlines: — Hearings Must Be Held On 

Constitutional Changes. And so our position about asking for 

hearings is supported by the Star-Phoenix in their editorial. And 

I want to read just a bit of what is stated in this article: 

 

The Meech Lake accord is a sell-out of the concept of 

Canada. What is even worse is that the Premier has not 

only helped sell out Canada, but the people of 

Saskatchewan as well. 

 

That’s the article from the Star-Phoenix. It goes on: 

 

When the deal was signed, every province had the 

opportunity, over three years, to conduct public hearings 

on the accord. Instead, the Premier has chosen to rush 

blindly into a deal that will in no uncertain terms spells 

disaster for the West and for Canada. 

 

That’s what they’re saying. And we’ve been asking for public 

hearings in order that the people of Saskatchewan may have an 

opportunity. It says here: 

 

The West does not need a weak federal government but 

needs to have more of a voice in a strong central 

government. In short, the Meech Lake accord is bad deal 

for Canada, an even worse deal for the West. Prime 

Minister Brian Mulroney, seeing how low the 

Conservatives are in the polls, decided to give away the 

entire  

country for the sake of a possible next election. 

 

This is the analysis by our leading newspapers here in 

Saskatchewan, and it doesn’t stop just with the editorial writers 

here in Saskatchewan, the Leader-Post or the Star-Phoenix. But 

we have the U. of S. law professor, Howard McConnell, who 

did three articles in very much detail in respect to the accord, 

and I want only to indicate a part of what he says. He says: 

 

Experts and politicians disagree on Meech Lake deal. 

 

And I want to read just a portion of the concern that we have 

and other Canadians have. It says in this article: 

 

The secrecy and the speed with which the first ministers 

carried out their deliberations at Meech Lake and the sense 

of finality with which they presented their reformulated 

proposals to the Canadian people, are really unprecedented 

in the constitutional process of any democratic country. 

There was virtually no public input before the government 

was crystallized, and the wording of the text will be hard 

to change. 

 

Those are the words of a leading authority on constitutional 

law, Howard McConnell. 

 

(1445) 

 

And there was three basic articles in his analysis of it. I just 

want to read one other aspect of it, and all members here will 

know that some of the things that the Alberta government has 

been doing, and Premier Getty has been asking for, is an elected 

Senate. And out of the Meech Lake accord - and it’s really 

amazing how the Premier of Alberta was able to sign the accord 

in light of the fact that he’s looking for the Triple E Senate. The 

comment here by Professor Howard McConnell states: 

 

It is truly amazing that as one of the leading proponents of 

a Tripe E, (that’s) (Effective, Elected and Equal) Senate, 

Premier Don Getty of Alberta could have agreed (with) 

Meech Lake proposals. While the accord does provide for 

annual meetings of the first ministers on the Senate 

reform, the recast section 41 requires unanimous 

provincial consent for any alterations in the new 

“provincial” mode of selecting senators. 

 

In essence, the Triple E Senate will be almost impossible to 

attain because it now will require unanimous consent from all 

provinces, unlike what it was previously. 

 

I want to say that in the House of Commons, as I indicated, 

there is the hearings going on. The join committee of the 

parliament and Senate concluded their hearings. The report is to 

be made public on Monday, then it’s submitted to the House of 

Commons and will be debated there. 

 

And I may also say that there is no great rush. We have time 

here for hearings, for people to have the opportunity to have 

hearings, because as is indicated in one of the articles, that even 

after the joint committees have held  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2626 

 

 

their meetings in Ottawa and it’s submitted to parliament, that 

the Senate itself now intends to set up a system of hearings 

under the auspices of the Senate. And they’re saying that the 

earliest that . . . the Senate could deal with it for six months - 

there’s a limitation. And the earliest that it could possibly be 

finalized is by some time April of next year . . . 

 

And so what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is: — what we’re calling 

for here is an involvement of the public. And as I said before, if 

this is such a great accord, if it’s so defendable, if it’s the right 

thing for Canada, why exclude the public and the people from 

participating in any analysis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — And I say to you that that is what we’re calling 

for. And the fear that I have is that what we have is desperate 

politicians clumping together in a hidden agenda, trying to 

approve an amendment to the constitution without the public 

having an opportunity to discuss it. And certainly that’s the 

situation, and articles will also indicate that the Prime Minister 

is in need of scoring some kind of a headline - in desperate 

trouble in Quebec politically, as he is throughout the rest of 

Canada, by the way. And what he is attempting to do is to get 

something that will shore up his political fortunes without really 

thinking of the future of Canada, and that’s the danger. 

 

But the unfortunate thing that I see is that no matter what the 

Prime Minister has for a policy, whether it be free trade, in the 

bungling method that he went about it, or whether its Meech 

Lake, we have a Premier here who, when the Prime Minister 

says: — Join me on this mission, and he says: — me too. So 

anything that the Prime Minister is doing, let us be sure that the 

Premier of this province is endorsing the policies of the Prime 

Minister, Brian Mulroney. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — He’s doing it in free trade, and he’s doing it in 

Meech Lake, and I say we need more leadership than that. I 

don’t think that the Premier should be following all of the 

policies of the Prime Minister because the policies of the Prime 

Minister are not being either accepted or appreciated by the 

people of Canada. 

 

I was interested to know how the Premier so lightly spoke in 

respect to the possibility of a hearing - the people of 

Saskatchewan being given an opportunity to discuss the 

contents of the Meech Lake accord. Do you know what he said? 

He says: — I’m not going to put on a road show. And here is 

one of the most important documents that this nation has. And 

when we ask for public hearings and participation by the public 

the Premier dismisses it as he does so many serious, serious 

concerns with the glibness of, “I’m not going to establish a road 

show.” 

 

Well I’ll tell you when the Prime Minister asked him to get on 

board with his free trade - and it was before the last election - 

what he did do was put on a little road show for free trade. And 

he sent them around, and it cost the people some $300,000, and 

it wasn’t even any  

recommendation nor an analysis of the impact of free trade. But 

when it comes to an important document like the constitution, 

or the amendments of the constitutions of this country, the 

Premier will not allow the people of this province to have a 

voice. 

 

And the thing I guess you have to ask is: — why is he so intent 

on getting it passed? The hearings in Ottawa are not dealt with . 

We don’t have a copy of the recommendations from the joint 

committee from the parliament and the Senate. And wouldn’t it 

be logical, if there’s any meaning whatsoever in the hearings 

that they’re holding in parliament - the committee from 

parliamentarians and Senate, if it had any meaning - then 

wouldn’t it be wise that all of the provinces would wait until 

that report was tabled and dealt with by the federal government. 

Because by the very nature here . . . Let us assume that we were 

to pass this accord today or whenever, shortly; and then let us 

assume that the hearings in Ottawa changed some of the aspects 

of the accord; well, then we would have to come back to again 

approve the amended one. 

 

Doesn’t it make eminent sense, Mr. Speaker, that if there’s any 

meaning whatsoever in the hearings that are going on, or have 

gone on, in Ottawa, that certainly we should be given the report. 

It should be tabled here by the Premier. We should consider 

some of the recommendations from the members of that 

committee, and surely we should have that report to see what 

analysis was given by members of the committee in Ottawa. 

 

So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult. We’re dealing with a 

very, very important document, and I think the Minister of 

Justice indicated that. But as soon as the Premier has signed the 

accord and agreed to it, he came rushing back, and his 

comments were: — Saskatchewan is much stronger because of 

this, he said; the increased power we have in western Canada is 

significant as a result of these changes. 

 

Apparently no change can be made to the Senate without 

unanimous support, but he didn’t take a look at that and say, 

well, sure we may have some input into the appointment of the 

senators. But if you want to get into the elected Senate, 

Saskatchewan indeed has lost power. 

 

I want to indicate here further evidence, and here is by Carol 

Goar . . . Goar is a Toronto Star political columnist. And the 

headlines of the article, August 13, ’87 in the Leader-Post. “The 

Constitution: — are Canadians seen, but not heard?” 

 

And this is just an indication of such a sham that is going on; 

what a disrespect by the Tory government of Ottawa and the 

duplicity of this government here in Saskatchewan because in 

this article here she indicates: — “So now it has fallen to Chris 

Speyer, co-chairman of the special parliamentary committee to 

give them their hearing.” That is the parliamentary . . . he’s the 

co-chairman. And it goes on to say: — “The constitution . . .” 

he says, this here, and this is a fellow . . . the co-chairman of the 

special parliamentary committee is a Tory from Ontario. And 

he says: 

 

The constitution is a very young institution in our  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2627 

 

 

lives and there’s much unfinished business to be done. It is 

important that we find (this is the co-chairman of the 

committee saying, it is important that we find) some 

mechanism to ensure public input. 

 

A Tory, a co-chairman of the committee, the parliamentary 

Senate committee in Ottawa. And this article concludes: 

 

As a Progressive Conservative and a Canadian, Speyer 

hails the country’s 11 first . . . (members) for pulling it off. 

But, as co-chairman of the parliamentary committee left to 

pick up the pieces, he is troubled by the process. 

 

And the final paragraph: 

 

But the legacy that would please him most would be to 

know that there will never be another committee like this. 

 

So that is what we’re being confronted with. It’s a political deal 

made by the Prime Minister with many other of the Tory 

premiers. They have excluded the public from any participation, 

and what they’re aiming for is short-term gain, and saying to 

heck with the future. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s dangerous 

for this country. 

 

And therefore, accordingly what we have done is, in a very 

serious way, approached and are offering here to this legislature 

a method of giving the people of this province an opportunity to 

have input. Because you see the terrible tragedy that we face if 

we adopt it — and they say we can’t change it, can’t modify it 

— that the terrible problem that we are confronting us, is we 

have to ask ourselves: what if those ten premiers and Prime 

Minister are wrong? What is they are wrong? 

 

And the member from Wascana, who knows nothing about 

potash and less about this, laughs. I say to him, Mr. Speaker, 

that is what the people of Canada have to ask. They have to be 

sure that what goes into the Meech Lake accord, into the 

amendments of the constitution, is to build a stronger and more 

unified Canada, not a divided Canada. 

 

And so I say, they have no supernatural powers. And I would 

say to you that the number of premiers that head up the list that 

march to Ottawa these days to change the constitution are less 

impressive than what was there in the past. I’ll tell you, I had 

confidence when a Peter Lougheed walked and talked for 

Canadians. I don’t have the same confidence with a Don Getty 

throwing the ball. 

 

And I’ll say here today that I don’t have the same confidence 

that we have the expertise and the knowledge and the 

statesmanship that we had when the member from Elphinstone 

was the premier of this province, and when we had the member 

from Riversdale as the attorney general. I’ll tell you, then we 

had expertise in the details of constitutional change. 

 

But today we have a Premier who is glib, a Premier who has no 

expertise, or never I don’t think, professed to have. But the 

other thing is that he’s not concerned with details.  

He’s glib. Generalities he deals in, not with the detail of how it 

may affect the future development of this country. 

 

(1500) 

 

And the other significant thing that we have to understand is 

that this Premier is inextricably tied to the policies of the Prime 

Minister, Brian Mulroney. And I’ll tell you that is a dangerous 

situation for the province of Saskatchewan to continue to 

blindly support the policies of the Prime Minister, and that’s 

what our Premier has been doing. 

 

I have an article here in respect from the chairman of the 

Canadian Committee for the Triple E Senate, a gentleman by 

the name of Bert Brown, and he has worked hard in order to 

establish that principle of getting an elected representative 

Senate across Canada. And I just want to read a couple of 

comments in which he says — in respect to the process here. He 

says: 

 

It must be admitted that the process by which the accord 

has developed leaves a good deal to be desired. The 

process had all the characteristics of a back room deal; 

secret agreements, secretly arrived at, and then announced 

as a fait accompli. 

 

That’s what Mr. Brown has to say in respect to the process. Let 

me just indicate a further comment from his article and he says: 

 

To achieve economic and political equality, the smaller 

provinces, particularly those of the West, require 

fundamental changes in the federal system. This 

amendment virtually assures that they will never get those 

changes. The central province do not require change, the 

status quo favours them. Universal veto also favours them 

since it provides the means of preserving their favoured 

position. 

 

He says: 

 

Obviously the universal veto, particularly as it relates to 

the reforms in the Senate, should be opposed. 

 

And there’s a lot more details in respect to this. But it’s not only 

Mr. Brown who has indicated his concern, and primarily in 

respect to the limitations of a reformed Senate, as a result of 

Meech Lake, but there are others who are concerned that there 

has been no proper process. There is a Canadian coalition on 

the constitution which challenges the premiers to commit 

themselves to improving the accord. And they had a press 

conference, and I just want to read a part of that, Mr. Speaker. 

And they indicate: 

 

London, a professor of law at the University of Manitoba, 

stressed the coalition’s debate to see Quebec as a full 

participant in the constitution. However, he cautioned, in 

its present form the accord is little more than a back-room 

deal hatched up by 11 politicians playing dangerous power 

games with our future. 

 

And there’s representatives here of concerned groups and  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2628 

 

 

citizens all across Canada. Supporting groups and associations 

as of June 30, ‘87 was: — the Assembly of First Nations, the 

Canadian Day Care Advocacy Association, the Canadian 

Institute of Child Health, Canadian Mental Health Association, 

the National Anti-Poverty Organization, the National Union of 

Provincial Government Employees, the Native Council of 

Canada, Social Planning Council of Metropolitan Toronto, 

Women’s Legal and Education Action Fund, and the list goes 

on. 

 

The coalition on the constitution is not there to destroy 

what has been achieved in getting Quebec entered into the 

. . . a partner in Confederation. But the coalition wants the 

process to be improved and by improving the process they 

indicate that we should in fact having meaningful 

hearings. 

 

The coalition believes that the decision making process, 

leading up to the accord has been alarmingly undemocratic 

because it has precluded the necessary public debate and 

participation, and it sets a dangerous precedent for the 

future. 

 

Canadians must, therefore, be meaningfully involved in 

the process of constitutional reform, and not frozen out as 

we were at Meech Lake. We insist that the first ministers 

slow down and allow us to participate in directing the 

future of our country. We do not want irreversible 

decisions presented to us as a fact accomplished, or a fait 

accompli. 

 

Those are the concerns of a coalition of Canadians across the 

country, representing every province and every area of this 

country, asking indeed to have meaningful public hearings. 

 

And there are other headlines which I don’t intend to go into in 

great detail, but it says: The Meech Lake accord threatens 

equality, Quebec expert says. Wording of the accord said 

dangerous. Yukon, who has been left out in the accord, it says: 

Yukon gets court approval to fight Meech Lake accord. Meech 

Lake endangers rights, experts say. 

 

And the headlines are all indicative that there’s a considerable 

amount of concern in respect to the process. And what we have 

been doing here, Mr. Speaker, is moving a resolution which 

would provide for public hearings. And I don’t think that any 

government . . . When any government says that I’m above the 

people, then I’ll tell you, that’s the time to pull a halt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — When any government comes with a document 

so important as this, and says: trust me, I’ll tell the people of 

Saskatchewan and Canada, that’s the time not to trust. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this, as I said, is an important document, and we 

don’t have to rush it in. There is time for a hearing. And 

certainly, even if the Premier who is so intent upon getting the 

accord passed even before it’s attended to in Ottawa,  

without any hearings; even if he would, himself, as the person 

that is master-minding this through and wanting it passed; if he 

would have the intestinal fortitude to offer himself to a full, 

intensive questioning of his understanding of the impact of this 

accord, then we might have more confidence. 

 

But I’ll tell you, the Premier will not come into this legislature 

and even allow the opposition to question him as to whether he 

knows the details or the implicit impact of the passing of the 

accord. And my understanding is, in Quebec, in the legislature 

there, the Premier at least allowed the opposition members to 

question him in respect to the Meech Lake accord. But here we 

get the little cheer-leader, our Premier, making positive 

statements without any depth of analysis or any expertise on 

which to base his hype. 

 

And so I say, and I say to the back-benchers over there, those 

that are so excluded from the power base of that front bench, I 

ask you to consider what you’re doing here. What we are asking 

is for a simple, for a very simple and democratic process, and 

that is for public hearings. And I want to encourage each and 

every one of you to think: how can politicians — 10 of them — 

get together in a back room and change the constitution which 

will affect this country for years to come, and not allow the 

public to participate? 

 

And I say, that’s where this government has deteriorated. It 

indicated that, oh, it was going to consult with the public. Well 

it’s sure consulting. It won’t consult into the impact of free 

trade, and it won’t consult, nor will it put its arguments forward, 

as to why we should support Meech Lake. 

 

And all I can say to the people of Saskatchewan, that our 

policies are totally tied to whatever the Prime Minister’s 

policies are. This Premier is walking in the tracks of Brian 

Mulroney. And I’ll tell you that this is not the tracks that the 

people of Saskatchewan want to walk. 

 

And so I say in conclusion that this is indeed a very, very 

serious matter that we’re dealing with, changing the constitution 

of this country. And I’ll tell you, it would not be in the best 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan for us not to fight to 

allow them to participate. And accordingly I ask other members 

to support this reasonable amendment asking that public 

hearings be held before we launch into the acceptance of the 

accord. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with some 

mixed feelings that I rise in the debate today. While I welcome 

Quebec as an official signatory to the constitution of Canada, 

the Meech Lake accord has some other aspects which cause me 

a great deal of concern, and I sometimes wonder how much 

we’re willing to pay to have Quebec as an official signatory to 

the constitution. I don’t see Quebec pulling out of Canada. I 

think that we have a bit of a red herring sometimes in using 

Quebec as the only reason to push through the Meech Lake 

accord. 

 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2629 

 

 

I think it deserves going back into a little bit of history to look 

at what constitutional process means. And constitutions, Mr. 

Speaker, are evolving processes in which documents are set 

down to tell people what the main law of their land actually is 

and how that law affects them and the governments that 

represent them. 

 

The first important constitutional process that happened in 

terms of our legislative and parliamentary process, Mr. Speaker, 

happened back, of course, in 1867, where the British North 

America Act came into place and the birth of a nation started to 

take place. There were other changes, Mr. Speaker, to 

constitutional change within our country. I think of the Rupert’s 

Land Act of 1868 which brought into Canada more territory 

than what had been there previous to the Rupert’s Land Act. 

And of course the Westminster Act, which in fact made 

constitutional change in passage of laws within Canada much 

easier, in that we didn’t always have to go and get the 

permission of the British parliamentary system for laws which 

we wanted to enact within our own country. 

 

And then when Canada really matured as a country, Mr. 

Speaker, I felt was in the year 1982 when the constitutional Act 

passed. And I had the honour of representing The 

Battleford-Meadow Lake constituency as a member of 

parliament at the time and during the debates of the 

constitutional Act of 1982. 

 

And at that time, Prime Minister Trudeau tried to unilaterally 

put into place the constitutional Act of 1982. He did that 

throughout the years 1980, 1981, and there was a great outcry 

from provincial legislatures, from members of parliament, from 

people right across this great country of ours, because they 

wanted more involvement. They didn’t want to see 

constitutional change where the greatest pinnacle of maturity of 

the country would be done unilaterally by one government in 

the isolation of parliament. And therefore there was a much 

different process, and it caused a great deal of anxiety for many, 

many Canadians and many, many politicians, legislators and 

parliamentarians across the country. 

 

And we all know that eventually the constitutional Act did pass, 

and what we’re dealing with here today is what’s commonly 

become known as the Meech Lake accord, and the Meech Lake 

accord is the first major change, in fact the first change, to the 

constitutional Act of 1982. And what we see happening here is 

a very unilateral process again, and we do not wish that to 

happen. 

 

(1515) 

 

The Hon. Leader of the Opposition, the member from Regina 

Elphinstone, has introduced an amendment which we, of 

course, support on this side of the House. As New Democrats 

we feel that that amendment brings in a broader spectrum of 

people who have input and information seeking the 

constitutional process. 

 

And what we’re calling for in the amendment is something 

that’s very reasonable, and I think members on the government 

side should consider that, that we want to have public hearings, 

because constitution is even more  

important, Mr. Speaker, than being the governing law of this 

great country of ours. The main law, which all other laws and 

all other rights flow from, is the people’s document - at least it 

should be a people’s document. It’s people that make up this 

great country, and not 11 men sitting around a table some place 

in central Canada, deciding what should happen in 

constitutional change. 

 

Even the constitution of our great neighbour, the United States 

of America, starts out by: “We, the people . . .” That’s the 

constitution. The constitution is the people’s document. And 

what we see happening by 11 men sitting around the table 

making these changes, saying, we’re not accepting any 

amendments by this government, and the Premier — with all 

due respect for the Premier of this province — are putting 

something unilaterally on the people of Canada, in this case the 

people of Saskatchewan, because we’re being asked as 

legislators in this province to pass the constitutional amendment 

which has become known as the Meech Lake accord. 

 

And it’s being all done under the cover of getting Quebec in as 

part of Canada. Well Quebec has always been part of Canada. I 

maintain Quebec will likely always be part of Canada. And I 

welcome them, through this type of a constitutional process, as 

being a great and important part of our nation. 

 

But we’re wrought will all kinds of fault, all kinds of items. 

There are five major items, I understand, in the Meech Lake 

accord, and they cause me, as an individual member of this 

legislature, a great amount of concern. 

 

And some of them, just to talk about a few briefly — and I want 

to stay more on the amendment — but just a few of the real 

concerns I have, Mr. Speaker, about the Meech Lake accord is 

allowing provinces to opt out of cost-shared programs, where 

you can virtually have the effect of having a checker-board 

Canada, where we should, if we want to be a cohesive and a 

co-operative country whereby people can move freely from 

province to province, our programs that are cost-shared should 

remain basically the same type of program. There may be 

changes in the way the program is administered or changes in 

the way the program is delivered to people, but basically people 

should have the security of programs that are comparable, 

whether they live in British Columbia or Saskatchewan or 

Ontario or Quebec of Newfoundland or Prince Edward Island, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second thing that I think bothers me a great deal about this 

constitutional accord, the Meech Lake accord, is the enshrining 

of the Senate. I’ve always viewed the Senate as being a 

patronage place where members who have given dedicated 

service to the Progressive Conservatives and to the Liberals 

have been appointed. And it’s an upper chamber; it’s supposed 

to give us regional representation, which is a good concept 

because we have representation by population from the 

members of parliament who sit in the House of Commons. And 

we have representation, in theory at least, by region for those 

members who sit in the upper House, which is the Senate, and 

those two Houses combined make up our Parliament of Canada. 

 

But the people who go there, to the Senate, Mr. Speaker,  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2630 

 

 

have no responsibility for reporting back to people in the 

regions that they represent. And I think that that system of the 

Senate has to be changed, and by the passage of the Meech 

Lake accord it makes Senate change virtually impossible 

because it means that it’s there for ever in the way that it is 

now, and it will remain a patronage position. 

 

And many people question why someone can be appointed to 

the Senate and remain there until age 75, I believe the 

compulsory retirement age is now. It used to be that they were 

appointed for life; now at least there’s a retirement age set on 

those people who are appointed to the Senate, but that has to 

have some structural change so that people in the Senate are 

accountable to people within the area that they represent. 

 

Another thing that concerns me is the change of the amending 

formula in that future constitutional change will virtually 

become impossible. It’ll become impossible to change because 

every legislature in the country and the federal government are 

going to have to agree on most changes to the constitution of 

our country. And I don’t see why one province would be able, if 

they had a government who was opposed to what the rest of 

Canada was doing, could hold up constitutional change for an 

infinite amount of time. And I think that that’s a fault of the 

Meech Lake accord as well as the enshrining of what we have 

now. 

 

But mind you, I would want to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that 

constitutions, since they are the main law of a country and they 

preserve the rights of people; they inform people what their 

main rights are, they tell legislatures what their laws have to 

flow from; they should be hard to change or it should be hard to 

change the constitution, but it should not be impossible, Mr. 

Speaker. And what happens here is that we find an impossible 

situation of having future constitutional change within the 

country. 

 

Something that’s not in the constitutional accord, the Meech 

Lake accord, is the total disregard for Canada’s native people. 

And that’s a subject that other members of our caucus will be 

addressing, and I think it is a sad state of affairs that Canada’s 

native people are not dealt with in a more involved and 

democratic way, flowing from treaties and the agreements that 

were made between the early settlers and the people that were 

living in this country before the white population arrived. 

 

The other thing that troubles me deeply is the whole thing about 

the appointment of judges that is part of the Meech Lake accord 

and the exclusion of the territories. As I mentioned earlier, the 

Rupert’s Land Act of 1868 brought in more territory into the 

country. Well at some time I would think we might want to look 

at including the Northwest Territories and the Yukon as new 

provinces to our country - a further stage in our constitutional 

development in having an even larger family that has provincial 

status within our country. And by the way the Meech Lake 

accord is set up, I’m very fearful that those areas may not ever 

be able to come into confederation and share full relationships 

as a provincial body with other provinces within our country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, I welcome Quebec but I wonder  

what the price is. Do we pay all of that for bringing Quebec in, 

and I wonder if not Quebec isn’t in the constitution, Mr. 

Speaker. In all reality, Quebec has been there since the 

beginning of Canada and I think that Quebec will always be 

there as a very important part of our country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, going back to the process, what we’re calling for 

is for people to become involved in the constitutional process in 

this country, and it happened during the constitutional Act of 

1982 where people from coast to coast were able to make 

presentations. Legislatures, and members of parliament, and 

legislators that sit within our provincial assemblies were all able 

to make that input into the very important aspect of a maturing 

country - the evolution of the constitution, something that 

should continue to evolve but should not be held to a very 

selective group of people. 

 

Because what happens in situations like that? And I don’t at all 

dramatize the situation, but you look at countries such as the 

Soviet Union hat had a great sounding constitution; they have 

an exemplary charter of rights. You look at countries like Chile, 

exemplary charter of rights, great constitution, but people are 

oppressed. Their rights are oppressed in those countries. They 

are abused in terms of their personal privileges. And I don’t 

think anyone in this Assembly would want to live in either the 

Soviet Union or in Chile because of the oppressive regimes that 

govern those countries. But they have a constitution and a great 

charter of rights in both of those countries. 

 

What seems to be the problem? The problem is, Mr. Speaker, 

that constitutions and the charter of rights that are contained in 

constitutions are no better than the political will of governments 

that are in place to enforce our constitutions and our charter of 

rights, which protect people and have a flow of what we can do 

within this country and feel assured that we can have freedom 

of voice and freedom of assembly. If the political will isn’t 

there to enforce it, the constitutions and the charters of rights 

mean nothing. 

 

And so I think that the government here today should look very 

closely, Mr. Speaker, at what they’re doing in terms of 

unilaterally imposing upon the people of Saskatchewan which 

they’re responsible for, as we are responsible for for our 

constituents, imposing constitutional change without 

consultation and without public input. There’s no forum set up, 

and that’s the forum that we’re asking for in the amendment, so 

that people across Saskatchewan regardless of whether they 

come from an Indian band, or whether they represent a 

municipal government, or whether they’re a constitutional 

expert from a university, or an ordinary Saskatchewan citizen 

off the street that wants to, first, know what this change means 

to them, and secondly, make a contribution in terms of their 

views, in a very important part of the evolution of constitutions. 

 

And I would like in our country - I don’t want to follow too 

closely the United States, Mr. Speaker, but I would like our 

constitution as well to be we, the people; because we, the 

people, is what is all important in a constitution. Without the 

people within the country you don’t have the  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2631 

 

 

kinds of rights and the kinds of privileges. Those people have to 

have a close involvement in the process. 

 

And the counter argument I suppose to that could be, Mr. 

Speaker, that all members of this Legislative Assembly have the 

right to speak. But I think that constitution is something that’s 

so important to the development of our country that those 

people should have the right to speak not through our mouths in 

this Assembly through you, Mr. Speaker, but should have the 

right to have that input themselves. Whether it’s one person or 

100,000 or 1 million people who want to have input into the 

constitutional process, they should have every right to do that. 

 

And I know that many people here today, members of this 

Legislative Assembly, don’t view the constitution as a bread 

and butter issue, just as most of the people who would be 

watching on television today or read about this issue in the 

papers do not view the constitution as a bread and butter issue. 

And it’s not. I admit that it’s not a bread and butter issue that 

affects people very deeply and moves them on a day to day 

basis, with the possible exception of those involved in the legal 

profession, Mr. Speaker. They have a keen interest in what 

happens in constitutional developments because it’s a 

professional angle for them. 

 

But the long-term effects certainly do affect people. And if we 

don’t protect people’s rights under constitutional change 

through having public input, Mr. Speaker, we can very easily go 

the way — and I would never accuse the government that we 

have today, or if we were to become government after next 

election, of abusing people’s rights. But constitutions, as I 

mentioned, are long-standing documents, Mr. Speaker. They 

last for hundreds and hopefully thousands of years to protect 

people, to flow laws into the country that people live under. 

 

And who’s to say what kind of a government would be in 

power in the province of Saskatchewan a thousand years from 

now. And so constitutions take place over a long period of time, 

and I think that we do not want to start setting the precedent 

where a very small and confined group of people make 

constitutional change without broad public input. 

 

And I do have other things I want to say on the debate, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t think that I will go into them at this point in 

time because there will be other opportunities for the members 

to debate. There are other amendments. There’s the main 

resolution itself, and I will be taking pleasure in entering into 

this debate again. 

 

And I would like to close off by just saying that please, 

members on the government side, observe what your 

constituents say, and look at the public hearing process. If it is 

such a good accord, the Meech Lake accord, what’s the rush? 

Thousands of years, hundreds of years, constitutions develop 

over. If it is a good package it will stand the test of public 

hearings. It will also then stand the test of time because it is a 

people’s document. And I urge you to look very closely at 

holding public hearings so we can have a true people’s 

document for Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — This is something I wish to resolve before we 

go to the next speaker. 

 

I just ask the hon. minister and Madam Minister if she would 

just not speak for a minute or two. There’s something I’m 

trying to resolve regarding this resolution, so if she would just 

co-operate so that the whole House understands. I don’t wish to 

refer to it now. 

 

(1530) 

 

The reason that I asked the co-operation of the members in the 

House to refrain from speaking for a few minutes — which the 

Minister of Commercial and Consumer Affairs so graciously 

did — was because of a comment made by the member for The 

Battlefords which drew to my attention the nature of the motion 

we are discussing. And I felt it imperative that all members 

understand the type of motion we are discussing, because it will 

make a difference as to their opportunities to speak to the 

motion. 

 

So essentially, in short, the ruling is this: that the amendment to 

the main motion suggests an alternative. And since it suggests 

an alternative to the resolution, then the debate will be a 

concurrent debate. Which means the hon. member for The 

Battlefords said that he will have further opportunity to speak to 

further amendments and to the main motion, but it then means 

that he will not have further opportunity to speak to the main 

motion. This is the only opportunity he has. He may speak to 

further amendments, and those amendments of course will be 

restricted very narrowly to the amendment. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Only if they’re in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, of course if they’re in order. But he will 

not have a further opportunity to speak to the main motion, 

which is why I bring this to your attention, that in the event that 

you wish to continue speaking to the main motion, I think that 

the House probably will be willing to continue . . . allow you to 

continue to do so. They may not. 

 

But he didn’t understand and therefore I’m raising it here. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It depends on, I 

suppose, on the order of business of the House,. If we knew a 

bit further ahead of time what the day-to-day business was of 

the House, I could make a judgement now as to whether or not 

I’d wish to make my other input into the debate on the Meech 

Lake accord and the amendments, and do that concurrently. 

 

Unfortunately, I’m unable to be here tomorrow and if the 

Meech Lake accord . . . if this resolution is being debated again 

tomorrow and all the amendments are dealt with tomorrow that 

have been proposed and put forth at this time, I may not have an 

opportunity to speak on it again. So I don’t know. Can I ask 

guidance of the House as to whether or not we have assurance 

that this item will be dealt with again tomorrow, or when it is 

coming up on the agenda, Mr. Speaker? 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2632 

 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well I don’t know if you could get that 

assurance, of course. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, two things. I think that 

the member has in fact taken his place and that he has given up 

his right to speak on the main motion. 

 

Secondly thing, in answer to his question specifically. The plan, 

as we have discussed with the Opposition Whip, was to bring 

the Meech Lake motion back in tomorrow. And whether or not 

it’s concluded tomorrow, you know, is not in my hands; it’s in 

the hands of the House. My guess is that it would not likely be 

concluded tomorrow. But it was the plan to bring it back 

tomorrow after having dealt with the potash Bill tonight in 

committee. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity you tried to afford me to continue by debate. The 

government House Leader obviously does not want that to 

happen. I think it would require unanimous consent. So I do 

appreciate your ruling, Mr. Speaker, and I guess I take my 

chances and hope that I’m back here for debate on some of the 

amendments, because there are some of the amendments which 

I would like to debate. And if I have that opportunity I will 

participate in the debate on the specific amendments. I do 

appreciate your ruling, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I thank the hon. member, but I would just like 

to make this comment. I did not make a specific ruling whether 

or not you can continue to speak. That is not for me to do. What 

I was doing is drawing it to your attention and to the attention 

of any future speakers so that they know what the situation is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, colleagues, especially the 

colleagues across the way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the opportunity to speak on 

this important resolution put forward by our Premier, and I 

would like to congratulate him, and of course the Prime 

Minister, and other premiers across the country for their historic 

accomplishment. 

 

The Meech Lake agreement marks another important milestone 

for Canada, Mr. Speaker, it brings Quebec into our 

constitutional family. I know that without exception, all of the 

people of Saskatchewan welcome that achievement. 

 

This constitutional amendment goes further, Mr. Speaker. It 

recognizes that yes, our confederation is evolving in response to 

changing times. It recognizes that federal and provincial 

governments no longer operate in rigidly separate areas. It 

recognizes, in fact, one overwhelmingly important fact that in 

today’s world the actions of one order of government almost 

inevitably affect the other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment put forward by the Premier leaves 

no room for doubt. In the years ahead there will be increased 

consultation between the federal and the provincial 

governments, and I’m sure we can all applaud that. 

 

The amendment also goes further. It sees that institutions 

through which this consultation will take place are created. And 

I can cite some examples, Mr. Speaker. Immigration, for one; 

appointments to the Senate and to the Supreme Court; changes 

to the amending formula; shared-cost programs; first ministers’ 

conferences to resolve federal-provincial issues, are just a few 

of them. 

 

This is a historic agreement, Mr. Speaker, and all of us should 

stand a little taller today because it has been reached. Our 

constitution has shown once again that it is adaptable to the 

needs of our diverse and growing country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this agreement our constitutional package of 

1981 is complete. Our Canadian union is enormously 

strengthened. Now all of us in Canada can get on to the new 

and the vitally important challenge facing us in the future. It 

means that we can now focus our energies on such vital issues 

as free trade, western economic diversification, the challenges 

of today and tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some critics, like some members opposite, have suggested that 

this amendment will lead to a weak central government. And I 

would suggest to them, Mr. Speaker, that they don’t understand 

the dynamic country that we live in. No reasonable person can 

suggest it is realistic today for the federal government to 

unilaterally decide national issues. The need is for improved 

consultation and co-operation, Mr. Speaker, between the federal 

government and the provincial governments. Rather than 

diminishing Ottawa’s power, this agreement greatly strengthens 

our confederation and our country. 

 

Let us look at the benefits to a province such as ours. For the 

first time, we will have a say in naming senators to represent us. 

The same goes for the Supreme Court justices. We will 

negotiate agreements with Ottawa on immigration policies that 

will have a beneficial impact on Saskatchewan. We will have 

more input into shaping shared-cost programs. Like all 

provinces, we will have a veto over some amendments to the 

constitution. 

 

And there are other gains as well that will enable us to have 

greater input into the way our country is run. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

glad to say that multicultural rights have not been affected by 

this agreement, nor have aboriginal rights. 

 

The question has been raised: does the recognition of Quebec as 

a distinct society affect the constitutional powers of our own 

province? The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. That clause takes 

nothing away from any province’s powers. The matter of 

Senate reform is of significance to all of us in the West. We can 

all applaud the fact that the Senate reform will be placed on the 

agenda on a first ministers’ conference to be held no later than 

the end of 1988. 

 

I am sure all of us agree that improving the role of the Senate 

must not be done at the expense of the provincial government. 

In providing for an annual first ministers’ conference on the 

economy, as well as one on the constitution, the amendment 

gives the provinces a strong role in shaping national policy. 

And this is a first, Mr.  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2633 

 

 

Speaker. Never before have the provinces had this opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, let me say that the people of 

Saskatchewan will applaud this constitutional amendment. In 

bringing it before this legislature this government has marked a 

red letter day for this province, and I would congratulate the 

Premier for his role in reaching that agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by passing the resolution as proposed by the 

Premier, and defeating the amendment as proposed by the Hon. 

Leader of the Opposition, I believe that Saskatchewan will be 

stronger and we will see a stronger Canada emerging as a result 

of this historic agreement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak in 

favour of the amendment proposed by the Leader of the 

Opposition, and I enter this debate with due respect for the 

responsibility placed upon us as members of this Assembly. We 

are debating changes proposed to the fundamental framework of 

our nation — our constitution. 

 

This is the law which lays the foundation of our parliamentary 

democracy. This is the law, Mr. Speaker, which defines our 

system of government and sets out the limits of government 

power and makes clear the rights of citizenship. 

 

Our constitution defines us in our own eyes and in the eyes of 

the other nations of the world. It is the blueprint for Canadian 

society, and at the same time, it affects their rights and 

responsibilities, and shapes the many laws which define 

services and opportunities in every community. It states our 

fundamental values and determines the strength and power of 

our local government and our national government. It 

determines whether we have a centralized or a decentralized 

government, and our constitution has within it a charter of 

rights and this charter speaks to individual and collective rights 

we as Canadians possess. 

 

(1545) 

 

Some may argue that the fact I have said there are collective 

rights in the charter, but nevertheless I take that position today. 

These rights have continuous and daily impact on our lives, and 

their existence and enforcement help to mold our society and to 

instil values that are important to a society which is built on 

many cultures, and which entails accommodation and tolerance 

because of its diversity, Mr. Speaker — both regional and 

cultural diversities. 

 

The process of constitution building in Canada has been 

consistent with our history and our traditions. Canada has 

attained its democratic traditions not by revolution, Mr. 

Speaker, but by evolution and the adoption of a Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms. 

 

The statesmen of 1982 are to be congratulated, Mr. Speaker, for 

their vision and perseverance. They achieved an historic 

agreement and left the door open for  

future improvements, and the benefits of the evolutionary 

change are evident in this new accord. To the credit of the 

leaders of 1987, they’ve been able to achieve something that 

was not achieved in 1982 and that is an agreement with the 

province of Quebec. 

 

And I do not in any way wish to diminish the importance of this 

achievement or the necessity for it, but I do wish to emphasize 

the flaws in this accord - flaws which I believe demand further 

consideration. Whereas the accord of 1982 left open the door 

for improvement, I fear that this agreement may close the door 

for too many Canadians. Before this accord becomes law, we 

must give Canadians the opportunity to examine this accord and 

to express their views on its merits. Canadians need to decide: 

does this accord meet the test of our traditions? Does it allow us 

to grow and evolve as free people? Does this accord open doors 

for Canada, or does it close too many doors for the future? 

 

No tradition is more precious to Canada than our rich heritage 

from immigrants from many lands, Mr. Speaker — no tradition 

is more precious. Yet the immigration provisions of this accord 

may close the door to Saskatchewan families whose relatives 

wish to come to Canada. The provisions in the accord 

pertaining to immigration, I’m thinking of section 2 in 

particular, may have a serious impact on Saskatchewan people. 

There is a possibility the immigration provisions may make it 

difficult for families in Saskatchewan to have relatives from 

their native country join them in Canada. And this could have 

very serious implications for many, many people in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for eastern European, such as 

Ukrainians and Poles, for Chinese Canadians, for East Indian 

Canadians, for Greek Canadians, and for many others. 

 

So Saskatchewan people, because of this . . . just because of this 

possibility alone, Saskatchewan people should be accorded an 

opportunity to explore the ramifications of this accord, and an 

opportunity to debate it openly and be heard. When one 

understands the importance of this debate, the immediate 

importance and what will be the historical importance, Mr. 

Speaker, when one understands the fundamental nature of these 

discussions, one readily concludes that no decision should be 

made on this accord until there’s been full dialogue with the 

public, until the public has been given an ample opportunity to 

respond, to have input, and to be involved in a meaningful way. 

 

Constitutional reform is about the future of our country, and it 

concerns all Canadians. It concerns all people in Saskatchewan, 

and not merely, not merely a few politicians, Mr. Speaker. Of 

paramount importance in this debate is the recognition of the 

role of Quebec in Canadian society. Inasmuch as the accord 

symbolically, and in a more formal sense, brings Quebec into 

the constitution, it is an important step forward. Quebec is one 

of Canada’s chief claims to distinction as a country and it has 

invaluably characterized Canada and we mustn’t lose sight of 

that. We mustn’t lose sight of that. But it is also our good 

fortune that we have other ethnic and linguistic groups in 

Canada, and I am proud to say that Saskatchewan plays home 

for several of such groups, and we are the richer for it. 

 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2634 

 

 

And in the Canadian context Quebec is a distinct society. But it 

is also a very integral part of Canada and Canadian culture. And 

just as Saskatchewan thrives on its many cultures, Canada does 

benefit from the uniqueness of Quebec. And in this diversity, 

Mr. Speaker, we have still maintained a unity. And even though 

Canada is by no means homogeneous, we can and we do offer 

an example of how major linguistic and ethnic groups can live 

together. 

 

And so it’s of paramount importance that Quebec join the 

constitution. But in our eagerness to bring all partners into the 

constitution, we must not lose sight of the overall picture, and 

the long-term and short-term effect of the accord on other issues 

and matters as well. 

 

And we must not under any circumstances, we must not close 

the door on future change, Mr. Speaker. And that is my biggest 

fear about the accord is that it’s going to close the door on 

future change. 

 

The Saskatchewan government should not dismiss the 

unresolved problems with the accord as unimportant. These 

problems should receive thorough scrutiny by the Saskatchewan 

public, and if it’s necessary to make rational amendments to the 

accord then that’s what we should do. That would be totally 

logical, totally reasonable, and totally fair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And although people realize that a society cannot exist without 

some means of exercising collective authority, Mr. Speaker, 

they resent being shoved around, and they want government to 

be seen as acting for them. Therefore the constitution should 

meet the needs of all people to whom it applies, and it should 

not be rammed through provincial legislatures without due 

consideration of all the consequences — all the very intricate 

consequences flowing from the proposed amendments. 

 

In this regard, let’s look at the provision of the resolution 

respecting the entry of new provinces. It requires all provinces 

to agree on whether or not the Northwest Territories be 

established as provinces at some future date. And although our 

nation has grown through the development of new territories 

and provinces, this accord may close the door to new provinces 

in the future. By demanding unanimous consent for the 

establishment of new provinces, are we closing the door on the 

Yukon and the Northwest Territories, Mr. Speaker? Is it not 

mean-spirited to apply a test of unanimous consent — a test that 

was not the rule when Saskatchewan joined Canada; is it not 

mean-spirited, Mr. Speaker? And I understand the Yukon and 

the Northwest Territories have had lots to say about that 

particular clause in the accord. 

 

Should Saskatchewan be voting on this motion I ask you, Mr. 

Speaker, before the report respecting federal hearings of the 

Senate and Commons committee has been released, which I 

understand is going to be happening sometime next week and 

perhaps in the early part of the week. Should Saskatchewan be 

voting on this motion before Saskatchewan men and women 

have had an opportunity to have their concerns fully considered 

and to make full representation? I think not, Mr. Speaker, I 

think not. 

 

Another major concern to many groups in Canada is the 

conspicuous absence of any reference to section 15 and section 

28 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Section 15 is the 

equality provision, Mr. Speaker, which says in effect that every 

individual is equal before and under the law and has the right to 

equal protection and equal benefit of the law without 

discrimination. And section 28 is the provision which basically 

says that the rights and freedoms in the charter are guaranteed 

equally to male and female persons. 

 

Some people argue, Mr. Speaker, that the accord leaves the 

status of the charter unclear, that section 15 and 28 rights are 

trammelled by the accord and will be subjected to the distinct 

society clause. 

 

They argue that insomuch as the distinct society supersedes 

equality, then people can be discriminated against, and in that 

way the equality provisions, including education rights in the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms, could be undermined as they 

pertain to Quebec. 

 

And indeed it is argued that the addition of article 16 in the 

early hours of the morning on June 3, 1987 merely compounded 

the ambiguity and uncertainty by singling out the rights of 

aboriginal peoples and our commitment to multicultures as 

requiring special treatment. 

 

And I’m not objecting to the addition of article 16. I’m not 

objecting to that, Mr. Speaker, but it is arguable that it does 

make the position of the charter more unclear, more ambiguous. 

But maybe this is what was intended. And if that’s the case, 

then it should be made more explicit. 

 

Some people feel very strongly, however, that the accord should 

not be left ambiguous in this regard, and therefore if the first 

ministers did intend that the accord supersede the charter with 

respect to equality rights, then this should be made explicit. 

And if they didn’t intend that, then the . . . that the accord 

should supersede the charter, then that should be made explicit, 

so that the people of Canada can have an opportunity to debate 

the issue in a meaningful and democratic way. 

 

On the other hand, some people do not wish to criticize or 

detract from the distinct society clause by amending the accord, 

while others feel the fears expressed about the distinct society 

are unfounded. And in Saskatchewan, having regard to the 

controversy respecting the equality provision, and whether or 

not the accord should be amended in that regard, we should be 

mindful of this debate, and we should be mindful of the fact that 

the accord may still be amended to meet these concerns, as well 

as others. 

 

And for this reason alone, Mr. Speaker, we should not hasten to 

approve the resolution until we know what lies ahead, and until 

we have given Saskatchewan men and women an opportunity to 

make their views known at public hearings here at home in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And equally controversial is the absence of any reference in the 

accord to advancing the concerns and aspirations of Canadians 

of native origin. There is a reference in section 16 of the accord 

to section 25 of the charter.  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2635 

 

 

Section 25 is the guarantee of aboriginal rights and freedoms, 

but the accord remains totally silent on the issue of native 

self-government. 

 

And one would think that at the very least there would be some 

further guarantee of further constitutional talks pertaining to the 

aspirations of native Canadians — at least an open door, Mr. 

Speaker — at least an open door. But no such proposal was 

forthcoming in the accord. It remained silent on the issue. 

Surely for Saskatchewan, surely in Saskatchewan, this alone 

requires further consideration by our governments and the 

public. 

 

And there are many other potential and real problems with the 

accord. The extension of the unanimity rule means that the 

chances for any meaningful change to our federal institutions, 

such as the Senate, is extremely remote. Can we afford to close 

the door to future change to our federal institutions, such as the 

Senate? I ask you, Mr. Speaker, can we afford to close the 

door? 

 

(1600) 

 

Another concern is the concern that the province-building, if 

you like, or the decentralizing aspect of the accord could 

accentuate the economic differences among provinces, and that 

it may make it extremely difficult to maintain and develop 

national social programs that apply with uniformity across 

Canada. And it’s argued that this will lessen our unity and 

increase our diversity across Canada. 

 

And one of the distinct achievements of our Canadian form of 

government has been a federal system which allows for strong 

provinces, while at the same time providing for a broad measure 

of equality in the benefits enjoyed by citizens of different 

provinces. Programs of social support, education, and medical 

care in Canada rest on this basis. Will the accord close the door 

on the development of new initiatives on a national scale? Does 

giving provinces the right to opt move us away from the 

principle of equal benefits and increase the disparities between 

parts of our nation? 

 

These are a few of the questions that should be addressed, Mr. 

Speaker, and we believe that public hearings in Saskatchewan 

could address these and other points. We believe that the 

government could benefit from the wisdom of Saskatchewan 

people on these points, and if the need for changes to the accord 

is demonstrated by public hearings, then changes should be 

pursued. And this would demonstrate the statesmanship of those 

involved. 

 

I have dealt only with a few of the problems that have come up 

in the last few weeks, or the last couple of months, and I’ve 

referred to them for the purpose of illustrating the point that the 

Meech Lake accord should not be an accord of a few 

politicians, but it should be an accord, Mr. Speaker, of the 

people of Canada. Because ultimately, the sovereignty of 

Canada lies with the people, and not just a few politicians. 

 

It’s the people’s country we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, not 

the country of a few politicians hammering out an agreement in 

secret behind closed doors. And because  

Canadian society is culturally and regionally diverse, it is 

imperative that people from all parts of the country are given 

the opportunity to participate in a meaningful way in the 

drafting of our constitution. It is imperative that our constitution 

becomes truly legitimate, a truly legitimate constitution 

embodying the hopes and aspirations of all Canadians across 

this vast country. And Saskatchewan men and women, Mr. 

Speaker, should have an opportunity to participate fully in this 

process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — By opening up the issues to public debate, 

members opposite can demonstrate their own commitment to 

democratic principles. If they have faith in this accord, and if 

they believe that what they are doing is right, they should be 

prepared to face the people and explain their actions to the 

people. The importance of this issue, Mr. Speaker, demands 

nothing less. And so I challenge the Premier, I challenge the 

Premier of the province of Saskatchewan to face the 

Saskatchewan people to consider the flaws of this agreement 

and take whatever action is necessary to make this accord speak 

well for our traditions and serve well all Canadians, including 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martin: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Meech Lake debate is really about 

whether we want a stronger central government, that course 

being the federal government in Ottawa, or stronger provincial 

governments. It is my contention, and the majority of people in 

western Canada, that over the past decades the federal 

government has not served the West as well as we would like it 

to have. The most obvious example, of course, is the 

ill-conceived national energy program forced on western 

Canada by the previous federal government. 

 

The program forced the oil producing provinces of Alberta and 

Saskatchewan to sell their oil at prices lower than the work 

market to those in eastern Canada, central Canada. This cost 

Saskatchewan about $2 billion in revenue, important revenue, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we could be using today, with world 

prices and the prices of other resources being substantially 

lower. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1867 when Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and 

Canada formed the original federation, Canada being Quebec 

and Ontario in those days, we were then an agrarian society. 

But as technology took over in the western world, the central 

government became more and more powerful. We now in 

western Canada want to get some of that operations . . . have 

the ability to speak on behalf of our own provinces, get some of 

that strength back, as it were, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to have 

control over those resources that are in our own territory. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a great pleasure for me, on behalf of the 

constituents of Regina Wascana, to have the opportunity to 

speak in support of the Premier’s resolution to adopt the change 

to Canada’s constitution. That constitution of  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2636 

 

 

Canada defines our national dream of one Canada, one nation, 

from the Atlantic to the Pacific. The constitution of Canada is 

not a piece of legal paper work; the constitution is a living 

document that symbolizes our heritage, our history, and our 

values as a free nation. 

 

All of us will recall our school days when we learned of Sir 

John A. Macdonald and the fathers of confederation. We recall 

their vision of a new nation. We recall their dream of a new 

confederation to be called Canada. Now on the first day of July 

of every year we celebrate the birth of our nation. This year, 

120 years after the birth of Canada, we can take pride. Because 

of the historic Meech Lake agreement, the dream of a united 

Canada is now a reality. 

 

When the premiers of Canada’s ten provinces met at Meech 

Lake with the Prime Minister, their purpose was to bring the 

province of Quebec into the Canadian constitution. At the 

historic meeting at Meech Lake, an agreement was reached to 

bring Quebec into Canada. All of us can proudly say that 

because of the constitutional accord, Canada is today truly a 

greater nation. 

 

I wish to take a few moments to pay special tribute to the 

leadership of the Premier of Saskatchewan at the historic Meech 

Lake conference. Our Premier put the interests of all Canada 

ahead of other considerations. 

 

The Premier took the position that the future of Canada, as a 

nation, is more important than the parochial or political issues. 

Saskatchewan’s Premier went to the conference table with 

constructive proposals to help build Canada. With the eyes of 

all of Canada on Meech Lake, our Premier stood out as a 

statesman, as he has on some many other occasions. 

 

Our Premier took the position that Saskatchewan would only 

agree to a constitution that gave all of the provinces of Canada 

equal status and a veto on certain constitutional matters. That 

was the position of the Premier prior to going to the East to 

meet with the Prime Minister and the other premiers, and he 

held that position. 

 

Every member of this legislature will remember that for years 

the province of Quebec demanded special veto powers over 

constitutional changes. The Premier of Saskatchewan took the 

position that this contravened that the fundamental principle 

that all provinces are equals. And when our Premier went to 

Meech Lake, he was determined to protect that principle. I 

commend with pride the leadership of the Premier of 

Saskatchewan in presenting a constructive and well thought out 

proposal for an equal status veto in the constitution. 

 

The Meech Lake agreement and the signing of the 

constitutional accord in Ottawa on June 3, 1987, heralded a new 

day for Canada. The Prince Albert Daily Herald, in an editorial 

published on July 6, said, and I quote: 

 

We agree with Premier Devine when he terms this 

constitutional accord a victory for all Canadians, and 

especially western Canadians. 

 

I believe the Meech Lake agreement achieved a stronger role 

for the West in Canada. 

 

Like all Canadians I, too, was pleased that Quebec joined the 

Canadian constitutional family. Premier Robert Bourassa of 

Quebec can take great satisfaction in leading his province into 

the Canadian constitution. At the same time, the Premier of 

Saskatchewan and that went to . . . and we, the people of 

western Canada, can take satisfaction that our part of Canada 

has been given equality in confederation. 

 

I refer, of course, to the fact that each province in Canada will 

have a veto over constitutional changes to the central 

institutions of our nation. It will now participate in the 

appointment of senators and Supreme Court judges. This is a 

major and positive step for all of Canada, and especially for 

western Canada. 

 

This historic decision presents a golden opportunity to help 

alleviate the feelings of frustration and regional alienation that 

we in western Canada have felt for years gone by because of the 

clout of central Canada. 

 

Shortly after the Meech Lake agreement, the Premier of 

Saskatchewan made the following statement, and I quote. The 

Premier said: 

 

This agreement recognizes a political reality of a Canadian 

nation. I believe that as a result of the measures taken, 

westerners will be included in the central decision making 

structures of the government as they have never been 

before. 

 

Well the Premier is right. Saskatchewan and the West became 

equal partners in confederation at Meech Lake. 

 

Today before this legislature we have the results of Meech Lake 

before us in the form of a motion presented by the Premier. We 

as members of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan have 

been asked to pass this motion which would in effect make our 

province the second one after Quebec to ratify the constitution 

amendment of 1987. 

 

Today is not a day for partisan politician speeches. Today is a 

day for all members of this legislature to lay aside political 

affiliations and act in the words of Sir John A. Macdonald who 

said, “Before all else, let us be Canadians.” 

 

The motion before the legislature is one that will be enshrined 

in the history of Canada. The constitutional accord reaffirms 

our faith in confederation and is proof of the confidence that we 

have in the Canadian nation. Today is one of those rare days 

when we in public life, those of us in the political arena, today 

is one of those rare days when we can lay aside politics and act 

in the spirit of the fathers of confederation. We can say, with all 

the pride that we can muster, I am proud to be a Canadian. 

 

The motion before the legislature asks us to ratify the 

constitutional accord. The constituency of Regina Wascana is 

only a small segment of this province and our great nation. Yet 

on behalf of all the people of Regina Wascana, I am proud to 

support the motion to ratify the constitutional accord, for in 

doing so, we make a  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2637 

 

 

commitment to the future of Canada as a nation. And in doing 

so we once again reaffirm the spirit of one Canada, one nation. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will be supporting the 

motion put forth by the Premier. I will not be supporting the 

amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1622) 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas - 17 

 

Brockelbank Shillington 

Koskie Romanow 

Tchorzewski Rolfes 

Mitchell Upshall 

Simard Solomon 

Kowalsky Goulet 

Hagel Lyons 

Calvert Lautermilch 

Goodale  

 

Nays - 30 

 

Muller Duncan 

Andrew Berntson 

Lane Taylor 

Smith Muirhead 

Maxwell Schmidt 

Gerich Hepworth 

Hardy Meiklejohn 

Pickering Martin 

Toth Sauder 

Johnson McLaren 

Petersen Swenson 

Martens Baker 

Gleim Neudorf 

Gardner Kopelchuk 

Saxinger Britton 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise with some pleasure to 

speak to the motion. And at the end of my remarks, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll be proposing an amendment to the motion. 

 

It’s a particular pleasure for me, or at least a great interest of 

mine, to debate on this resolution, because I have in one 

capacity or another had a long contact with the constitution of 

Canada and have been interested in the subject for many, many 

years. 

 

I thought I just might trace, Mr. Speaker, as a prelude to some 

of the remarks I will be making, my own approach to 

constitutional matters over the years. I began life, as far as the 

constitution is concerned, during my university training, during 

my arts studies and my law studies. And at that time I was a 

centralist. I believed that the problems that were facing the 

province of Saskatchewan could best be resolved by a strong 

central government. 

 

The study of constitutional law, at least at that time, Mr. 

Speaker, was largely a study of the distribution of powers 

between the federal and the provincial governments. It remains 

such, although of course it’s become more complex as issues 

emerge and recede in Canada. At that time in the early part of 

my life, I believed that a strong central government was 

necessary in order that the problems of agriculture and 

transportation, and problems that were then major issues, could 

be adequately resolved. 

 

That continued until the early 1970s when I went to work for 

the federal government as a civil servant, and I saw the way in 

which the Ottawa bureaucracy works from the inside. I stayed 

there for three years. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Terribly. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — The Deputy Premier suggests it was terrible, 

and in many respects it was, because I then became a convert to 

the provincial rightist side of the debate. I became convinced 

that the federal government had quite enough powers, thank 

you very much. And indeed in light of the public agenda that 

existed in the ’70s, and indeed in the ’80s, it was extremely 

important that the provinces obtain certain powers which they 

then did not have. And my thinking went through this 

transformation and was confirmed in my subsequent years back 

in Saskatchewan when I worked for a spell with the provincial 

government, and subsequently in private life. 

 

And so I remain today a person who believes that at least for 

our part of the country it is essential that we have a strong 

provincial government with rights that are appropriate to the 

responsibilities which we must discharge for the people of our 

province, and the people that we in this Assembly represent. 

 

Now that continued without any qualification until the . . . in 

many respects, it continues. But what I’m going to convey to 

you, Mr. Speaker, is my reaction to the Meech Lake accord 

when I first read the newspaper articles reporting upon it, and 

then a few days later, read the substance of the accord itself. 

 

And I found that I was uncomfortable. Meech Lake is to a large 

extent a recording of a transfer of certain powers from the 

federal to the provincial governments, which in a general sense, 

I favour. 

 

I asked myself though on looking at the accord, why these 

powers? Why these powers? Since when did it become an issue 

in Saskatchewan that we have the major say in appointing the 

members of the Supreme Court of Canada? Since when did it 

become crucial to the interests of Saskatchewan that we in 

effect have the power to name the appointments to the Senate? 

 

Now I can think of many areas in which we require greater 

powers. I think we should have a greater say in manpower 

policy, for example, in the whole broad range of manpower 

instruments — a subject, as far as I can tell, that was never even 

addressed during the Meech Lake discussions. I think that we 

require, at least at certain times, increased powers with respect 

to other matters,  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2638 

 

 

and none of those are included in the Meech Lake accord. 

 

So I had this sense of disquiet on looking at the accord. While 

on the one hand it is desirable, for many reasons, to increase 

certain powers in the provinces, it does not seem to me that the 

Meech Lake accord addresses any of those subjects. 

 

(1630) 

 

Rather, the subjects that are addressed are not important to 

Saskatchewan. I want to qualify that. I mean, I’m not trying to 

dismiss Meech Lake as being an unimportant document, but 

what I’m trying to say, Mr. Speaker, is the subjects that I think 

are crucial so far as the province of Saskatchewan are 

concerned are not addressed in the Meech Lake accord. We are 

working Meech Lake from somebody else’s agenda. 

 

Now I welcomed the conferences that led up to Meech Lake, 

and indeed the news that an agreement had been reached, for 

one very important reason, and that is that it marked an 

agreement on the basis of which Quebec could be said to have 

fully entered the constitutional arrangements in Canada. And I 

think that is an important thing. 

 

It is true, as my leader has observed, that Quebec always has 

been in the constitution, and indeed was in the constitution in a 

legal and constitutional sense, following the constitutional 

agreement of 1981-82. Quebec always has been in the 

constitution, including the Constitution Act and the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms. But in a practical, philosophical, and 

spiritual sense, Quebec was not in, and would not be in, and 

would not be in until she could sign the constitutional 

instruments in Canada and take her place on the same basis as 

all of the other provinces. And in this respect, I welcomed and 

would have welcomed any agreement that would have 

accomplished that purpose, and indeed in that sense, welcomed 

the Meech Lake accord. 

 

But the problem with Meech Lake is that I sense that the 

negotiators, the Prime Minister and the premiers who were 

present behind the closed doors at Meech Lake, made the wrong 

kind of a deal, Mr. Speaker. In the case of the Prime Minister I 

can’t shed the feeling — no matter what I read and what I hear, 

I can’t shed the feeling that the Prime Minister gave away far 

more than he had to in order to arrive at an accord. And I can’t 

either, escape the feeling that the provinces took advantage of 

that situation and grabbed for powers that they did not consider 

important to them, and in so doing stripped the federal 

government of certain powers which I think are important for a 

central government to have in any, in any federation, in any 

federated states, in any federated state. 

 

Now I’m not going to talk about that aspect of the matter, Mr. 

Speaker, because other speakers have already referred to it and I 

know they intend to refer to it in subsequent speeches in this 

House. What made me uncomfortable about the Meech Lake 

accord was the process that had been followed in arriving at it. 

And it’s to that subject that I want to address my remarks this 

afternoon. 

 

The question of constitutional change, as Canadians know 

better than practically anybody else, is a complex difficult 

process. You don’t have to spend much time studying the 

subject of the Canadian constitution to understand the 

thousands, even millions of person-years of effort that have 

gone into the subject of amendments to that constitution. 

 

It has always been a difficult process. It has always been a very 

complicated one. It has always been a very controversial one. It 

has always taken a great deal of time and care and study and 

discussion and debate. And the agreements that have been 

arrived at over the years have been arrived at with difficulty and 

at the end of a complex, time-consuming, and exhaustive 

process. And Meech Lake was none of those things, Mr. 

Speaker — Meech Lake was none of those things. 

 

What is at stake here, as the member from Regina Wascana 

observed in his remarks earlier in this House, is the kind of a 

Canada we have — the distribution of powers in Canada. And 

there are two extreme views of that: on the one hand there is the 

view, there is the view that the federal government ought to 

have a large . . . the federal government ought to have a large 

number of powers, and on the other extreme that the provinces 

ought to have a large number of powers - it’s the difference 

between the centrists on the one hand and the provincial 

rightists on the other. And in Canada we have never been at 

either of those extremes. We’ve been pulled they way and that 

by legal interpretations of our constitution over the years. 

 

For example, in the first part of this century, the Privy Council 

in the United Kingdom interpreted the British North America 

Act in a way that favoured the provinces, and they continued to 

do that for some years. And then gradually that pendulum 

moved back towards the centre and, in some cases, in some 

decisions, towards a centrist view of our constitution. 

 

So the member is perfectly correct in his approach to it, and that 

is precisely what is at stake here. The question that we as 

legislators in this Assembly and in all of the Assemblies of 

Canada have to grapple with is: where is that pendulum, at what 

point in that pendulum ought Canada to be? And I suspect that 

there re shared views in this House as to what is an appropriate 

point for the pendulum as between the rights of the central 

government and the rights of the provinces. And that’s what has 

to be considered, I suggest, when we’re looking at the Meech 

Lake accord. What does it do to the pendulum? 

 

I think there’s no doubt that it moves the pendulum 

significantly and sharply towards the provinces. I’ve said to 

you, Mr. Speaker, that in a general way I am comfortable with 

that, although I certainly don’t intend to speak for all members 

of my caucus or my party on that point. But I personally am 

comfortable with that idea. 

 

But also as I said earlier, I think the Meech Lake accord doesn’t 

deal with the right subjects. In other words, the pendulum has 

moved toward the provinces on issues that are not crucial to our 

interests as a province. And indeed, if I were making a list of 

powers that ought to be  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2639 

 

 

redistributed under our constitution, I would not have included 

most of the matters that are touched upon in the Meech Lake 

accord. As I said earlier, we were clearly working from 

someone else’s agenda and not from the agenda of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

But the point is: who in this House feels that they are so wise 

about this question of the proper position for the pendulum? 

Who among us is so learned as to say that this is the proper 

point? And that’s a problem that is being expressed in one way 

or another right across Canada. And it comes back to the 

question of the process that was followed. 

 

Traditionally, and historically in this province, as I said earlier, 

the process is a complex, complicated one. It involves all sorts 

of things — study, consultations, discussions, meetings, a 

debate, speeches, reports, papers, panels, research, seminars, 

federal/provincial meetings, provincial meetings, more study, 

more research, more discussion papers, on and on and on and 

on it goes. And the number of people who participate in this 

process have traditionally and historically been very large, and a 

broad spectrum of our society is normally involved. That was 

certainly the case during the 1981-82 constitutional discussions, 

which went coast to coast, which received extensive media 

coverage, and which involved the public in very, very important 

ways. 

 

And that lack of process in this case is, without question, the 

cause of a lot of the unease that we hear expressed across this 

country today, and which you hear expressed in this House 

during the debate on this resolution. 

 

There is something about the prospect or the sight of our Prime 

Minister and our premiers going into a room and coming out 

many, many hours later, after a sleepless night, after long, long 

sessions in which they apparently weren’t even allowed to 

consult with their experts and officials, but they emerged finally 

with a deal. There’s something about the process that Canadians 

are finding disquieting. 

 

It’s not a partisan question you know; it’s not a question of an 

opposition taking one position and the government another. It’s 

a question of a process with integrity and a process that 

proceeds from wisdom. And it explains, I think, so much of the 

opposition that we hear, or that we read in our media 

concerning the Meech Lake accord. 

 

Now the Premier introduced this resolution to the House and 

made a presentation to us. And I, and others on this side, 

listened carefully to that presentation and have studied it with 

some care since. And with respect, I did not find that 

presentation to be either assuring or persuasive. 

 

Now it may be that it happened on a bad day, or that the 

presentation had not been as complex as . . . or as extensive as 

he would like to have made. But I got no sense from the 

Premier’s remarks that he appreciated the important, the impact, 

of what Meech Lake was about. I mean, it is just not a good 

enough treatment of the subject to say that it’s about time the 

provinces started to have a major role in the appointment of 

Supreme Court judges.  

Why is it important? To whom is it important? What problem is 

it curing? I mean, what’s wrong out here that it is going to be 

fixed by the technique of having the government of the day say 

who will be appointed to the Supreme Court of Canada? 

 

And so I listened to the Premier’s remarks, and at the end of it 

had no sense that he recognized the importance of a process 

which would be appropriate to the amendment of the Canadian 

constitution. 

 

Now in my submission, that process was seriously flawed. It 

did not involve enough people. The country was barely aware 

of what the agenda was. Most of the country didn’t even know 

there was an agenda. But even those that follow the 

constitutional process were only vaguely aware of what the 

agenda was. 

 

We know that this meeting . . . We knew that this meeting was 

going to take place, and we knew that they were really going to 

try very hard to get an agreement. But we did not know that 

they were going to emerge from that room with a document 

which is as hard and fast as this one appears to be. 

 

Since then we have had the Prime Minister of Canada, the 

prime minister of Quebec, and other premiers, make public 

statements to the effect that this accord is, in effect, cast in 

stone. As far as Ottawa is concerned, it will only be amended if 

an egregious error is uncovered. 

 

We didn’t know that was — and I speak here as we Canadians 

— did not know, when the first ministers went into that room, 

that they were going to emerge with a document that was, in 

effect, a piece of marble on which a final deal was etched, 

which was, in a practical sense, not subject to any amendment. 

 

Indeed they emerged with a document which is not even subject 

to appropriate discussion. Now by appropriate discussion I 

mean discussion as it normally takes place when we Canadians 

talk about amending our constitution. Because that process 

historically is a much different process than the one that we are 

following here. Now we’re suggesting a number of amendments 

to you; we’ve heard one. You’re going to hear another one from 

me, and you may hear some more. And I’ve no doubt that 

looking back on this a week from now we will find that you will 

reject all of our amendments. 

 

Now what’s the purpose; what kind of a consultation is this. 

Our Premier and other premiers have said that it is enough 

consultation to have this matter debated by the elected 

politicians in this legislature. And yet I, Mr. Speaker, am 

making a speech that, as far as I can tell, only two people on the 

other side of the House are listening to. Now what kind of a 

consultation is that. The consultation that ought to have taken 

place was one suggested by the last amendment where the 

public can be involved. 

 

(1645) 

 

The format was wrong also, Mr. Speaker, because these 10 

men, these first ministers, went into a room . . . 

 

An Hon. Members: — Eleven. 

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2640 

 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Eleven first ministers went into a room, and 

they stayed there; they were required to stay there practically 

around the clock, as I said earlier, without having the 

opportunity to consult any of their experts or officials, and they 

were not allowed to leave until they had made a deal. 

 

Now that’s appropriate in many situations, you know. Certainly 

our Prime Minister has been in many such rooms where he has 

been required to stay until he comes out with a deal. He’s a 

labour lawyer from Montreal, and he’s been in many situations 

where his mediator would not let him our of the room until he 

had concluded a collective agreement. And what he did was 

bring his techniques from his collective bargaining, labour 

relations background into that first ministers’ meeting in Ottawa 

and applied that technique. Now it’s a wonderful technique for 

settling a collective agreement — I’ve done it many times 

myself — but it’s not a wonderful technique in setting the 

constitution of a country, and it has resulted in a situation where 

we are proposing to amend that constitution with significant 

elements of our country being very, very uncomfortable with 

the way in which the deal was made. 

 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, it is a flawed process, and it is one that 

places a cloud over these amendments which just simply 

shouldn’t be there. Now we’ve had opportunities in this country 

to clear that cloud away. We still have opportunities to do that. I 

mean, it’s still not too late to do it, but it’s going to be too late 

unless the governments of this country — the national 

government, this one, and the other provinces — elects to take 

the train off the track or to put it on a siding for a while, while 

we give this matter a proper airing among the elements in this 

country who are interested in these questions. 

 

Now to some extend that’s happened. And when I say some, I 

mean some small extent, because the federal government has 

struck a committee, a joint committee of the Senate and the 

House, who have held public hearings. You can quarrel with 

that process because it was short, it limited itself to the number 

of people that it would hear, and it operated under a mandate 

which was — well to be kind about it — which was certainly 

subject to criticism because a lot of very important people made 

it very clear that it didn’t matter what that committee decided, 

the deal was not going to be changed in the absence of 

something that we now call an egregious error — after we had 

scrambled to our dictionaries and learned what that word meant. 

But that certainly hung as a pall of smoke over the deliberations 

of that committee. 

 

But the committee did sit, and it did hear from some very 

important groups in Canadian society, and from some very 

important people. And that committee’s report has apparently 

been drafted, and is apparently ready to be made public. It 

awaits only the completion of the French translation before that 

happens, but according to newspaper reports of yesterday, that 

report could be made public as early as next week. 

 

And what I’m going to suggest, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

Assembly wait — at least wait in our deliberations until see that 

report. And what I’m going . . . I’m going to be  

suggesting an amendment in a moment which will say precisely 

that; that we all get a chance to take a look at the report. It can 

be tabled in this House, and then we can resume our 

consideration of the resolution. 

 

I can’t think of one reason why we wouldn’t do that. At one 

time I thought that the government had a very good reason for 

getting this through quickly, because they introduced this 

resolution at an early date. The Premier presented the resolution 

with a speech to this House which indicated that the matter was 

fairly urgent to the government, but then that apparently has 

been by the boards because this matter has been allowed to 

languish on the order paper for approximately two months. 

 

Now in light of that, why would it be important to complete our 

consideration of the matter this week? Why not wait until next 

week when we’ve had an opportunity of looking at the report 

from he joint committee of parliament and the Senate, and at 

least have the benefit of their views before we cast our own 

views in stone with our votes in this House. And so I wish to 

move the following motion, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my 

colleague from Saskatoon South. And I will read the motion: 

 

That the paragraph commencing with the words “Now 

therefore” be deleted, and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

And whereas the people of Saskatchewan should have an 

opportunity to consider the findings of the special joint 

committee of the Senate and the House of Commons 

which has been established to consider the matter of 

constitutional reform; 

 

Now therefore the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

urges the Government of Saskatchewan to table in this 

Assembly the findings and conclusions of the Special Joint 

Committee of the Senate and the House of Commons with 

respect to the matter of constitutional reform and the 

schedule hereto, with a view to later consideration by this 

Assembly. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon South. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it is certainly my pleasure to have seconded the amendment 

moved by my colleague from Saskatoon Fairview and to say a 

few words on the main motion as presented by the Premier. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the accord . . . the main motion and the 

amendments that are before us today, I think because they have 

been on the order paper for nearly two months, indicates to us 

and I think should indicate to the people of Saskatchewan, and 

consequently because the accord pertains to all of Canada, to all 

Canadians, that there is really no rush in passing this particular 

motion. And I know that the government, because it is a 

government  

  



 

September 17, 1987 

 

2641 

 

 

that wishes to listen to the views of the opposition and to the 

people of Saskatchewan, will see fit to support this amendment 

and to postpone the resolution of this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constitution and accord, when it will finally be 

adopted by the Government of Canada and the provinces, will 

be doubt profoundly affect the way we govern and live in 

Canada. 

 

The changes that are proposed by the accord will positively 

affect some groups and individuals in this country, but it 

certainly will negatively affect or have a negative impact on a 

lot of minority groups, and in a way that we will be able to 

implement cost-shared programs in the future in Canada. 

 

The constitutional accord will most assuredly determine 

whether aboriginal peoples will ever fulfil their desire of having 

self-government. The accord will also adversely affect 

Northerners and their desire to become provinces in Canada. 

 

I believe that we should retain the current constitutional 

requirement for the admission of new provinces. That 

requirement or that formula, Mr. Deputy Speaker, needs the 

approval of the federal government and at least two-thirds of 

the existing provinces, with at least 50 per cent of the 

population of Canada. Now that, Mr. Speaker, seems to me to 

be fairly reasonable. It has worked in the past, and it certainly 

will work in the future. 

 

The new formula, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which requires the 

unanimous approval of all the provinces for the admission of 

new provinces is too rigid, in my opinion, and is unfair and 

inequitable to the people of the Yukon and the Northwest 

Territories. 

 

The new accord also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will probably 

prevent any changes to be made to the Senate. The unanimity 

clause requirement will mean that the Senate will continue to 

function as a costly and, in my opinion, generally a useless 

institution to be used at taxpayers’ expense, mainly, Mr. 

Speaker, as patronage appointments for the Liberal and 

Conservative parties of this country. 

 

As you probably have noticed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have 

some grave concerns about the constitutional accord. However, 

having said that, one must also recognize the positive aspects of 

Quebec becoming a full-fledged member of this country. This, 

in my opinion, must be the overriding factor which we cannot 

ignore. 

 

Getting the province of Quebec to sign the constitutional accord 

was a significant accomplishment. But what about the price that 

had to be paid by our aboriginal peoples? What about the price 

that had to be paid by the people of the Yukon and the 

Northwest Territories? One must question, in my opinion, the 

negotiating capabilities of the Prime Minister when he has to 

sacrifice the rights of our native people, and the rights of the 

people of the Yukon and the Northwest Territories, in order to 

get the province of Quebec to sign the accord. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have already acknowledged the  

importance of having Quebec sign the accord. The significance 

of this should not be underestimated. However I am gravely 

concerned about the aspects of our society that the accord does 

not adequately address. And I have already expressed my regret 

that the accord will adversely affect many groups and 

individuals of Canada, particularly our native groups and 

northern people. 

 

Because the accord, Mr. Deputy Speaker, fails to adequately 

address future changes to the Senate, because it fails to provide 

a process of discussion with native people on self-government, 

and because it adversely affects the people of the Yukon and the 

Northwest Territories in becoming provinces, I would hope that 

the government will agree to the amendment moved by my 

colleague, the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

I am, Mr. Deputy Speaker, disappointed however that the 

government could not agree to the amendment moved by the 

Leader of the Opposition, which would have given, which 

would have given the people of this province an input into the 

accord. It would have given the people an opportunity to 

participate; it would have given us an opportunity to question 

how the process has worked; and it would have given all of us 

an opportunity to make suggestions in public hearings. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government opposite had an 

opportunity, or will have an opportunity now, to atone for their 

mistake by accepting the amendment being debated now. Why, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, wouldn’t the government wait one more 

week sot hat we can have a look at the findings of the joint 

committee of the Senate and the House of Commons to see 

what the people of the rest of Canada, and some people from 

Saskatchewan, what input they had and what suggestions they 

have made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fortunately time is on our side. We don’t have to 

make a decision on this motion and on the accord for at least 18 

months to two years. In that sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am 

optimistic that as an open government and as a democratic 

government, as they claim to be, and as the Deputy Speaker has 

indicated that they will listen to the people, I am sure that they 

will graciously accept the amendment move and that they will 

not defeat the amendment. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a number of other things that I 

would wish to say on this amendment. I therefore beg leave to 

adjourn debate. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Mr. Chairman: — It being 5 o’clock, I do now leave the chair 

until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


