













































October 9, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 9, 1987 

 

 

3241 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 

you, and through you to the Assembly, a group of people in 

your gallery. These people number approximately 60. 

Twenty-five of them, Mr. Speaker, are from Newfoundland, 

and they are here on an exchange visit with the Moose 

Mountain Air Cadet Squadron at Carlyle. The group from 

Newfoundland is from . . . they belong to the number 589 

Carbonear Squadron in Newfoundland. 

 

This has become a bit of an annual event, I think. The exchange 

has been going on now — not always with Newfoundland; I 

think last year it was with a group from Quebec, and we’ve had 

these visits back and forth now for some time and I’ll expect 

they’ll continue. They’re a very active group from the Moose 

Mountain Air Cadet Squadron in Carlyle. 

 

And they are here today with their co-ordinator, Mrs. Irene 

Doty, from Carlyle and Mr. Jim Ash from Carbonear, 

Newfoundland. In addition, leading the group today, Mr. 

Speaker, is Captain Jack Wilson of Carlyle, and Captain Susan 

Garland of Carbonear, Newfoundland, and Lieutenant Nedra 

Clark of Carlyle. 

 

I would ask all member to join me with a . . . well a good 

Saskatchewan welcome to our Newfoundland friends and a 

healthy thank you to our Moose Mountain friends for being 

such great hosts to our friends from Newfoundland. And so I 

would ask all members to join in that welcome, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Drug Benefits Review Plan 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Acting Minister of Health, and it deals with your 

government’s decision to do in the Saskatchewan prescription 

drug plan, and the fact that Saskatchewan people are now faced 

with prescription costs of hundreds and, in some cases, 

thousands of dollars up front. My question, Mr. Minister, deals 

with your drug benefits review panel. Can you tell us how many 

people have applied to the panel for special consideration, how 

many of these people have received assistance, and in how 

many of these cases have they simply been given a priority post 

envelope? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

indicate at the outset of my response that I think again the 

member tries to exaggerate. Certainly we in Saskatchewan 

have, in my mind, and in the mind of many people, still the best 

drug plan in the Dominion of  

Canada. Certainly many of the benefits that we have other 

provinces do not have. The specific part of her question in 

regard to the number of people that have applied to the special 

committee for consideration, I would have to take notice of that, 

and I will, and be in consultation with the minister and report 

back to the Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you confirm that one of the 

reasons the numbers are so low is that there have been hundreds 

of people who have written to the government, yourself, the 

Premier, or have been referred to the Minister of Health by their 

MLAs, are not considered to have applied for special assistance 

and that they are required to request an application form for this 

special needs plan because you and your department do not tell 

them that they should apply, or how. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I find it rather interesting that as I listened 

to the debate yesterday in the House, and having talked to a 

number of my colleagues on this side, and from my own 

situation as a member of a rural constituency, I can say that I 

have not had this large number of requests that the members 

opposite seem to continually to be saying in discussion with 

their constituent and this letter, and so on. So I don’t share the 

member’s viewpoint that there are hordes of people across 

Saskatchewan writing in for special consideration. In my case, I 

have not had that. And having been a past minister of Health, I 

think that I probably would have got as many letters as some of 

the people otherwise, and I can truthfully say that hasn’t 

happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — One of the reasons why these members may 

not have gotten an requests is because they’re so heartless and 

the people don’t want to go to them any more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, a number of MLAs . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Could I 

please ask the hon. member to indicate whether she’s posing a 

supplementary or new question. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question, Mr. Speaker. A number of 

MLAs have asked the Department of Health for copies of the 

drug benefits review panel special application form. We wanted 

to display these application forms in our constituency offices 

and advise our constituents that they were available, but the 

department to date has refused to give us these special 

applications so we can give them to our constituents. 

 

Why is that, Mr. Minister? Why is it that your Department of 

Health refuses to give application forms for the duly elected 

members of this legislature? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3242 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well as I understand — and I’ll preface 

my response as I did previously — that the member opposite 

continually tries to insinuate that there are literally thousands of 

these people applying and wanting application forms. I can say 

from my information and in talking to many of my colleagues, 

that simply is not the case. 

 

I understand in the Department of Health each is dealt with on 

an individual merit basis. And I can say, for the people that I 

represent in this part of the province, that system seems to be 

working well because I have not had my phone ringing off the 

wall or my mailbox flooded with letters. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Maybe the Premier of this province can get 

his buddies at the Saskatchewan Tory network to allow him to 

explain to the people of this province how they apply. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question. Mr. Minister, can you advise 

us who the members are on this special drug benefits review 

panel? And why aren’t the people they are asked to pass 

judgement on allowed to appear before the panel and plead their 

case? And why are you afraid to have the members of the panel 

meet face to face with the people of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I think as Health estimates 

would be on later today, these questions would be more aptly 

asked in estimates to the minister. 

 

But being that as it may, if the member chooses to ask in 

question period, I will indicate who are the people that are 

helped by this type of system — it is those people on low 

incomes; it is those people with pressing drug needs; it is people 

in institutions — those are the people that the drug plan of 

Saskatchewan is helping, and helping in many cases, and doing 

a very good job of it. 

 

As I’ve said before, she can stand and say that there are 

thousands and thousands of applications. It would seem logical 

to me, who talked with many people over the past five years on 

health care in this province — and I’ll put my reputation for 

compassion against yours any day — it would seem logical to 

me that I would get some letters concerning the drug plan if it 

was not functioning well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — That minister is long on rhetoric, long on 

politics, but short on answers to the question, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, when the drug benefits review 

committee decides that a family isn’t eligible, does that family 

have a right to appeal? And in particular,  

if a family feels that the panel did not consider all of the 

information available, what appeal process is in place for that 

family? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, as you’re well aware, I do 

not have hands on on the operation of that panel. I would have 

to take notice of her question and have . . . be advised of that. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the Acting Minister of 

Health. Today’s Globe and Mail, Mr. Acting Minister of 

Health, reports that “Ottawa made drug bill pledge in trade 

pact.” 

 

Mr. Minister, when you were the minister of Health, you told 

the people of this province that you were opposed to drug patent 

legislation in Ottawa because it would cost the people of this 

province $15 million in increased costs to their prescription 

drug plan. After the election, Mr. Minister, your government 

sang the Hallelujah Chorus for those drug patent changes. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you confirm that your decision to do in our 

prescription drug plan and support these changes to the drug 

Bill, the drug patent legislation in this country, was part of your 

sell-out to the Americans, an attack on these sick people in our 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, I think the question of the member 

opposite indicates exactly the mind-set of the opposition, how 

they look towards the development and the future of this 

country of Canada. Certainly when I was the Minister of Health 

in this government, there were some concerns about a Patent 

Act that were coming in at the time that I did not think was in 

the best benefits of the people of Saskatchewan. And I can 

indicate . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The minister is 

being interrupted continuously, and I’d ask for the co-operation 

of especially one or two members in allowing him to answer the 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I thank you very much for that, Mr. 

Speaker. As I was saying, and some of the members that are in 

the front benches of the opposition who were in the last 

opposition will recall the thirty-seven and an half hours of 

debate in Health estimates last year where there were questions 

arising about the Patent Act. At that time I made representation 

because I did believe that the Act as it was coming forward at 

that time was not in the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I can say with some degree of success 

we’re able to have that patent act have a re-look at . . . they took 

a second look at it. 

 

But I want to say, as I listen to the member opposite, as I 

listened to the member for Riversdale give such a pathetic 

performance the other day on free trade, it indicates . . . a 

pathetic performance, the worst I’ve seen him do in this House 

in all my years here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3243 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And I say that sincerely, sir. I just want to 

say that when we look at the kind of feeling towards the 

development and growth of this province . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Hon. members 

may not like the reply, but that does not give them licence to 

holler and interrupt the minister answering the question. 

 

Order, please. Order, please! It seems like hon. members, some 

of them don’t hear too well. I just asked them to please be quiet 

while the minister finishes his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: Thank you once again, Mr. Speaker, for 

getting some order in this Chamber. I just want to say that the 

statements of the member opposite indicate fairly strongly that 

they’re against building . . . they’re against developing drugs in 

this country, they’re against jobs, and I will cite for example the 

questions the other day in my estimates. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. I think the 

member has made the point. 

 

Cut-back in Support to Chiropractic Services 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also 

to the Acting Minister of Health. It has been, Mr. Minister, at 

least two months since the Health minister in this House 

threatened a $1.2 million cut in government support for 

chiropractic services in Saskatchewan. And the Minister of 

Health said in his last comment that chiropractic and 

physiotherapy services were under review at that time, some 

two months ago, and that no final decision had been taken. 

 

I wonder if the minister can tell us whether it is still the 

government’s plan to cut $1.2 million from chiropractic 

services in Saskatchewan by limiting the number of visits, and 

when was the last opportunity for the government to consult 

formally with the chiropractic association in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I would like to correct the member 

opposite. I don’t think the minister ever threatened this, that he 

was going to do this. I believe there has been some dialogue 

with the chiropractors. I know when I was the minister of 

Health we had continuous dialogue, some of it, I would say, 

very beneficial to the development of health care in this 

province. 

 

But I couldn’t say to you at this point in time when the last 

consultation between the present Minister of Health and the 

chiropractors took place. However, I would offer you the same 

suggestion as I did to the member from Saskatoon. Within a 

few hours we’ll be into Health estimates, and I’m sure the 

minister will be more than pleased to answer your question at 

that time. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Is the minister now 

suggesting to us, since he discounts my notion of a threatened 

cut-back, is he now suggesting to us that there is no such 

cut-back in the works and that the government is not 

contemplating a limitation on the number of visits that will be 

allowed to chiropractors in the province of  

Saskatchewan? And will he determine exactly the date of the 

last consultation between the Minister of Health and the 

chiropractors of Saskatchewan, which I suspect is at least three 

months ago? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what I was 

denouncing was the word a “threat” to cut back. I don’t think 

the Minister of Health, in all fairness, even threatened anyone 

on a cut-back. However I will just reiterate to you that, and you 

should have the opportunity to ask these questions within 

estimates and the minister I’m sure will provide you with the 

date of the last consultation. Failing that opportunity though, 

failing that opportunity, I will take notice of it and report back 

to you. 

 

Charges for Nursing Home Services for Seniors 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question also is to the Acting 

Minister of Health, and it has to do with your government’s 

treatment of senior citizens and the disabled in this province. 

Will you confirm that effective November 1 the monthly charge 

for nursing home residents in Saskatchewan will jump to $596 a 

month? That’s an increase of $92 in the past year. That’s an 

increase of 18 per cent in less than a year. Can you explain why, 

when your government is preaching restraint, you are so 

gouging the seniors and the disabled in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t understand how a 

member opposite could have the gall to stand in this Chamber 

and talk about gouging senior citizens when this government 

has a senior heritage program in place, when this government 

has done more nursing homes over the past five years than 

anywhere else in North America, where this government has an 

enriched home care program, and where the drugs of the people 

in the senior citizens’ homes are covered. I can’t see where you 

see any part of gouging there. 

 

And let me tell you a bit about gouging, seeing you raised the 

word. I can remember when the now president, the now 

president of the NDP party was the minister of Social Services. 

They want to hear about gouging. I’ll tell you a case of 

gouging. He was the minister of Social Services, the now 

president of your party, and do you know the amount of 

disposable income that he allowed the senior citizens in this 

province to have? Sixty dollars — sixty dollars, that’s gouging. 

And when we came into office we pegged that at $100 of 

disposable income and the raises in disposable income and 

charges go up proportionately. And in my mind that is not 

gouging, that’s consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary question to the 

same minister. Mr. Minister, when you instituted the quarterly 

increases in nursing home fees, at that time you left people with 

$100 disposable income. That was in 1983, four years ago. 

You’re leaving them today with that same amount of money, 

that same $100. And you know full well, from that $100 they 

need to take out things like their drug prescription dispensing 

fee, their haircuts, clothing, in some cases their incontinence 

pads. 

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3244 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you justify to the seniors and disabled of 

Saskatchewan an 18 per cent increase in one year? And further, 

would you ask your Premier to explain this to the people and 

the seniors and the disabled of Saskatchewan on his free-time 

political broadcast on the Tory network? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — First of all, on the last part I would advise 

you and members of your opposition to tune in and hear the 

Premier when he’s on his political broadcast because I’m sure 

you will all learn something. 

 

But getting back to the gouging of senior citizens, I . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ve explained previously that certainly, 

when they were government, they allowed the seniors $60 

disposable income. We pegged it at 100, and then we took it, 

and the raises from here are proportionate — the amount that 

goes to the home for their cost, and also the amount that goes to 

the senior citizen. 

 

But if I think you want to hear something about gouging, I’d 

like to remind you about the type of statements that the member 

from Riversdale, the apparent new leader of the party will be 

saying in regarding to care of the elderly and the building of 

nursing homes. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a statement from this 

person on September 9, ’87. And with your concurrence, it will 

take me a minute to read it. He says: 

 

If politicians try to cope with the sickness problem of our 

ageing population by building more hospitals or similar 

facilities, the cost will be prohibitive and the results will 

be disastrous. 

 

The results of building more nursing homes, that gentleman 

says, will be disastrous. I’ll put our record of nursing homes for 

senior citizens against their moratorium and his new policy of 

disastrous results any day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Increase in Cost of Motor Vehicle Insurance 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question was to be 

to the Minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance), but again I direct by question to the Premier. And it 

of course deals with your increase in the cost of insuring motor 

vehicles on an average of 10 per cent announced just earlier this 

week. Mr. Premier, once again your government has failed 

miserably to practise the restraint that it is preaching for others. 

 

Can you stand up in this House and tell motorists why, when 

Saskatchewan is already suffering from the highest inflation 

rate in Canada, why they should feel good about a 10 per cent 

jump in their vehicle insurance which is more than double the 

current inflation rate? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting that 

the hon. member is mentioning and premising his question on 

the basis of inflation rates when this morning we have the 

second lowest unemployment rate in all of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — In fact, at an actual rate, we are 5.8 per 

cent unemployment in the province of Saskatchewan as a result 

of a large degree of management and diversification and 

growth, as a result of the things that we’ve been doing here for 

some time. And then he drifts in, Mr. Speaker, and he says, well 

what about the raise in SGI rates? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. The member for Saskatoon South, I’m calling 

you to order. And I’m warning you for the last time that I’m 

calling you to order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. members knows 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The Premier has 

the opportunity to answer the question. All members in this 

House have the obligation to allow him to answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The hon. member knows that when he 

mentions inflation that the rates haven’t been increased for 

some time. I’m not sure of the years but for two or three or, I 

guess, five years the rates haven’t increased. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the PURC (Public 

Utilities Review Commission) decision to give back tens of 

millions of dollars to the consumers across Saskatchewan, 

which I don’t believe that you gave anybody and certainly us 

not a bouquet for giving that money back. 

 

There is a need for money in the insurance fund to make sure 

that the auto fund is protected. And that’s just natural, Mr. 

Speaker, that you want that fund with sufficient amount of 

money so that it can protect people against decline in the fund 

and so that they have good insurance. 

 

So in terms of a combination, Mr. Speaker, (1) it hasn’t been 

changed in five years; (2) a great deal of money was given back 

to people; and (3) it is surprising when we’ve got the lowest 

unemployment, the second lowest unemployment in Canada, 

that he would talk about inflation at this time and afraid to 

mention jobs in the legislature, like they’re afraid to mention 

trade, agriculture, potash, uranium and several other issues that 

are relevant today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 

Premier, Saskatchewan motorists just don’t buy your tortured 

explanation. They just don’t buy it. 

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3245 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Motorists know their vehicle insurance rates 

have jumped an average of 10 per cent, and for a number of 

drivers the increase is much greater than that, and that this 

insurance premium has fallen within days of your 

announcement of a 100 per cent jump in the cost of drivers’ 

licences and vehicle registration fees. 

 

In total those increases, Mr. Premier, are taking $38 million out 

of the pockets of Saskatchewan’s motorists. That’s the 

equivalent of an income tax increase of between 2 and 3 

percentage points. 

 

I’m wondering: is the Premier going to speak on this on his 

Saskatchewan Tory network speech on Monday, on his 

free-time political speech on Monday; and further, when is your 

government going to stop these back door tax increases on 

hard-pressed Saskatchewan families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s really important that we 

address the questions of inflation and the question of taxes 

squarely and fairly. If the hon. member wants to see inflation 

reduced, he should support a comprehensive trade deal with the 

United States. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — If he wants to see the price of an 

automobile drop by 3 or $4,000 — you ask people in Regina 

whether they’d want to do that. If he would want to see the cost 

of clothes decline, Mr. Speaker; if he wants to see the cost of 

chemicals decline in the province of Saskatchewan; if he wants 

to see the price of a half-ton truck dropped by 3, 4, or $5,000 to 

people in Saskatchewan, he should say, that might have an 

impact on inflation. And he won’t support it. If he’d like to see 

food costs go down in the province of Saskatchewan and food 

costs go down across the country as a result of trade, Mr. 

Speaker, you’d see an impact on inflation. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Thank you very 

much. I want to point out to the hon. member, if he’s interested 

in the cost of living and the changes in the cost of living over 

time, which is the rate of inflation, if he wants them to go down, 

he should support a trade agreement so that we can get access to 

lower priced goods and services. He doesn’t even want us to 

allow . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Finally. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. New question 

for the Premier. It’s interesting the Premier wants today to talk 

about free trade when we don’t have time. Twice you’ve turned 

down an opportunity to debate that very issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan drivers might not be 

nearly so upset with your government . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

Please allow the member from Regina North to make his point. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for drawing the 

government members to order. 

 

Premier, Saskatchewan drivers would not be nearly so upset 

with these massive increases in their cost of driving if they 

could see that money going into services, but what you’ve got 

. . . we’ve got a situation here where we’ve got the worst 

highway system anywhere in Canada, with the possible 

exception of the Maritimes, and you keep increasing these huge 

back door tax increases that are simply going into the black hole 

called the Conservative government deficit. 

 

How can you justify what you’re doing with these tax 

increases? How can you justify those increases on 

Saskatchewan motorists when we have such a terrible highway 

system in such desperate need of repair and you’re not spending 

the money on it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 

many of the rates also went down, and he’s afraid to mention 

that. And it’s like they’re afraid to mention trade and afraid to 

mention jobs, since their new leader has been beaten on by the 

. . . not only this side of the House but the general public and 

the media, because they haven’t been able to address the issues 

properly and correctly. 

 

And it’s evidenced this morning, as I said yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker — not one single question about jobs in this legislature 

on the day that it’s announced statistically across Canada. 

Where is their courage to speak about the issues? Where is it, 

Mr. Speaker? They don’t speak about inflation correctly. They 

don’t speak about jobs or agriculture or any one of the 

important issues of the day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Saskatchewan’s Trade Office in New York 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to inform the 

House that on October 6, 1987, I was in New York on behalf of 

the Premier and the Minister of Economic Development and 

Trade, the Hon. Bob Andrew, to attend a commercial signing 

ceremony and the establishment of Saskatchewan’s New York 

trade office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The enormous New York market holds great potential for 

Saskatchewan from both a trade and an investment perspective. 

This is something, this is something, Mr. Speaker, that members 

opposite . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Unfortunately 

this morning we’ve had a . . . many, many interruptions of 

speakers speaking on both sides of the House, and I would like 

to ask the co-operation of  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3246 

 

members to please allow the Deputy Premier to make his 

statement, and no doubt the opposition critic will want to 

respond to it. So I’d just like to ask for the co-operation of 

members in this House to allow the business of this House to 

proceed in a normal manner. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I know, Mr. Speaker, that it’s difficult 

to keep their attention when they really don’t understand the 

impact of trade and investment in this province, and so I’ll try, 

I’ll try a little harder, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the enormous New York market holds great potential for 

Saskatchewan, both from a trade and an investment perspective. 

Our trade office will take advantage of this potential through 

the promotion of Saskatchewan as a reliable source of 

world-class products, and will facilitate the Saskatchewan 

business sector in trading in the entire U.S. eastern seaboard. 

 

The potential of this trade and investment market has been 

recognized by other jurisdictions: Ontario, Quebec, Alberta. 

They have already established offices in New York, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The office has already started to pay dividends as evidenced by 

the commercial contracts signed by Sweeprite. And the member 

from Moose Jaw North thinks that’s a joke; signed by Gainers 

Ltd. Sweeprite, Mr. Speaker, with the assistance of our 

representative in New York, has successfully demonstrated 

their equipment to the New York Department of Sanitation, the 

number one purchase of street sweepers in North America. New 

York is expected to make an initial purchase of six street 

sweepers. But even more important, Mr. Speaker, Sweeprite 

now qualifies to bid on the 100 street sweepers that New York 

buys each year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — At $75,000 for each street sweeper, 

Mr. Speaker, this is a major breakthrough for a world-class 

Saskatchewan manufacturer, and very important and significant 

as it relates to jobs and employment numbers here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Gainers, Mr. Speaker, again with the assistance of our New 

York agent, was able to finalize two contracts for the sale of 

Saskatchewan processed meat, with a total combined value of 

$2.5 million. 

 

In addition to finalizing these two major contracts, I had the 

honour of co-hosting with the Canadian Consul General a 

reception for 100 influential New York investors and business 

people. I am pleased to report that considerable interest in trade 

and investment opportunities, which exist in Saskatchewan, was 

expressed by many in attendance. 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is a province which relies on 

exports to drive our economy. Whether it be wheat, oil, potash, 

uranium, processed goods or manufactured goods, we must take 

every opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and make every effort to 

promote Saskatchewan as a supplier of world-class goods and 

as a profitable investment centre in the U.S. markets and around 

the world. The  

establishment of the New York office will allow us to do just 

that in that region, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to respond 

with a few brief comments on the comments made by the 

minister opposite, Mr. Speaker. Here we have another example 

of something which the government has been doing for 

something in excess of 18 months and has not mentioned 

anything about it to the public until it was raised in this 

legislature. 

 

And the member opposite has been forced now to admit this 

wasteful expenditure of money, of taxpayers’ money in 

Saskatchewan, to do nothing more than duplicate the efforts and 

the office of the federal government which already exists in 

New York and in the United States. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — It’s another example, Mr. Speaker, of 

tens, maybe hundreds of thousands of dollars to pay somebody 

that may be a friend of some cabinet ministers in New York to 

live high at the expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

There seem to be, Mr. Speaker, there seem to be no funds to 

help the people in nursing homes who have had 18 per cent 

increase in their nursing home rates this . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. I don’t like 

to stand up and interrupt the proceedings of the House, which 

unfortunately I have had to do many times today due to the 

noise in the Assembly. So I am once more asking hon. members 

to please allow, in this case, the member from Regina North 

East to proceed with his remarks. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

saying, that this government cannot find funds to stop them 

from putting on an 18 per cent increase on the rates that people 

have to pay in the nursing homes in this year alone, but they’ve 

got funds to pay for an office to be . . . a duplication of an office 

which already exists in New York and the United States. 

 

That is where, Mr. Speaker, they are making the choices which 

are the wrong choices. They’re abusing their positions of 

government and wasting taxpayers’ money. 

 

It is really ironical to have the minister stand in this House and 

talk about trade and the promotion of trade, when they just have 

brought about, in the free trade agreement, the greatest sell-out 

in Canada’s history of our resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — He talks about free trade when they have 

just agreed to, carte blanche, without even knowing the details, 

to the greatest sell-out of Canadian sovereignty and Canada’s 

future through this free trade agreement. 

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3247 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re going to have someone in New York paid 

a high salary to sit there while they have not included in this 

free trade agreement any binding dispute-settlement 

mechanism. So what they have done is that they have created so 

that the United States has complete access to all of our 

resources and energy resources in Canada. They have complete 

access to take over all of our industry because of unrestricted 

investment rights that they now have. 

 

We have given up, and that minister has given up, two-price 

wheat for our farmers, so it’s going to cost them $280 million a 

year. The minister, the former minister of Health, admitted in 

the House today that in this free trade agreement they’ve given 

up the drug patent legislation because that’s part of the deal, but 

there is no guarantee for a market for Canadian and 

Saskatchewan products because there is no binding dispute 

mechanism in place. And he stands up today and says they’re 

going to spend hundreds of thousands of more dollars to station 

somebody in New York — to do what? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the kind of priorities that this government is 

putting into place which are costing people a lot of money and 

which has turned Saskatchewan people against them to the 

point that now they even have had to enlist a television network 

across Saskatchewan which is going to freely provide to the 

Premier free-time political broadcasts without equal right for 

opposition parties to do the same. The public will judge. The 

public will judge on this kind of anti-democratic action by a 

television network and by a government opposite that cared . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Once more I must interrupt the 

speaker, unfortunately, because the interruptions from members 

in this House are simply continuous. Now once more I ask him 

to wrap . . . give him the opportunity to conclude his remarks. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’s finished. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member is concluded. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Uniform Building and 

Accessibility Standards Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 

to amend The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards 

Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

RESOLUTION 

 

Free Trade Agreement 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because of the 

importance of the subject matter, I seek leave of the Assembly 

to move the following resolution: 

 

That this Assembly regrets that the Government of Canada 

has failed to protect the interests of  

Saskatchewan and Canada in its proposed free trade 

agreement with the United States and, in particular, has 

failed to protect Canada’s future as a strong and 

independent nation by failing to ensure Canada’s ability to 

pursue an independent energy strategy for our future, and 

by failing to achieve an effective and binding 

dispute-settlement mechanism to protect Canada’s 

interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I seek leave of the House, I might add for the 

second time on this motion and for the third time on a motion of 

this nature, to discuss free trade. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 34 — An Act to 

amend The Prescription Drugs Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — We all expected, Mr. Speaker, that after 

that stirring address by the member from Weyburn last night at 

10 o’clock, that he would have inspired some of his colleagues 

to get up and defend this. I think one may conclude, Mr. 

Speaker, that the member from Weyburn is the only one who’s 

foolhardy enough to try to defend the indefensible. That’s what 

you have with this Bill, is an indefensible change to 

Saskatchewan’s health program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the drug legislation we had one of the finest 

public health programs that this country had seen. For better or 

for worse, drugs and medicine are an integral part of healing the 

sick in the 20th century. They are used and they are necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you have a health program which doesn’t 

include the right to have prescription drugs, you have a health 

program which is seriously flawed. Drugs and medicine are as 

necessary to health care in 1987 as a doctor is. We may or may 

not like that state of affairs, but that’s what we have. Without 

medicines you don’t have a health program. 

 

(1045) 

 

In, I think it was 1973, I stand to be corrected, but it was the 

first term of office of the last administration, that it was 

recognized, a drug prescription was brought in — I may add, 

over the objection of the right-wing parties at the time, although 

the public was relieved of any attendance by members opposite 

in 1973. 

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3248 

 

We brought in the drug program. It was objected to by members 

opposite with all kinds of wild and silly objections — that it 

was an interference with freedom of the market-place; that 

people would abuse drugs and take them when they didn’t need 

them. What really underlay their objections is a belief, which is 

firmly rooted in members opposite, that health care remains a 

private responsibility — and that states the philosophy of 

members opposite. You believe that health care and payment 

for health care is a private responsibility. 

 

That is what underlay your objections in 1983. Lo and behold, it 

was a very popular program. People were able to get the drugs 

they needed when they needed, whether or not they could afford 

them. It was a public health program which established and 

provided an essential service. Since only prescription drugs 

were paid for, and since they could only be had with the advice 

of a doctor, the opportunity to abuse the program was virtually 

non-existent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that public health program, by and large, no 

longer exists. Once again we see the philosophy of right-wing 

parties that health care should be a private responsibility. That 

means if you can afford to pay for it, if you live on a cabinet 

minister’s salary, it’s a good philosophy. But if you’re not so 

fortunate, if you made the mistake of being elderly, or you 

made the mistake of being physically handicapped, or if 

someone made the mistake of being chronically ill, then they 

can’t afford those drugs and the medicine, and they don’t have a 

health program. And that really is the corollary to their 

philosophy. 

 

If it is to be a private responsibility, then presumably if they 

can’t afford it, that’s their fault. Well, that’s certainly not our 

philosophy. Our philosophy is that we are our brother’s keeper. 

We have a responsibility to ensure that essential services in our 

society and the necessities of life are available to everyone. 

Whether they are rich or poor, whether they are young or old, 

whether they are handicapped or not, and whether or not they 

are chronically ill or healthy, we believe that everyone has the 

right to those necessities. And that’s what a philosophy which 

says that health care is a private responsibility denies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public are not being asked to buy something as 

cheap and routine as a pound of nails. Drugs are expensive — 

very, very expensive. They’re going to get a lot more expensive 

with this free trade sell-out that members opposite are trying to 

foist upon us. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, members opposite, we believe that 

the elderly, the handicapped, the chronically ill should all have 

as good health care as we can provide. We believe that’s a 

social responsibility that we share equally. The member from 

Weyburn said that we are against . . . the members of this side 

are against change. Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you, if change 

means we’ve got $20 million for the likes of Peter Pocklington, 

a quarter of a million dollars for the likes of Weyerhaeuser, and 

nothing for senior citizens to help them pay for their drugs, then 

we’re against that change, and so are the public against the 

change. And if members opposite don’t believe that, then call 

the Saskatoon Eastview  

by-election, and we’ll see how much of this future the public 

want to buy. 

 

It isn’t just the 25 members on this side of the Assembly that 

want to get off this train to the future, it’s the public of 

Saskatchewan that badly want to get off this train to the future. 

And if there are any system of recall in our political system, 

then it’d be used and they’d be out of office. So I say to the 

member for Weyburn, the future which you’re painting, one of 

socialism for the rich and free enterprise for the poor — you 

give everything to the likes of Pocklington and Weyerhaeuser, 

and you’ve got nothing for those who need help — if that’s 

your vision of the future, we want off. The public of 

Saskatchewan want off. Let’s call the Saskatoon Eastview 

by-election and see who wants to get on this train to the future 

with you. 

 

That, I say to the member from Weyburn, is not the future. It’s 

not the future we want, it’s not the future the public want, and 

after the next election we’re going to be moving towards 

different goals and a brighter, more compassionate future in 

which we each look after the other . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Well I can’t say that about the member from Muirhead. I 

don’t recall the last speech he gave. It may be the best or the 

worst, but I can’t say that about you because I don’t recall the 

last speech he gave. It may have been when the minister 

distinguished himself by buying jelly beans and got bounced 

from the cabinet. That may have been your last speech, but it’s 

so many years ago I don’t remember it. So I cannot say the 

same with the member from . . . because I don’t recall the last 

speech he gave. 

 

Well I’m not prepared to concede that the members opposite 

won the election because of the stirring oratory of the member 

from Arm River. Although no doubt it was a major factor, Mr. 

Speaker, major factor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the inherent problems with having people pay for 

their own drugs is exacerbated by the incompetence in the 

administration of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were promised a two-week turnaround time for 

payments, and that’s possible. What we have got, in fact, is a 

two-month turnaround time. Senior citizens in my riding who 

live on 600 bucks a month and pay $300 for drugs — and I 

know of such cases — got to wait two months for their money 

back. If they were getting 100 per cent of the cost back, that 

would be a severe hardship, but they are waiting for two months 

on those funds back. That is just inexcusable. That is absolutely 

inexcusable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes are causing a very real hardship. I 

know one woman who lives on her old age pension, pays 

between 100 and $200 a month for her drugs, has just simply 

run out of money. She’s quit taking the drugs because the 

two-month period it takes for these incompetent louts opposite 

to turn around the money, she just runs out of money and she’s 

quit taking them. And that’s a public health problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was in the drug store the other morning making 

some small purchase. I knew an individual standing behind me. 

He told me that he had gone . . . it was about 9 o’clock in the 

morning, Mr. Speaker. He had come down to pick up his wife’s 

drugs. He checked his  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3249 

 

wallet; he had $50. So he set off on foot — doesn’t drive — set 

off on foot, about a block and a half. Got to the drug store; the 

bill was $75. Had to walk down to the bank, get some more 

money and come back — that, on an income of around $600 a 

month. That’s a hardship. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s not possible. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — That is possible and it happens. And if the 

member from Melville doesn’t believe it, then you might spend 

a little less time insulting people here in Regina and go back to 

your riding and listen to some of them, because that happens. I 

say to the member from Melville, if you wanted that appeal 

system to work for those drugs, you would give us the 

application forms; you won’t provide and information. If you 

wanted that system to be fair and to work, you’d structure it 

differently. The fact that you won’t give us applications means 

that you want to make it as difficult as possible for people to 

appeal. 

 

And you won’t give us answers either on what the rate of 

granting appeals has been. My experience has been it is 

extremely low, because people that I think are experiencing a 

real hardship, the $600 a month income who pays a $100 a 

month for drugs and waits two months for the money to come 

back, and waits . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, and waits 

two months for the money to come back, that, that is a very real 

hardship. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, the member from Melville, who is so 

overwrought with wisdom on the subject, exuding compassion, 

and has exhibited such a love of his fellow men, will want to 

get into this debate and tell us how this system operates to the 

benefit of the public of Saskatchewan. So I know, Mr. Speaker, 

that when I sit down the member from Melville will spring to 

his feet like a jack-rabbit and will give us a stirring and 

informative speech on how well this program works. I know 

that he will not want to speak just from his seat — I know that, 

I know that. 

 

So I say to the member from Melville, if you want to be patient 

you will have the opportunity to explain it all to us. Mr. 

Speaker, the problem with respect to the drug plan is going to 

be aggravated by the federal legislation on drugs and the free 

trade agreement. The free trade agreement provides, as you will 

know, Mr. Speaker, for international protection of intellectual 

property, so-called. In terms of drugs, that means that the 

patents in the U.S. will be recognized; their law with respect to 

patents will be recognized in Canada. It will mean . . . the 

free-trade agreement means a virtual end to generic drugs and 

an important industry in this country. 

 

We don’t have a major drug-development company. We do 

have an important industry in generic drugs. It’s our industry in 

Canada; we’ve developed it, and it’s been fairly successful. 

We’re going to lose it; we’re going to lose those jobs. And I 

think more directly to the public of Saskatchewan, we’re going 

to lose the generic drugs, and the cost is going to go up. It is 

going to go very, very substantially. So this program and the 

mistakes which you people are making is going to be 

aggravated by the  

federal drug patent legislation and the free trade agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that members opposite want an 

opportunity to consider their position, to consider what they’ve 

done. I know they’ll want an opportunity to discuss the matter 

with their constituents, visit the odd drug store in their riding 

and talk to people who are paying for drugs. I therefore move 

that this debate be adjourned. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I say to members opposite, you’ve picked a 

strange piece of legislation to ram through this legislature. I say 

to members opposite that I would be . . . and I ask anyone else 

would be hard put to pick a more unpopular piece of legislation. 

You picked your most unpopular piece of legislation to ram 

through the legislature — that’s a strange tactic. And if you 

don’t think this is the most unpopular thing you’ve done since 

1982, then I say to you, you’ve spent far too long in this 

Legislative Assembly; you need to get back on weekends to 

your riding; start listening to some of the people who elect you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite who are reading newspapers 

might want to . . . the member from Weyburn who’s engrossed 

in the comics might want to look up for a moment and listen to 

the reasons why we are pursuing this debate and why we have 

pursued it through five days. It may be that there’s not a whole 

lot that’s new that’s left to say. But we want to give voice to the 

outrage which Saskatchewan people feel with respect to the 

abolition of the drug program. 

 

We want to speak for them, we want to express that outrage, 

and we want go give vent to it. The public are furious that a 

good program which was affordable, which forms an essential 

part of our health care system has suddenly been privatized, has 

suddenly meant they’ve got to pay for their own drugs. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, and members opposite, I say to you that the day 

has passed when the public believe that health care should be a 

private responsibility, when people who are elderly or 

chronically ill or handicapped should be penalized because 

that’s their condition. 

 

If members opposite don’t believe that this program penalizes 

people who are elderly, handicapped, chronically ill, or in 

indigent circumstances, then you’ve spent too long in this 

Assembly, too little time in your riding, and your salaries are 

too high. 

 

Because if members opposite believe that on a minimum wage 

which is about $700 a month, or a full pension with supplement 

which is about $600 a month, if members opposite believe that 

a drug bill of $100 a month . . . and that doesn’t buy you many 

drugs. You don’t need a big pocket to put $100 worth of drugs 

in; indeed you can generally get it in your shirt pocket if that’s 

the only one you’ve got. People of this province had no idea 

how expensive drugs were until after this legislation came into  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3250 

 

being. 

 

If you think a drug bill, if members opposite think a drug bill of 

$100 a month isn’t a hardship to someone who’s on minimum 

wage and making $700 a month, or isn’t a hardship to senior 

citizens who get the supplement and the old age pension — I 

think that’s around $600 a month now — then you are out of 

touch. You’re out of touch with what people are feeling and 

thinking. I say to members opposite, in this business there’s two 

short steps: you’re out of touch and then you’re out of office. 

 

And if you don’t start listening to what people are saying, if you 

continue to assume that you know best, if you continue to 

assume that your future, the one you paint of socialism and 

public assistance for Pocklington and Weyerhaeuser is right, 

and cutting back health programs and programs which assist 

low income people is also right. If you continue to insist that’s 

the future, and that’s the future you’re taking them to, then 

you’re not going to survive the next election and there aren’t 

going to be very many of them around. 

 

And you’re going to get your own opportunity to see how you 

structure question period . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 

member from Canora is wondering what I’m worried about. I’m 

worried about constituents in my riding who cannot afford these 

drugs. They just don’t have the money, and they wind up giving 

away their drugs. I apologize, I wrongly named the member 

from Canora, sorry, I apologize for that. I say to the member 

who spoke that those kinds of people exist in my riding, they 

cannot pay for their drugs; they are doing without. That’s 

caused by the high cost of drugs and that is caused also by the 

incompetence of this administration in being unable to meet the 

payments. 

 

And I invite some of these members opposite who don’t believe 

that to spend Saturday morning in your local drug store and 

shake hands with the people who come in. You’re not going to 

wear out your gloves, because a whole lot of people that come 

in are not going to shake your hand when they’ve got to pay for 

those drugs. 

 

I was talking to a woman this morning who is young, living on 

a relatively modest income, who had a infection in her ear. She 

has children. She went to the medical clinic, the doctor 

prescribed a drug. I assume it was an antibiotic. I don’t know. 

She went to get it — this was all at 8 o’clock last night when 

the infection hit her ear. She went to the drug store. They 

wanted $30, she didn’t have $30. It might as well have been 

3,000, she didn’t have it, had no way of getting it. She went 

without the drug. 

 

I saw her this morning. Her ear was still swollen up. She’d gone 

home, she found some other antibiotics that a doctor prescribed 

for a different illness and started to take them. I am sure the 

doctor would be horrified if he knew that, but that was her only 

option. She had an infected ear which you could visibly see. 

She went to the doctor. The doctor prescribed the drug which 

would cure it. She went to the drug store; they wanted 30 bucks. 

She didn’t have it, couldn’t get it. As I say, it might as well 

have been 3,000 bucks. She just didn’t have it. She’s still got 

the infected ear this morning, and no drugs. 

If members opposite don’t think this is happening, I’ll take you 

on a tour of my riding. I say to members opposite, I’ll make you 

a deal. If you don’t think this is happening, I will arrange for a 

tour of my riding, and I will show you what a drug bill of even 

$30 means to a person who lives on a minimum wage and 

doesn’t have the 30 bucks. It means you do without drugs. 

 

When we have a health system such as we do, which is heavily 

dependent on drugs for curing illnesses, that means you don’t 

have a health care system. There was nothing the doctor could 

do except prescribe the drugs, no other alternative. He did. She 

didn’t have the drugs and she’s still got an infected ear. And 

that’s what your program means. 

 

And it does not just mean that in Regina Centre. It means that 

that’s also happening in Arm River. That’s happening in Morse 

and it’s happening in Melville. It’s happening in Melfort, it’s 

happening in Canora — all of your ridings. And it’s happening 

in Arm River. 

 

And if you don’t believe it’s happening, go and stand in the 

drug store on Saturday morning. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I challenge you to come to Arm River. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I’ll make the member from Arm River a 

deal. I will come to Arm River if you will come to Regina 

Centre. I will . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All right. All right, 

we’ll do that. 

 

The member from Arm River will see what this drug program is 

doing. It’s causing some very real hardship. It’s meaning people 

are not getting the medical treatment they need, illnesses and 

infections are going untreated. The clock is being turned back. 

 

And that’s, Mr. Speaker, what happens if you believe that 

health care is a private responsibility. It means that if you’ve 

got the bucks, you’ve got health care; if you don’t, you live 

with the infected ear. 

 

I say to members opposite, if you don’t reconsider this, if you 

continue to ram this thing through, you’re going to pay a very 

heavy price. This is just simply not acceptable in Saskatchewan 

in 1987. I say to members opposite — I’m going to conclude in 

a moment — but I say to members opposite that this just simply 

will not work. In terms of public health it doesn’t work. 

Illnesses are going untreated. In terms of politics it doesn’t 

work. It isn’t acceptable; it isn’t working. Abandon it and go 

back and try to put together the pieces of one of the best public 

health programs that this country saw. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

believe it is very important also to get into this debate. This Bill 

has serious, serious implications for the people of this province 

despite what members opposite may say. Dismantling a drug 

plan, a program that has helped the people of this province for 

many years, paid for by  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3251 

 

everyone, paid for by natural resources, and used when 

necessary by the sick. And now this government wants to take 

that away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is a betrayal, another betrayal to the people of 

this province — betrayed on a number of issues like taxes, like 

the waiting lists, and it goes on and on. And I ask them why? 

Why bring forward this Bill and betray the people of this 

province? Do they not know what the problem is? Do they not 

know what the people are saying? 

 

They’re taking money into the government and they spend 

money out of the government. And where do they get the 

money from? With this Bill they get it from the sick, many of 

whom are elderly people in this province who need a constant 

supply of drugs to maintain their health and their activities. 

Attacks on the sick — taking money from the people who can 

least afford it, the sick people and the elderly, into the 

government’s coffers, and paying that same money out in 

patronage appointments. Mr. Speaker, to me that’s disgusting 

— taking money from people who are sick and paying George 

Hill $200,000 a year. What kind of irrational logic is that? 

 

The Premier of this province says he had a commitment to 

health care. Some commitment! Some commitment to the 

health care of this province, to the people who are sick, by 

making them pay when they cannot afford it, many of them. His 

commitment, Mr. Speaker, I maintain, was in a secret hidden 

agenda formulated behind the famous closed cabinet doors. A 

hidden tax, another hidden tax — that’s the secret agenda. Keep 

taxing the people, keep on drawing money out of those who 

can’t afford it, and pay off Tory hacks. What kind of misplaced 

judgement is that? 

 

He’s chipping away, the Premier of this province through his 

Minister of Health is chipping away at the social fabric of this 

province. Taking away the prescription drug plan is a prime 

example. You cannot treat people as though they aren’t there or 

don’t exist. And that’s what this Tory government is doing and 

the members opposite, trying to believe that the people out there 

will just carry on, will just keep going despite what they’re 

doing. The attitude of this government is that, well, the people 

are so far down now they won’t talk back. The old 

marshmallow theory — you step on them and they don’t make a 

sound. That’s the attitude of this government. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, to some degree they are right. 

Because when people have been beat upon time and time again, 

like they have been, as we witness with this drug Bill, time and 

time again when they go and cast their ballot expecting 

something better and get trodden down up, after a while they 

become very complacent. It’s happened in Saskatchewan under 

the direction of this Premier. It’s happened in Ottawa under the 

Prime Ministership of Brian Mulroney. Coming down on the 

heads of people time and time again, making people believe 

they’re important in society in rhetoric, all the while betraying 

them, making them pay, and still all the while paying off 

high-priced help for the government, high-priced patronage 

appointments. That, Mr. Minister, in my judgement, is 

disgusting. But that is the Premier’s and Minister’s of Health 

commitment to health care. 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have listened to stories from many of the seniors 

of this province as I go around, and health care is a very high 

priority with them because they came through the time when 

there was not medicare, and before prescription drugs and 

hearing aid plans. They came through the time where, as one 

fellow told me, his mother fell and broke her arm, many years 

ago, and she sat for one week with a broken arm because they 

didn’t have the money to have it set by the doctor. They had to 

go through the process of selling some animals or something to 

pay the doctor. 

 

We’ve come from that. This province has built up a structure 

whereby that should no longer happen. Or another story where 

when he was a young boy his sister had an appendix attack, 

very serious in those days, as it is now, except the difference 

was then they had no money to pay the doctor. And I forget 

what happened to the sister, got somehow to the doctor and 

healed, or died or what, I don’t know. But the point is the 

suffering that went on then. 

 

And this government through this hospital plans, the medicare 

plan, has wiped that out. They’ve given the people equal 

opportunity to health care, equal access to a hospital when they 

need it, and reduced the suffering of the people of this province. 

 

And now what direction are we going, Mr. Speaker? We’re 

putting the machine in reverse. Again we hear story after story, 

denied by members opposite that there’s a problem, of people 

who cannot afford to buy drugs and they’re suffering because of 

it. We have put the machine in reverse when we’ve come from 

. . . we’ve seen the history and we’ve come from suffering and 

hardships, built up the structure, and now we dismantle it, going 

back to the point where people again are suffering because of 

Bill 34, the prescription drug plan. 

 

That is why this government must be stopped. That is just one 

example, Mr. Speaker, of why this government must be 

stopped. There are many, many more. We have, as I’ve said, 

stories of people suffering, can’t afford their drugs. 

 

And let me take it one step further. What is the result? I had a 

fellow in my constituency tell me, with a heart problem, that he 

decided he couldn’t afford the drugs so he was going to stop 

taking them. Can you imagine that — being put in a situation 

where you know your life was at stake and you had to make a 

decision whether or not you were going to take your drugs 

because you didn’t have the money? 

 

And with people in that case, in that situation, we know what 

happens. They get sick and they end up in hospital. That does 

two things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they get sick and they end up 

in hospital. 

 

First of all, has this government ever computed the cost of 

keeping a person in hospital, from getting sick because he 

couldn’t afford his drug bills, to what it would cost to pay him, 

to give him the drugs for years to come. And secondly, it 

overloads the hospital system even more,  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3252 

 

making the waiting lists longer because there’s only so many 

beds, because a lot of them are closed down. 

 

So we’re not just affecting one person. We’re affecting the 

person who had to go to hospital because he couldn’t afford his 

drugs; we’re affecting the person who is waiting possibly for a 

hip operation and in dire pain because his hip joint needs 

replacing, keeping him out of the hospital, making him suffer 

more. And I can also add to that the stress that the staff of these 

hospitals are under, the mental stress that they are under, nurses 

suffering burn-out. 

 

Where, I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the logic of this 

government? Why do they not go out to their constituencies and 

ask the people? Why do we have thousands and thousands and 

thousands and thousands of names on petitions if there’s no 

problem? And why do people have to suffer? 

 

Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, rather, I’ve heard last 

night . . . unfortunately I heard last night the speech from the 

member from Weyburn, or part of it. I give him credit. He stood 

up and tried to defend . . . I don’t see anyone else up when they 

get a chance. But he was saying about the responsibility of 

government, and we had to look at the health costs are spiring, 

and we have to manage this province to the best capabilities of 

the government and for the best response to the people; that’s 

what he was saying — we have to be responsible, we have to be 

good managers. And the economy is down right now, and the 

province is short of money, and we have to do these types of 

restraint measures. 

 

Well I ask the member opposite — when we’re talking about 

management, management of this government by the Premier 

supposedly, we can only get money from so many sources in 

this province, and natural resources is the big one, and taxes — 

where was this government in 1986 when oil prices were 

pushing $40 a barrel? Where were they? 

 

In 1982, Mr. Speaker, when we finished being government, we 

had about over half of the dollars from oil that came out of the 

ground kept in this province for the people of this province. 

And we didn’t have the suffering we do now. 

 

A year or so ago the dollars were greatly increased from oil that 

came out of the ground. And how much did this province keep? 

About one-quarter of it. And all of a sudden, we have a crisis; 

we don’t have any money. I wonder why. That’s what I call bad 

management. That’s not only bad management, it is a sign of a 

government and a Premier who was unable to manage the 

affairs of this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so we have this drug plan Bill where the 

people have to . . . they’re privatizing the drug business, drugs 

for people. And what does the Premier tell the Minister of 

Health to do? To duck. He says, better put a panel out there. 

 

First of all members opposite are saying, well in my 

constituency there’s no people calling me. If there’s no big 

problem, why do we have a panel to handle all the cases of 

people in hardship — direct contradictory, isn’t  

it, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

Anyway the Premier guides the Minister of Health: I have an 

idea; put a panel out there and duck the flak. Because I would 

suggest, that his motive was, we can’t stand any more flak, 

because we’re so low in the poles. Let the panel take the heat. 

 

And what do we see? We have a panel to review cases, but we 

can’t get the application forms. We’ve asked members opposite 

to supply our offices with application forms. No. And why not? 

I say the reason why not is because they are not concerned. 

They’re not concerned about the people of this province. They 

are only concerned with power. That’s the key, Mr. Speaker — 

power. This prescription drug plan comes to us from a 

government concerned with power, hitting on people who are 

sick and the elderly. And they’re trying to dodge the issue; they 

won’t stand up and defend it. 

 

The Minister of Health gave us a devastating two and a half 

minute speech. They know they’re in trouble, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They know the problem is the Premier of this province 

and whoever supplies him with information — incapable of 

making the right decisions. 

 

This is a basic attack on our health care system, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and it is appalling. We see it in the drug plan, we see it 

in the dental plan, we see it with the waiting lists at hospitals, 

breaking down the entire system that’s been built up by the 

people of this province and the governments of this province for 

the benefit of the people and totally dismantling it. 

 

Again I challenge the members opposite to stand and defend 

this policy. But I understand why they don’t. I understand why 

they don’t because I don’t think the there would be anybody, 

except the member for Weyburn, who would be capable of 

standing up and trying to defend a policy that threatens the lives 

of people — how crass. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, we’ve seen it in the drug plan, 

the dental plan, the waiting lists, the SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids 

to Independent Living) program and the hearing aid plan — all 

the building being cut down. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these people said they were reliable, 

in all their campaign material. I know this has been said once or 

twice before, but it is so very, very important. We have seen the 

campaign material from members opposite, listing the great 

things the Tory party was going to do. How many of those 

campaign promises were kept, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And this is a very, very good example. I have here an important 

notice to all senior citizens — important notice to all senior 

citizens: 

 

A Progressive Conservative government will (first thing 

on the list) eliminate dispensing fees on all drugs 

prescribed for senior citizens. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Read it again. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Eliminating dispensing fees on all drugs  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3253 

 

prescribed for senior citizens. That’s what this government was 

saying, putting on paper, spreading around the province to get 

people to vote for them. 

 

Continue medicare at no extra cost and upgrade health 

care in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s what this government was saying to get elected. And 

what have they done? They have done precisely the opposite — 

precisely the opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I just want to 

say this: we, the people of Saskatchewan, throughout the years 

have fought many, many battles to improve our whole system. 

We’ve won many, many battles and we have improved our 

system. But the battle goes on. 

 

Unfortunately there’s a bit of a difference. In the past, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the battle was with companies, large 

corporations, or whoever it was, trying to gouge the people. So 

the governments of the day and the people banded together and 

went and won victories to improve Saskatchewan, to improve 

health care. 

 

(1130) 

 

And now we have another battle. The people of this province 

have another battle. But the battle is not with companies, the 

battle is with the government. Can you imagine that? People 

having to battle their own government that they elected on 

promises of improving health care, eliminating dispensing fees 

for drugs. And now they have to turn around and battle them to 

keep themselves alive in this province. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, I say this. We are in this battle with this 

government. The people of Saskatchewan and the members on 

this side of the House are in a battle with the Tory government 

of this province. And let me tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

will guarantee you that we will win that battle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Together the people of Saskatchewan will 

again share equality in health care some day. We will rebuild 

what once was the best medical care system in North America, 

the envy of the world. Together the people of this province and 

the New Democratic caucus on this side of the House, and the 

party, will overthrow the government and return the province to 

competence, compassion, credibility and, most important, 

common sense. 

 

We will improve the basic services to the people of this 

province, despite what this government may do in the next three 

years or three and a half years in office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province also, leading this 

government, is the number one person that we must focus our 

concentrated attack on, the person leading the Tory government 

opposite allowing — being involved in decision making in 

political campaigns — allowing, telling everybody to put this 

propaganda out there. He not only betrayed the people, he 

betrayed his own caucus members by allowing this material to 

be put forth. How can he be trusted? 

How can we trust a Premier of this province who, through his 

policy-making decisions, says he’s going to eliminate drug 

dispensing fees as one of many, many examples. How can we 

trust a Premier who says he’s going to do this, and turns around 

and does completely the opposite? And that is what the people 

of this province see, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They see the mistrust, 

the mixed priorities. 

 

They see the lust for power that this Premier has, and it’s just 

been witnessed yesterday with the announcement that he is 

being pulled out of the gutter by the Baton broadcasting system. 

The reason is power. The reason is power, because this network 

works with the Tory party. They’re all one together. 

 

And they need power to maintain control in this province. So 

what do we see? A prescription drug Bill, people revolting by 

petition and by phone call, government going down in the polls 

because of its incompetence and the lack of credibility of the 

Premier. And what do we see? A Tory machine coming in to try 

to pull the power back together because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

it’s power, not people that the people of this province and this 

country are concerned about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen with this 

drug Bill an increased cost in our medicine. But I can tell you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I can tell the members opposite and 

the people of this province, that the most expensive medicine is 

not prescribed by a doctor. The most expensive medicine is not 

bought at the pharmacy. The most expensive medicine that the 

people of this province have to swallow is Tory medicine. That 

is so expensive from the taxes and the cuts and everything else 

that is being drawn out of the pocket-books of the people of 

Saskatchewan that it is far, far beyond even what we’re talking 

about today with this prescription drug plan. 

 

Tory medicine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is expensive medicine. 

Tory medicine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is tough medicine. Tory 

medicine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is hard to swallow. The 

medicine that this Tory government is forcing down the throats 

of people of Saskatchewan today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, gives 

them a headache because they cannot stand the consequences 

that they are being put in. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Tory medicine gives people 

stomach-aches because they are so uptight with knowing what 

to do in this province because of things like the prescription 

drug Bill. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say Tory medicine is a drug of 

depression. Tory medicine is putting the people of this province 

into a state of mind that is depressing. 

 

And what do the members opposite over there say? They had 

three calls in my constituency — no problem. Where are the 

misplaced priorities? Where is the desire to help the people? 

 

Oh yes, the Premier says — I have it here somewhere — there’s 

so much more we can be, in some of the campaign  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3254 

 

material. There’s so much more we can be. And being 

optimistic people from Saskatchewan like our history has 

shown, maybe people say, yes, maybe there is more we can be. 

But the hidden agenda means, we can be poor; we can be sick 

without medicine; we can be sick without a hospital bed; we 

can have rotten teeth and expensive dentists to go to. There’s so 

much more we can be. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the woman from Regina, an 

asthma sufferer who says that her prescription drug plan will 

actually exceed her income, I wonder if she thought that there 

was so much more that she could be under the Tory government 

— I’ll bet she did. I wonder if the Esterhazy couple whose son 

is house-bound with chronic asthma thought there was so much 

more better they can be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government and this Bill upset me so much 

and I get so wrapped up in it, I make the odd little mistake, and 

that’s what they pick up on. Because they can’t defend the drug 

plan, all they can criticize is a little slip of the tongue. 

 

But I wonder if these people, where the family struggles to pay 

$1,700 for child drugs, I wonder if they thought there was so 

much more they could be — I’m sure they did. And what has 

happened to their expectations? Expecting elimination of 

dispensing fees for seniors, those people were expecting 

continued medicare at no extra cost. Obviously, if you could 

believe these people, you’d expect more. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier of this province and this 

Tory government cannot be believed, and we’ve seen it time 

and time again with every policy and program that’s come out. 

So what do we do? 

 

We must, as people of this province, stand up, stand up — and 

they are. There’s not very many vehicles that people in this 

province have to express — because they’ve been pushed down 

and ignored — to express themselves. But a petition is one way 

they can do that. 

 

Many people feel embarrassed or a little shy to write a letter to 

a cabinet minister or to the Premier or to make a phone call 

because they feel intimidated. And no wonder, with the 

arrogance of this government, that they would feel intimidated. 

But a petition is one way that they can express their feelings, 

one way that they can tell this government how they feel, tell 

them the mistakes they’re making, and how hard they’re being 

on the people. 

 

And the people have done that. We have seen the petitions 

coming into this legislature, thousands and thousands of names; 

people resisting the demise of our health system. And I think 

we’ll carry that on a little further. The people will resist not 

only the demise of the health system, the people will remember 

how this Tory government treated them in year one, when in 

year four of the last campaign they were giving them the world. 

 

People will not forget, and I remind members opposite of that, 

even though they are being convinced by the Premier of this 

province that voters don’t forget. They may forget some things, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they will not forget the incompetent 

government that has bestowed  

hardship upon them — sick people paying taxes, sick people 

unable to afford their drugs — they will not forget that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — And this government knows that. And this is 

the attitude that I hear out in the country. You know I’ve been 

told these guys know they’re not going to get elected so they’re 

just going to go out and wreck everything that the New 

Democratic government has done in this province to build it up 

this high. They’re just going to go out there and wreck it just 

because of spite, just because they know they can’t manage, and 

they’re done. That’s what the people are saying. 

 

And they’re saying that because of what they’re seeing. They’re 

not making these things up. They’re saying that because they 

see the prescription drug plan; they’re saying that because they 

see the dental nurses gone; the waiting lists in the hospital; their 

taxes going up when it was promised they weren’t going to 

have higher taxes; promised they weren’t going to have to pay 

fuel tax. That’s why the people of this province are saying what 

they’re saying. 

 

They’re saying the Tory government is taking an ideological 

path of destruction through this province simply because they 

don’t want to see the NDP, in a short period of time after 

they’re elected, build it up. That’s their strategy. They think 

that, we’ve lost the next one; the people in four years will say 

that . . . It’ll be down so low the people will say, well the New 

Democrats can’t do it either. That’s their strategy. And that’s 

what the people are saying. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I tell you, the people are probably 

right and this government will be gone in the next election, and 

it’ll not be gone for four years like they suspect. That’s going to 

be the mistake. It’ll be gone for a good many, many years. 

 

So in conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just like to say, 

because of all the points that I have made tonight . . . today, 

because of all the people in this province who are protesting this 

change to this drug Bill and many other Acts of this government 

— and I agree with the people — because of the incompetent 

Premier that we have in this province who couldn’t manage a 

three-house paper route, the people of this province will rise up 

and put down the oppressors. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I paused for a minute before I rose, to give the 

members on the government side an opportunity to rise in 

defence of this Bill. I notice that nobody from the other side, 

with one exception, Mr. Speaker, with one exception — that 

was the Minister of Education, the member from Weyburn, who 

got up last day and feebly tried to defend a Bill which really 

begins the desecration of medicare in Saskatchewan, the drug 

Bill, Bill 34, which imposes fees, deterrent fees, on those 

people who have to use prescription drugs. 

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3255 

 

(1145) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s a sad commentary on the state 

of PC thinking, and I believe it’s a sad commentary on the state 

of the Minister of Health’s thinking, and more importantly I 

think it’s a sad state on the . . . a sad commentary on the 

Premier’s thinking, when they have to introduce a Bill which is 

so counter to the direction that the people of Saskatchewan 

want this province to go. 

 

This Bill is right now being criticized around the province by 

people of all ages, Mr. Speaker, by people in all walks of life, 

and by people of all parties: yes — by New Democrats, by 

Liberals, and by Conservatives. And it should be criticized, Mr. 

Speaker, because it’s a step backward. 

 

By introducing this Bill, the government and this Premier have 

given us a clear indication of his government’s priorities, and 

they give us a clear indication of the direction in which they 

want to go. And this Bill, I say, because of that direction which 

they have now indicated, will stand as a monument pointing to 

the defeat of the present government. 

 

Let’s find out what it is exactly that this prescription drug Bill 

will do, this Bill 34. I say, Mr. Speaker, that it erodes the 

medical care system that we have had here in Saskatchewan by 

imposing a deterrent fee on drugs. 

 

What used to be the case, Mr. Speaker, what used to be the 

case? When we got a prescription signed by our doctor in the 

past, we would go to a drug store and we would pay for the 

dispensing fee of $3.95. Regardless of how many drugs we had, 

it was a system which made drugs accessible, prescription drugs 

accessible to all members of our communities in Saskatchewan, 

whether . . . and it certainly did not have any deterrent on it. It 

was a vast improvement on what we were used to; it was a very 

progressive move, and the people felt that it was a progressive 

move to have this plan in place, just like they were proud of the 

school dental plan which we had in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we in Saskatchewan, I’ve said, were proud of that plan 

because it fit in with a very practical program of medicare and 

of dental care that was being modelled across this nation first 

and then across other parts of the globe. 

 

And those people who took part in the forming of medicare — 

like Tommy Douglas, Allan Blakeney, and Mr. Lloyd, 

Woodrow Lloyd — deserve credit for that. And indeed, the 

government, starting with the early ’50s and moving on into the 

’70s, the governments who showed slow but steady 

improvement, continually got credit for that. 

 

And we were looking towards total health care, a system which 

would give us total health care, right from childhood to the 

grave, and in all aspects, including chiropractic care, including 

the home care program, including the dental care program, and 

certainly including prescription drugs. 

 

Now what is it now, Mr. Speaker? Originally the program,  

until July 1, until this government came in with this retrograde 

legislation, until then, you had to pay $3.95 per prescription. 

And how what do you do? Well you pay for everything up 

front. If you or I have a prescription, we have to pay for 

everything up front. 

 

And we don’t necessarily get it back. It just depends on how 

much we have to spend. Because for the period July 1, ’87 to 

December 31, ’87 — and I’m reading right from a document 

which was given to the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 

Association as they were advising them of the new system, of 

the new scheme — anybody that came to the drug store would 

have to put up, for that half a year period, $62.50 on the basis of 

a family. 

 

And starting on January 1, over the year it’s going to cost, not 

62.50, but $125 for every family — 125. If you happen to be a 

senior citizen, then from July 1 until December 31 would cost 

them 37.50, and now next year it’ll be going up to $75 up front. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, if there was a single senior citizen, right 

now it’s costing $25 or, for the next year, $50. But I remind you 

that they have to pay everything up front. And once they go 

over these sums that I mentioned, once it costs them over $125 

per family, then, Mr. Speaker, you have to keep the bills. You 

have to keep the bills, and then you send in the bill to the 

government, and the government in its good graces reimburses 

you up to 80 per cent, depending on their schedule. Now that’s 

quite a contrast, Mr. Speaker, quite a contrast. So it ends up 

costing you $125 per family plus 20 per cent, and that is why I 

call this a deterrent fee. 

 

It is particularly hard, Mr. Speaker, on those people, and there 

are quite a few, who have to pay hundreds of dollars a year for 

prescription drugs, and those very few, but there are many of 

them that are affected, that have to put up as much as thousands 

of dollars up front for prescription drugs. So I say, Mr. Speaker, 

that this amounts to a deterrent fee. Now only does it do that, 

but it shifts the burden of the cost from the average taxpayer, 

from every one of us when we are well, to only those who are 

sick. 

 

When it becomes a deterrent fee, when you put this in, what is 

the effect? When you put on any deterrent fee, it is most likely 

the people will not use the plan as much, will not use the drugs 

as much. And my colleagues have attested and gave testimony 

to that kind of a scenario already. A deterrent fee is a cost 

disincentive. Maybe if we put the price up high enough nobody 

will buy it; nobody will abuse the system. 

 

And a deterrent fee does another thing. It assumes abuse of the 

system. And that is what the government is doing — assuming 

that there are people in Saskatchewan who are abusing the 

system. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I will tell you that this deterrent fee system 

was tried once before in Saskatchewan in the field of health. 

And it was the Liberal government of Ross Thatcher and Davey 

Steuart who had set up a deterrent fee back in the ’60s. They set 

up a deterrent fee on health care. Now that deterrent fee was so 

hated by the people of Saskatchewan at that time that they gave 

the government, that government of Thatcher and Davey 

Steuart, they  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3256 

 

gave that government a resounding lesson. They gave them the 

message the only way that they could, and that was they booted 

them out of government. And that’s what I say is going to 

happen to this particular government. You will also get booted 

out of government because of the introduction of this Bill. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that eroding medicare is the Achilles heel of 

this particular government, because that’s exactly what it does. 

It erodes medicare. It denies accessibility to those who are poor 

and those who are on limited income. 

 

Last winter, Mr. Speaker, I was in attendance of a 25th 

anniversary celebration of medicare in my home town of Prince 

Albert. And there we had as a guest speaker, Justice Emmett 

Hall, and he addressed and gave a brief outline of the history of 

medicare, indicating how it had helped, how it was started in 

Saskatchewan, and how proud he felt to be a part of it. And we 

all know Judge Emmett Hall as being a man that is respected 

around — not only in Saskatchewan, but in Canada, on the 

continent, and around the world. And he ended in his speech — 

and I would paraphrase the sentence that he ended with, and it 

was something like this. He says, no government dares to attack 

medicare because it knows it will never be re-elected. Well it’s 

quite obvious, Mr. Speaker, that there are some members 

opposite who did not take that lesson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this deterrent fee, this deterrent fee of $125, plus 

20 per cent of anything else that you have to pay, that you have 

to pay when you buy prescription drugs, I say is a tax on the 

sick. And when it’s a tax on the sick . . . and it also is very 

representative of a broken promise, of a series of broken 

promises by this government. 

 

What I’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is gone through, gone through 

some literature that these members opposite have put out in the 

past, have put out when they were trying to get elected to this 

government. The members opposite . . . It wasn’t only the 

broken promise of the health care, Mr. Speaker, it was also 

broken promises on the education tax, the flat tax, and now the 

new 7 cent-a-litre tax. But let’s concentrate for the moment on 

health tax. 

 

Here I have before me, and I read from a copy of a pamphlet 

from the member from Rosetown-Elrose. And in his election 

platform — big notes — he’s got here: 

 

The commitments of the new PC government is: eliminate 

the 5 per cent sales tax on clothing and utility bills, (and 

then beside that, he’s got) revitalize and improve health 

care. 

 

I wonder how the members, the citizens from his particular 

constituency will react when they themselves see that this 

promise was now broken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the member from Redberry who in his 

literature wrote, and I quote: 

 

The PCs certainly won’t make any cuts in spending on 

medicare. They will increase medicare funding. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the member from Redberry 

was sincere when he said that. And I believe that this Bill puts 

him in a very unfortunate position because now he’s in a 

position where he has to either stand good behind his word and 

stand up to the Premier who’s forcing him to vote on this Bill, 

or he’s going to have to lose the respect of his constituents and 

vote with the Premier. I wonder which way he’ll go. I wonder 

which he’ll choose. And then when he chooses one or the other, 

what will he tell those good people in Rabbit Lake and Speers 

and Richard and Keatley and Ruddell? What’ll he tell them? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that I felt very strongly that this 

was a message that was not coming specifically from the 

member from Redberry Lake. I feel he was put in that position 

by the Premier. The Premier who we recall in 1982 used the 

same tactics of getting the public enthused as Jimmy Bakker 

does. And he used his four-finger salute. We all remember that 

very well. He said that he says what stands first is God, then his 

family, then the PC party. And then he said, the NDP under his 

thumbs — and then he said the NDP under his thumbs. 

 

And now after these broken promises I wonder how the people 

feel about that. Because he’s not putting the NDP under his 

thumbs, he is putting the people of Saskatchewan and medicare 

under his thumbs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — For that he will pay the ultimate price, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have before me here, and I will quote from some 

literature that was part of a campaign from the member from the 

Saltcoats constituency. And the headline that he has here, it 

says, “Time for a change.” He says, “A PC government will 

. . .” And then if you go down the line, he first of all talks about 

reducing provincial income tax — one broken promise. 

Eliminating the sales tax, 5 per cent, he says — another broken 

promise. 

 

And then we go down to the one we’re talking about today. 

“The PC government will extend drug plan coverage,” it says. 

Extend it, a plan to include all prescription drugs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this member by voting on this Bill, in favour 

of this Bill, will make this campaign promise once again show 

that the Tories cannot be trusted. 

 

The member who ran for Regina Wascana, Mr. Speaker, right 

here in Regina when he was running, sent out a note, a notice of 

. . . and it’s labelled “Important notice to all senior citizens.” It 

says: 

 

A Progressive Conservative government will eliminate 

dispensing fees on all drugs prescribed for senior citizens. 

 

(1200) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as you go through one by one and look at 

these promises and then you see the Bill, what Bill 34 does it 

puts on a fee, a deterrent fee on prescription drugs.  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3257 

 

You wonder whether these members can be trusted, and you 

wonder whether the Premier, whether he can be trusted. 

 

The member for Morse had a very similar campaign . . . had 

something very similar in his campaign literature, Mr. Speaker. 

He says: 

 

PCs have an awareness for the people in the province. 

 

And under that, he’s got: 

 

Expand drug plan to include all prescription drugs. 

 

Well it makes me sad to have to read these, Mr. Speaker, but 

these are not made up; nobody’s making these up. These are 

things that were made up by members opposite. And the people 

of Saskatchewan are aware of it. 

 

I have here some campaign literature. It was authorized by the 

member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, by the Progressive 

Conservative association of Last Mountain-Touchwood on 

behalf of the member. And he’s got an entire paragraph here 

about, revitalize and improve health care. And he says: 

 

A new PC government will place great emphasis on 

improving the delivery of health services by providing 

more adequate financing to our hospitals, by avoiding 

waste and duplication between the Departments of Health 

and Social Services by expanding the drug plan. 

 

Member after member after member, Mr. Speaker. Here we 

have exactly the same paragraph, word for word, on the 

campaign literature of the member from Kindersley. 

 

And then if we go back further, we think, well is it just the Tory 

party of lately that used these techniques of deception? And I 

look back and I dig back to a guarantee that was given to us by 

the present member from Qu’Appelle, the Minister of Finance, 

and it’s a guarantee which was an advertisement in a paper and 

read out: 

 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan is 

committed to continue the medicare system in our 

province. The Progressive Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan rejects any form of deterrent fees on health 

premiums. The Progressive Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan will abolish the unfair deterrent fees for 

prescription drugs. 

 

And it’s signed here, Mr. Speaker, by the MLA for 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 

 

An Hon. Member: — G.L. from Qu’Appelle. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — That’s G.L. from Qu’Appelle. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad, sad state of affairs, and it makes 

me very sad to see what the members opposite have promised 

and what we are now being delivered. Mr. Speaker, for some 

people, for most people in Saskatchewan, this type of promise 

— broken promise  

system — most people in Saskatchewan take it very seriously. 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are also some that are so disgusted with 

it, they’ve turned around and they’re starting to laugh — laugh 

at the action of the Premier and the members opposite. And I 

want to give you an example of that, because in their disgust, 

that is exactly what is happening. 

 

Here is a situation, here is an article from Grainews, a good 

Tory paper, of October 5. And this is an article that I’m going to 

quote from that talks about our Premier. And the headline in the 

article is, “Boob of the month.” Let me quote from this article, 

Mr. Speaker, let me quote from it. This is October 4 of this 

year; this was even before this prescription drug plan was put 

in: “Lately, our Saskatchewan Premier, Grant Devine, has been 

acting like a . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d like to call the 

member to order and remind the hon. member that we are not 

supposed to use the names of members of this legislature in 

your speech. So would you refer to him by his position or his 

constituency. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize. I was 

trying to be conscious of the rule, and I must say that I got 

carried away. And I will refer to him, then . . . it’s the 

Saskatchewan . . . it’s the G.D. His initials are G.D., so it’s the 

Saskatchewan Premier that I’m talking about here. And let me 

go through the . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I think we may 

as well set a pattern right away. And this is the second time that 

you have referred to a member of this legislature by his initials, 

and I would interpret that as being the same thing as his name. 

So would you please do it by the position or the constituency. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to start again on this 

because I’ve lost my train of thought on it, and I think the 

members opposite have. I’m quoting from an article, I’m 

quoting from an article from Grainews of October 5. And the 

headline in the article is, “Boob of the month.” And I’m quote 

from the article and it says: 

 

Lately, our Saskatchewan Premier (blank) has been acting 

like a farmer who is (actually) going broke and gradually 

sliding downhill towards the poorhouse. He began by 

selling off assets he felt were no longer needed, such as 

timber rights in northern Saskatchewan and highway 

equipment. 

 

They didn’t bring much, but it was better than nothing. It 

sounds like he is still trying to get rid of more property. 

We hear about the possible sale of pieces from SaskTel 

and Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 

 

And then, later on, the articles goes on: 

 

On assets not yet sold or up for sale, (blank, referring to 

our Premier) has been trying to shove inventory costs onto 

the taxpayer. The new drug plan is really a good example. 

Now, we have to carry the cost of drugs for two or three 

months before being reimbursed. On fuel bought at the  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3258 

 

pumps, the principle is the same. 

 

And the author goes on to say: 

 

It all reminds me of a farmer in a panic, trying to do 

everything possible to save the farm and not having much 

luck. Had he been a little more careful when land and 

equipment prices were at a peak, there would be no need 

to act so desperately now. 

 

And this article, Mr. Speaker, the author decided to call it, 

“Boob of the month”, and I think if he’d have seen what this 

Bill says and seen what this government is doing in total, it 

could be expanded to be labelled the “Boob of the year.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, let me review, once again, and 

what it is that we are debating in this legislature today. We are 

debating Bill 34 — an Act to gut the prescription drug plan. It 

used to be, Mr. Speaker, that anybody that needed prescription 

drugs had it fully accessible at $3.95 per prescription. And now 

this government is gutting the plan to a new user-pay system, to 

using a deterrent fee which I say punishes the victim. 

 

And who does it hurt the most, Mr. Speaker? Who does it hurt 

the most? I say it hurts the most, those who are ill, those who 

are elderly, and those who are on low incomes. 

 

I had one situation, Mr. Speaker, which happened last week, 

that I would like to bring to the attention of the members 

opposite. It is a case of a 62-year-old resident in my city who 

came to our office and gave us a story of his experience with 

the prescription drug plan. 

 

This gentleman — actually it was his wife that told us — this 

gentleman had had open-heart surgery. He’d had four major 

heart attacks in the past. His cost for all of his medication, and 

they were all dealing with pills that were heart . . . with his 

heart-related illness, cost him a total of $185 a month. So what 

he did is he sent in his claim at the end of August so that he 

could get his money back and get back to the drug store and get 

another prescription. 

 

He came to our office on Thursday, October 1, fed up because 

he had not received his rebate. He said, when we phoned the 

prescription drug plan, they said, well, they had mailed it on the 

previous Tuesday, on September 29, and it should be there any 

time. He waited and he waited, and unfortunately he had to go 

get his drugs on the Friday, because he needed them. He was 

running out of drugs. 

 

And when he went to the pharmacy and was presented with a 

$139 bill, his wife testified to us that because of the stress and 

the anger that he got, it resulted in a fifth heart attack. And his 

doctor has given him orders and has given his wife orders that if 

he gets under any more stressful situation, that he will not be 

able to make it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we had contacted, our office had contacted the office, the 

prescription drug plan office about this. They knew about it, 

had been warned about situations like this  

by many of our members from this side. And what do we get, 

Mr. Speaker? So it’s a very kind of a . . . it has tremendously 

sad effects, Mr. Speaker, and talking about a situation like this 

is rather unpleasant. But I think the members opposite ought to 

know how it affects certain individuals in our province. And it’s 

individuals like this that we feel should be defended, must be 

defended, when we are opposing this particular Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is imposing a user-pay system, a 

user-pay system on medicare. Our position is that medicare 

should not have any user-pay associated with it. There is a place 

for user-pay, Mr. Speaker. There is a place for user-pay. We 

feel that the ministers opposite should pay for airplane flights 

when they go to Calgary to attend a wedding. We feel that their 

Tory hacks should pay for vacations that they could be taking 

when they go to work, or so-called work, in these embassies in 

Hong Kong and Vienna, and today we heard about one in New 

York. 

 

That’s where user-pay should come in. Public money should 

not be used for private profit, Mr. Speaker — should not be 

used for private profit. And that’s why we are also opposed in 

the positions where . . . in the places where it is used, such as 

Peter Pocklington and the Weyerhaeuser situation. 

 

We are paying — you and I are paying — to pay for the 

highways and to pay for the nurseries and pay for the 

fire-fighting while Weyerhaeuser takes the profit. 

 

Now let’s apply the user-pay philosophy to those situations, Mr. 

Speaker, not to the situation of medicare or dental care or 

prescription drugs. 

 

We may wonder why it is, Mr. Speaker, why is it that this 

government has brought in this system. And I say that they have 

done it because it is part of their dogma, part of their political 

doctrine, part of their ideological agenda called privatization. 

They have privatized Saskoil, they have privatized 

Saskatchewan coal-miners, they have privatized the school 

dental plan, they are privatizing the North Park Centre, and now 

we’re getting an initiative on privatizing the drug plan. 

 

None of these cases of privatizing has got any practical value, 

Mr. Speaker. No practical value. Privatizing this drug plan will 

not make it any more accessible to anybody. In fact, it reduces 

the accessibility. This plan, coupled with the plan of the 

Mulroney government to change the drug patent laws, are 

simply working in the direction of additional privatization and 

part of the entire sell-out of Canada to the United States through 

their free trade dealings. 

 

(1215) 

 

And just in today’s Globe and Mail we have a headline which 

says that “Ottawa made a drug bill pledge in the trade pact.” It 

tells us that. It says that: 

 

The Canadian Government pledged in writing to pass its 

controversial drug patent legislation as part of a free-trade 

deal with the United States, but withdrew the commitment 

from the final version  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3259 

 

of the agreement. 

 

A copy of the text of the agreement (said . . . “Canada has 

agreed to pass the pending amendments contained in Bill 

C-22 in respect of compulsory licensing of 

pharmaceuticals.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, to what extent, to what measure is this Tory 

regime of Mulroney and Devine will to go to get a free trade 

deal? We see that they went as far as being willing to pledge 

erosion of our medicare and our drug system. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did you understand anything about that 

bilateral trade deal at all. Do you understand one ounce of what 

they signed? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well the member from Weyburn is sitting in 

his seat and he’s yelling out and he’s talking about . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — The member from Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, 

got up yesterday on his feet, the only member on that side, and 

he tried to defend this Bill. He tried to defend this Bill. And I 

listened to him as he posed some questions. I listened to what 

the member from Weyburn had to say. 

 

He shrugged his shoulders and he said, are we making the right 

decision regarding the drug plan? He says, are we making it? 

Then he starts weighing it from side to side. And then he said, 

well if we didn’t make this decision, we’d be mortgaging the 

future of our children, he says, if they didn’t cut this program. 

He said words to that effect. And then he went on and he said, 

well we wanted to know how else could we put the economic 

house in order, admitting of course in that statement that they 

had messed up the economic house of our province. And he 

said that they’re faced now with rising costs of the drug plan of 

a quarter of a billion dollars. 

 

And he mentioned also that Canada’s population is increasing 

. . . or the age of Canada’s population is increasing. Well how 

true, Mr. Speaker, that it’s increasing. And what more reason do 

we need for a good drug prescription plan just in view of the 

fact that the population of the aged people is increasing. 

 

And I say to that member from Weyburn and to all of the 

members opposite, if you can’t manage the economy of 

Saskatchewan well enough to deliver medicare and to continue 

to improve it, then you better resign. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, what should be the objective 

of a government? Should it be to take a dental plan and a drug 

plan and privatize them like they’re privatizing North Park 

Centre? Should it be to rip asunder, to gut, or to protect those 

people who are ill? Ask any Saskatchewan citizen, and I’ll bet 

you that there’s less than 2 per cent that want medicare gutted. 

There’s less than that want the school dental plan done  

away with. There’s less than 2 per cent, I’ll bet you, that want 

the drug prescription plan gone. That’s why right now at this 

time there are citizens across this province who are signing 

petitions, thousands and thousands . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’d like to ask 

the member for Weyburn to please allow the debate to continue 

without interruption. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are 

thousands and thousands of people who are right now signing 

petitions, protesting this particular Bill, protesting cuts in 

medicare. And the members opposite will soon see them. And 

the people are telling us, and my constituents are telling me and 

my family, and anybody I talk to is saying, stand up in the 

House and work and speak and oppose this Bill. And that’s 

what I intend to do, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When we take a look 

at the prescription drug plan, the amendments to the 

prescription drug plan, Mr. Speaker, what we see is a very 

unfair deterrent fee that’s being imposed by the PC government 

on the people of Saskatchewan — a $125 a year deductible plus 

20 per cent of the drug costs. And we the NDP opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, say that that’s very unfair because that’s a deterrent 

fee on the sick and the elderly of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And they say that they have to do it because of 

rising drug costs. They have to do it because of rising drug 

costs. And what do you see the Premier of this province doing? 

Cheer-leading with Brian Mulroney and approving the drug 

patent amendments that the PC government in Ottawa is putting 

forward. And if anything’s going to increase the drug costs in 

this country, it’s that PC drug patent amendment Act that sits in 

Ottawa and that is approved by the PC government in 

Saskatchewan and the Premier of this province. 

 

And that’s how concerned they are about rising drug costs, Mr. 

Speaker. They would approve a Bill that is going to levy an 

increase in drug costs on the people of this province that is 

unprecedented in the history of this province, not to mention the 

money that’s going to go out of Canada to the United States to 

large pharmaceutical companies in the United States and the 

loss of jobs that that drug patent legislation is going to cause. 

 

That’s how concerned they are about rising drug costs, Mr. 

Speaker; that’s how concerned they are. And once again we see 

the PC government saying one thing out of one side of their 

mouth and anything thing out of the other. But it’s very typical 

of this government — very typical, because they’re prepared to 

make the sick and the elderly people in this province pay for 

their incompetence and mismanagement and their political 

agenda. 

 

The sick and the elderly of this province will have to pay for 

their incompetence because it is the PC government of the 

province of Saskatchewan that created the $3.4 billion deficit in 

this province. It is them that created this  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3260 

 

deficit, Mr. Speaker, through incompetence and 

mismanagement. And even when resource revenues weren’t 

falling, because they’ll always refer to resource revenues, they 

had a deficit in this province, Mr. Speaker. It’s their 

incompetence, their wrong-headed policies, and their 

mismanagement. And now the sick and the elderly people in 

Saskatchewan will have to pay for that. 

 

And they’re prepared to make the sick and elderly pay for their 

political agenda, for their political agenda, Mr. Speaker, 

because the drug patent amendment legislation in Ottawa I part 

of the trade pact deal with Brian Mulroney and Ronald Reagan. 

And our Premier is participating in that, Mr. Speaker. The PC 

government is participating in that. That’s why they go along 

with the drug patent amendment legislation. That’s why they go 

along with the trade pact deal — the deal to boost Brian 

Mulroney and bring him up in the polls and prop up a failing 

Prime Minister. That’s what the trade pact deal is all about — 

the deal to sell off Saskatchewan and open up the doors to 

American investment in Saskatchewan. 

 

They refused, this Premier refuses to stand up to Brian 

Mulroney and Ronald Reagan, Mr. Speaker. He refuses to 

protect the people of Saskatchewan, and sells out Saskatchewan 

interests. And that’s how concerned they are about rising drug 

costs and the sick and elderly in this province. 

 

There’s no question that this Bill epitomizes the attitude of the 

PC government towards medicare and the ordinary family. It 

constitutes an attack on medicare, Mr. Speaker, a direct attack 

on our medicare system and an attack on ordinary families as a 

result. They have no real commitment, no real philosophical 

commitment to universal medical care of high quality, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s why they’re undermining the prescription 

drug plan, the dental plan, and that’s why we see health care 

cut-backs in this nature. 

 

And yet we hear them saying that we have no choice, we’ve got 

to save medicare. Have you heard anything so ridiculous. I ask 

you? No, and that’s what the people of this province say — they 

have not heard anything so ridiculous as to save medicare. 

 

They say they have no choice, Mr. Speaker, but I say they do 

have a choice. The can discontinue their give-aways to large out 

of province corporations. They can quit giving hundreds of 

millions of dollars away to their Tory friends, Mr. Speaker, and 

they can quit their give-aways to Ronald Reagan and Brian 

Mulroney. 

 

There is absolutely no question that this government has the 

wrong priorities, Mr. Speaker; along with the management and 

incompetence that created the $3.4 billion deficit, they have the 

wrong priorities. And now every man, woman, and child in this 

province has a debt on their head of $3,400, and family of four 

a debt of some 13,600 that they will have to pay back. And how 

are they going to pay it back? The sick and the elderly are going 

to pay it back through the prescription drug plan, and we’re 

paying it back through higher taxes — unprecedented hikes in 

taxes by the PC government. 

 

They tax ordinary families, take away the prescription  

drug plan and the dental plan, and they tell them they have no 

choice. And once again, Mr. Speaker, I say that the people of 

this province aren’t stupid, and they’re not going to buy that 

rhetoric. And what we’ve seen is PC MLAs repeatedly making 

promises, election promises. And my colleague from P.A. and 

other members of this Assembly have pointed it out repeatedly 

in this debate. They made promises to expand the prescription 

drug plan. They made promises to improve medicare. And what 

do we see? — how much their promise is worth. It shows in this 

Bill how much their promise is worth — a fat zero, Mr. 

Speaker, a fat zero. That’s the kind . . . that’s how one can trust 

their word. One simply cannot trust their word. And I tell you, 

the people of this province will not believe another single PC 

promise after 1987. 

 

And let’s take a look at the sensitivity of the PC government. 

We have people who are desperately needing drugs, some of 

whom spend hundreds of dollars a month with respect to 

medication and drugs. And what do they do? How do they 

attempt to help these people with high drug costs or these 

people who have difficulty paying drugs? Most of them are sent 

special envelopes, Mr. Speaker, and that’s it. And that just 

proves the insensity of this government, Mr. Speaker, and the 

insensity of the members on the other side of this House. 

 

And let me tell you something about their arbitrary plan, 

because I understand there are no rules and regulations or set 

guide-lines — at least they haven’t come forward to this House 

and told us what they are. They don’t even give us any 

application forms so, on behalf of our constituents, we can 

make an application to their special panel or tribunal. But in 

their arbitrary fashion they decide who gets a break or who 

doesn’t get a break. Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

this province don’t want to go begging, and I have heard that 

repeatedly. I’ve heard that repeatedly — we don’t want to go 

begging to the PC government. 

 

The other day I received a phone call from a young woman, 

over the weekend, who needed medication and went to the 

pharmacist and couldn’t get credit and didn’t have enough 

money to buy the medication. She phoned me in desperation. 

She didn’t qualify for welfare, but she didn’t have the up-front 

costs for the medication. She phoned me in desperation. I told 

her to go to her neighbour and see if she could borrow some 

money there, or from a member of her family. And she said to 

me, Louise, I don‘t want to go begging. That’s what she said to 

me. 

 

But they don’t understand that, Mr. Speaker, they don’t 

understand that, because their whole attitude towards this area 

is entirely different. They don’t understand that. 

 

I just want to talk also this morning a bit about the arrogance of 

this government, the arrogance of this government inasmuch as 

they have a lot of money, Mr. Speaker, for their PC friends, a 

lot of money. And we’ve repeatedly seen in this session the 

amounts of money that they have for their PC friends. They 

have money to support Brian Mulroney on his drug patent 

amendments which are going to increase drugs drastically in the 

province of Saskatchewan. But yet they don’t, they don’t have 

any money for the sick and elderly, Mr. Speaker, and that’s an 

indication of the arrogance of this government. 

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3261 

 

(1230) 

 

And in this session, in this session they’re making grave, 

serious, and very, very difficult decisions. They’re selling out 

Canada to Ronald Reagan. They’re destroying medicare. 

They’re going to put discipline on monopolies. That’s what one 

of the versions of this new trade pact deal says — discipline on 

monopolies. And I ask you: what does that do to many of our 

social programs, including medicare, in this province? What 

does that do to our social programs? 

 

But they are making these sorts of serious and grave decisions, 

and yet they would rather not debate many of them in this 

House. They want, they’re saying they want to see this session 

end, that it’s dragging on. They don’t want to debate these 

things because they know they’re wrong, and they’d rather not 

be here listening to us and listening to the people of 

Saskatchewan. That’s why they want to close down the House, 

to get out of here so they can bury their heads in the sand; so 

that they can avoid, they can avoid argument and debate on this 

subject; so they can avoid accountability to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

They break one promise after another. Their promises with 

respect to the prescription drug plan is just one example, Mr. 

Speaker, but it’s an important example. And their policy and the 

process they’ve implemented on prescription drugs, Mr. 

Speaker, just shows their incompetence and their 

mismanagement. 

 

The citizens of the province have t pay the up-front costs, and 

then they get a rebate of some 80 per cent. So what do they do? 

They early retire or fire people, and then they have to bring 

some people back in order to monitor the bureaucratic red tape 

where people pay and then get a rebate. That is just ridiculous, 

but that’s an example of mismanagement and incompetence 

right here in the way they operate their scheme on the 

prescription drug plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see this sort of thing throughout the government, and I 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, the stupidity and incompetence behind 

policies like that are going to be ferreted out by the NDP 

opposition during this session. And we’ll do our duty in this 

legislature and expose their wrong-headed policies, the 

wrong-headed PC policies, even though they prefer not to enter 

this debate. 

 

What’s happened to all the members in the back-benchers? 

Don’t they have the courage to come forward and stand up and 

enter this debate? Tell us, tell us here in the legislature what 

your constituents think about this drug prescription plan. Come 

on, let’s hear from some people in the back-benchers. I tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, they don’t have the courage to stand up and 

defend this Bill because they know in their hearts that it’s 

wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — They bring forward this Bill, Mr. Speaker, that 

taxes the sick and the elderly. They approve drug patent 

amendments that are going to create higher drug  

prices in this province that are totally unprecedented, and they 

don’t have the courage to stand up and defend it. Not one of 

them, except for the member from Meadow Lake who had an 

obligation to speak to it, and I notice his line or debate was 

very, very short — something like two or two and half minutes 

— and the member from Weyburn who tried to run out the 

clock, I think it was last night, is that not the case? 

 

And I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you why the 

members back there, the member from Wilkie, the member 

from Kinistino, the member from Canora, the member from 

Pelly, and the member from Shaunavon — I’ll tell you why, 

Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to stand up and defend this Bill, 

because they know it’s regressive. They know it’s wrong, and 

they know it imposes a hardship on the people of this province. 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is going to sit on the statute 

books of Saskatchewan when it’s passed for years to come. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not many years. 

 

Ms. Simard: — No, we may repeal it, but it will be there in 

black and white. But, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you, it is going to 

remain a symbol of how this government has — how low it has 

stooped. It’s going to remain a symbol of their insensitivity. It’s 

going to remain a symbol of how out of touch they are with the 

people in their own constituencies, as we heard from the 

member from Indian Head-Wolseley this morning who said he 

only heard from a little handful of people in his riding about it 

— it’s all falling into place and it’s doing very well. Well I tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, there are thousands of people out there in the 

province of Saskatchewan who are against this legislation, and 

the member from Indian Head-Wolseley is so out of touch, Mr. 

Speaker, so out of touch with the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan that we heard him say this morning, it’s falling 

into place; it’s doing it very well; nobody comes and complains 

to me. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is a symbol of the fact that the PC 

government and the PC MLAs in this province have abandoned 

the sick and the elderly in this province; it’s a symbol of their 

untrustworthiness, the fact that they made promises to expand 

the prescription drug plan, to expand medicare. In 1987 those 

promises mean nothing. It’s a symbol of their 

untrustworthiness. It’s a symbol of their arrogance, inasmuch as 

they have money for their Tory friends and they don’t have any 

money for the sick and the elderly in this province. It’s a 

symbol of their sell-out to Brian Mulroney and Ronald Reagan 

inasmuch as they agree to drug patent amendment legislation 

that’s part of a trade pact deal that’s going to sell out the 

country of Canada. It’s a symbol of their incompetence and 

mismanagement because the sick and the elderly and the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan are having to pay for their $3.4 

billion deficit. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the sick and the elderly people 

in the constituency of Regina Lakeview, and on behalf of others 

in the constituency of Regina Lakeview who still feel very 

co-operative, understanding and compassionate towards their 

neighbours, Mr. Speaker, and on behalf of thousands whom I 

know do not approve of these new prescription drug 

amendments, I oppose this Bill, and I adamantly  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3262 

 

opposite it. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I am heartened by the round of applause on 

both sides of the House. I enter this debate to add a couple of 

matters that I think are new, in the sense at least that they 

haven’t been talked about in the last couple of days. 

 

One that that I want to tell members about is a story that has 

been recurring. There are reports, over and over again, of the 

incident that I’m about to describe. Some of these reports come 

to me indirectly through druggists at drug stores, and the story 

— the typical story involves a person who goes into a drug 

store with a prescription in his or her hand, takes it in, it’s a 

prescription of course from a doctor, prescribed not for the fun 

or it but prescribed because there’s something wrong, because 

that person needs a particular drug to treat a particular illness or 

disease. 

 

The person goes into the drug store, presents the prescription to 

the druggist and waits while it’s being filled. The druggist then 

present the patient with the bill. Patient looks at the bill, realizes 

for the first time how much the drug is going to cost, and 

realizes that he can’t pay for it, so he turns around and walks 

out and leaves the prescription on the counter. 

 

It’s happened over and over again according to the reports that 

are coming to me and to other members of my caucus, and no 

doubt to the offices of members opposite. These are the real 

victims of the policy that’s being debated in this Assembly. And 

these are people who are not storming the citadels; they’re not 

phoning us; they’re not phoning the Minister of Health. They’re 

just people who have undergone the personal, private 

humiliation of having gone to see a druggist to obtain a 

necessary drug and have had to leave in great personal shame 

and humiliation because they don’t have the dollars to pay for 

it. 

 

Now that’s a situation that this government has created, and it’s 

a situation that they should be ashamed of. People ought not to 

have to go through this kind of personal humiliation and 

degradation. It’s one thing if you live in a province where 

you’ve never had the benefits of a prescription drug plan of the 

sort that we’ve had in Saskatchewan. And for people that have 

to live under that kind of regime they know that when they go 

into a drug store to buy drugs that they’re going to have to pay 

cash on the barrelhead. So they find out in advance what 

amount of money is going to be necessary to buy the drugs. 

 

But not so in Saskatchewan. I mean our people have become 

accustomed to paying a prescription fee and that’s all, so that 

for them they go in and they’re presented with a bill and they 

have no idea, Mr. Speaker, whether the bill is going to be $10 

or $100 — no clue at all. The doctor doesn’t discuss that with 

them. All the doctor says is, if you want to get well again, if you 

want to stop being afflicted by the particular affliction that 

you’ve got, then you’ve got to take these drugs. That’s all they 

know. And when they’re presented with the bill, as I say, they 

realize  

for the first time that they can’t afford that drug, so they turn 

around and walk out. 

 

How do members opposite answer that? I mean, are we just 

going to say to those people, well it’s a tough world, and find 

some other way of getting well? That’s no answer for these 

people, and we in this province, at this time in our history, just 

ought not to be economizing in this particular area. We ought 

not to be economizing with respect to people’s health and 

that’s, it seems to me, the essence of the problem that the 

government has created by the plan to change The Prescription 

Drugs Act. 

 

The member from Weyburn, in that interesting address last 

night, seemed to be telling us that the problem in Saskatchewan 

is we’ve got this ageing population. And I thought as he spoke 

of the address of the minister from Moose Jaw South last night 

where he had these roving bands of senior citizens running 

around with prescription pads in their hands, writing out their 

own prescriptions and taking them to drug stores and thereby 

putting great pressure on our health plans in Saskatchewan by 

increasing the costs of the drug plan. 

 

And of course that’s just not the way these things work. People 

don’t write their own prescriptions. People get prescriptions 

from doctors, and they get them because there’s something 

wrong with them. People don’t go to a doctor and say, doctor, 

will you please give me a hundred capsules and so and so, of 

this particular kind of a drug, and the doctor then says, fine, 

sure I’ll give you the pills you need, and the person then goes 

out and raids the pharmacy to get these pills that aren’t 

necessary. 

 

People are prescribed drugs by doctors, and they’re prescribed 

drugs because they need them. So it’s just not at all fair for the 

minister from Weyburn to say that one of the objectives of the 

government policy is to get at the over-user, the person who 

uses too much drugs, too many drugs. And that is not a fair 

description of the problem. People don’t use drugs just for the 

fun of it, they use drugs because they’re prescribed and because 

they need them. 

 

And if we’re going to try and economize and cut back expenses, 

that is not the area where they should be cut. We should find 

other areas, and we on this side of the House have suggested 

countless ways in which that could be done that wouldn’t hurt 

the ordinary people of this province in one of their very 

essential parts of their lives, namely their own health. 

 

How does the government opposite expect the ordinary people 

of this province to be able to absorb the burden of this drug plan 

as they have not amended it, or as they have now recast it? 

 

Let’s review the numbers. They’ve been reviewed before, Mr. 

Speaker, but I want to go over them again because they’re so 

important. First of all, the first $1125 that the average family 

spends in a year has to come out of their own pocket, and after 

the $125 has come out of their own pocket, then they have to 

continue paying for their drugs. 

 

And let’s use, as an example, a family that has an asthmatic 

child in the family, and this is not a unique example, as I’ve 

learned. I mean, I didn’t realize that there  

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3263 

 

was so much asthma in the west end of Saskatoon as I have 

since this plan came into effect. Their costs for drugs run in the 

neighbourhood of 90 to $100 a month — 90 to $100 a month. 

So let’s use that family as an example. The first $125 comes out 

of their own pockets; the next $100 comes out of their own 

pockets for the next month’s drugs, and then they parcel up that 

claim and send it in. 

 

There’s about a five-week turn around in the processing of 

those claims before the money gets back to the individual, so 

that they probably are into the next month and have had to put 

up another $100 before the first 80 per cent flows back to them. 

 

(1245) 

 

So they’re out of pocket about $325 before the first $80 tarts 

coming back. And then they’ll get through the rest of that year 

getting $80 back for every $100 spent, and then they come to 

the end of the year and they start over again. And this 

exemption, this deductible, this $125 is not something that 

happens once in a lifetime — happens every year. So the next 

year they have to start all over again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the reality is, as I’ve said in this House before, that the 

people simply don’t have any spare money. And I’m not talking 

here about social welfare recipients. I’m talking about people 

who have full-time employment, and they don’t have any extra 

money. Now that’s a fact, just go down any street in any 

average residential neighbourhood in this city, or in Saskatoon, 

or in any other city, and you will find that the people are 

spending all of their incomes. All of their incomes are 

earmarked for rent, for transportation, for the education of their 

children, for food, for clothing, and for other necessaries. They 

don’t have $325 that they can just come up without great 

personal sacrifice in their own families. They’ve got to take it 

from somewhere else and start spending it on drugs. And it’s 

causing a great deal of discomfort. 

 

Now I’ve had cases come to me, Mr. Speaker, where the people 

are earning good incomes, may have a family income of 

$40,000. Now members in this house can say that people who 

earn $40,000 ought to be able to put up something towards the 

cost of their own drugs. And of course at one level I understand 

that, and I agree with it. The point I want to make is that that 

family earning $40,000 has been earning that for some time and 

has an expenditure pattern that’s been established in that family, 

and all of that money is being used. And by the introduction of 

the amendments to this plan, what the government has done is 

say to that family, you have to reorder all of your priorities. 

You have to remake your budget, and you have to allow for 

spare cash to pay for your drug plan. You have to pay for the 

original $125. You got to pay for 20 per cent of your drugs after 

that, and you have to be able to put the money up front on the 

barrelhead while you’re waiting for the refunds to come from 

the government. And it’s causing great dislocation, and I know 

you’re feeling the heat. 

 

I mean I know that . . . I don’t know where this chap from 

Indian Head hangs out during the days, but I now other 

members in their constituency offices are getting call after call 

after call. And some of those calls aren’t so friendly;  

some of them are fairly abusive. Some confrontations in coffee 

shops in this province that we’ve heard about aren’t friendly 

either. They tend to be fairly abusive. Some of the things that 

are said about these members to their faces on the streets of this 

province would curl your hair. 

 

To think that our population would be saying those things about 

elected members of a legislature. And this is the issue on which 

they focus more than any other — it’s the only one by any 

means — but this has become the focus of a lot of criticism of 

this government, and it’s well deserved — well deserved 

criticism at that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now we raised these problems over and over 

in this House and we raised them, in particular, in question 

period when these complaints started to come in. And the 

answer that we got from the Premier, and the answer that we 

got from the Minister of Health, was that we’re going to set up 

a committee; we’re going to set up a committee and these 

hardship cases can be referred to that committee, and the 

committee will have the capacity to be able to fix up these 

hardship cases. 

 

So we were invited to refer our hardship cases to the minister. 

And we told people who complained to us to send it to the 

minister. And if it came to us in a written form, we would pass 

it on to the minister. Now, I don’t know about the rest of the 

members in this House, but of the complaints that I have 

referred to that minister, or the complaints that I know have 

been made to him and referred to that committee, not one of 

them, not one of them have resulted in any relief — not one. In 

all of Saskatoon, to my personal knowledge, I know of one case 

where one claimant got relief, and he has to pay 20 per cent of 

his bill rather than the 80 per cent. That’s my information. Now 

there’s one case out of the whole of the city of Saskatoon. 

 

What kind of relief was that? In fact, Mr. Speaker, it was no 

relief at all. In fact, we were just being sold a bill of goods in 

this House by the Premier and the minister pretending that this 

committee was going to relieve against hardship cases, and it 

didn’t do it. And it’s still not doing it. 

 

The point was made in question period today that the committee 

is working without hearing from these people. To my 

knowledge they’re not even investigating the circumstances. 

I’ve had people contact me and say that they got a decision 

from the department about their particular case, but they had 

never been contacted for any information. They were never 

contacted to verify any of the information that came forward. 

They were merely informed that they were being put on this 

priority mail service or priority envelopes or something like 

that. The effect of which is you could get paid every week. 

 

Now that’s not any answer to these people; that’s not any 

answer to this problem. The problem is that these people have 

got health problems that requires them to take drugs that cost an 

awful lot of money, and they don’t have the money to put up 

front to obtain those drugs. That’s the problem, and the 

committee is no answer to it. 

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3264 

 

I suggest to the Minister of Health that he get a hold of that 

committee and try to impress on it that he had a different 

expectation from them than they have delivered. He had the 

expectation which he told us about in this House, that this 

committee would be able to hear hardship cases and fix them 

up, that hardship cases would find relief by contacting the 

minister, that this committee would hear their cases and provide 

relief where relief was justified. And I say to the minister that it 

hasn’t worked, and he knows he hasn’t worked, and I’m asking 

him to do something about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — If he’s got people on that committee who are 

so stubborn that they won’t listen to his instructions about what 

they’re supposed to do, then fire the committee and appoint a 

new one. But for God sakes, give the people of Saskatchewan 

some relief in hardship cases. 

 

Now I have a number of examples of people who have 

contacted me with drug problems, and I just want to refer some 

of these to the minister and to the House, Mr. Speaker. There is, 

for example, a woman in Saskatoon who suffers from crippling 

arthritis, complicated by kidney problems and high blood 

pressure, and she has been under treatment for many years and a 

number of drugs have been prescribed to treat her condition. 

Her drug bill averages $300 each month. Her income is $1,500 

a month, and she has a family and all of her income is spoken 

for, Mr. Speaker. It all goes to the things that the families of this 

province spend money on. 

 

She’s now faced with having to . . . when she contacted me, 

with finding the $300 to put on the barrelhead, as I call it, while 

she’s waiting for the refunds to start to come. But even so, she’s 

going to be responsible for 20 per cent of that $300 on an 

ongoing basis for the rest of the year, after she’s got by her 

deductible period. And then she doesn’t have to worry about it 

till the year goes by, and then she has to face another deductible 

period and the delays that I spoke about earlier. 

 

Now she wrote to me in terms that I want to share with 

members of this House. This is a person whom I do not know, 

and I still don’t know except through the correspondence that 

I’ve had with her. She says that . . . she talks about the fact that 

her husband brings home about $1,500 a month. 

 

We just can’t make ends . . . (I’m quoting now from the 

letter, Mr. Speaker) . . . We just can’t make ends meet any 

more, with house payments, taxes, and school. We don’t 

have enough left to clothe and fee the family properly any 

more. I don’t know what will happen when the weather 

gets cold and the gas bills go sky-high. 

 

Instead of going ahead we’re going backwards. If this 

government stays in much longer we’ll all be in the 

poor-house. We were much better off before. At least we 

knew where we stood. And the home improvement plan, 

what good is it? Only the rich benefit from it, other people 

can’t come up with the other half of the money anyway. 

This is  

the reverse of Robin Hood, taking from the poor and 

giving to the rich. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now I referred that case to the minister on 

September 3, and I received an acknowledgement from the 

minister that told me that he had established a review panel 

which would be assessing those people who are having 

difficulty with the changes to the Saskatchewan prescription 

drug plan. 

 

Our intention is to then address any truly unique situations 

in the most caring and helpful way possible. 

 

Well my goodness, the most caring and helpful way possible! 

Person with a $300 a month drug bill, with a family income that 

doesn’t cover their existing expenditures. 

 

. . . and to this point I’ve had no response. Now no doubt 

the committee has decided what to do but I have not been 

informed of that decision. 

 

But in any event, this woman continues in Saskatoon faced with 

these drug bills and unaware of what help, if any, she’s going to 

receive from the government. Based on the track record thus far 

she won’t get any help at all. Based on the track record so far 

she will receive a letter from the minister’s office advising her 

of this priority post service so that she can send in her weekly 

drug bill. Well she doesn’t have a weekly drug bill; she has a 

monthly drug bill — $300 it costs her to have her prescription 

renewed. Well that’s no help to her at all. And here she is, a 

truly unique situation, and I insist that she be treated in the most 

caring and helpful way possible. And the minister’s not doing 

it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Another family in my constituency — one of 

those situations where a child has an asthmatic condition. The 

drugs prescribed for this particular boy amount to $193.48 per 

month. Now this is a family where the father has just started a 

small business — just started a small business. That should be 

something that appeals to the ears opposite. The mother is on 

maternity leave. And this family suddenly finds that it has to 

shell out $193.48 on the barrelhead at the first of each month. 

Now I’ve referred that case to the minister some time ago. 

There’s been no answer from the minister’s office or the 

minister’s committee on the disposition of this case, that I know 

of. 

 

Now I want to refer the minister to another problem where I did 

get an answer from the committee. This was a case of a woman 

who was suffering from a brain tumour, and the brain tumour is 

controllable by medication. Her husband earns the grand sum of 

$800 per month — $800 a month. That’s the family income. 

They have children. They’re not on welfare and they’re 

struggling to stay off welfare. Her drug bill is $112 a month. 

That was referred to the committee. There was no investigation; 

there was no verification; nothing was done. The decision was 

that she would be put on this priority service envelope system. 

Every week she can send in her drug bills. 

  



 

October 9, 1987 

3265 

 

Now if she is not a truly unique situation, then what in the devil 

does it take to constitute a truly unique situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — And to have the audacity to suggest that her 

case was handled in the most caring and helpful way possible, 

just leaves me breathless. That is not caring and that is not 

helpful by any possible definition of the term, and this lady is 

outraged. Their only way they can cope with this situation is to 

try and get on welfare, which will mean that this man will leave 

his job; the family won’t have any income; they’ll become a 

ward of the member from wherever it is who . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It being 1 o’clock, this House now stands 

adjourned until Tuesday at 2 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


