


















































November 5, 1987 Hansard Morning


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 November 5, 1987 
 
 

3987 
 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Communications 

 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Communications, presents the first report of the 
said committee, which is as follows: 
 

The committee has adopted the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Library’s annual report for the period ending March 31, 
1986. 
 
Your committee agreed to the following resolution: 
 
That this committee requests for next session a report from 
the Legislative Librarian on the cost of establishing an 
on-line Hansard. 
 
Your committee has considered the reference of the 
Assembly of June 25, 1986 and has re-referred on September 
1, 1987, namely the recommendation of the Public 
Documents Committee under The Archives Act contained in 
the retention and disposal schedules comprising sessional 
paper no. 132 of the fifth session of the 20th Legislature. 
 
Your committee recommends to the Assembly that the 
recommendations of the Public Documents Committee on 
schedules numbers 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, and 264 be 
accepted. 
 
Your committee has also considered the reference of the 
Assembly of October 30, 1987, namely: 
 
The recommendation of the Public Documents Committee 
under The Archives Act contained in the retention and 
disposal schedules comprising sessional paper no. 153 of the 
first session of the 21st Legislature. 
 
Your committee recommends to the Assembly that the 
recommendations of the Public Documents Committee on 
schedules numbers 254, 266, 267, 268, 225, 269, 270, 271, 
272, 273 and 274 be accepted. 

 
Mr. Gerich: — Moved by myself, and seconded by the member 
from Prince Albert: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 
Communications now be concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Speaker: — By special order, question period will be  

at 2 p.m. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 55 — An Act to 
provide for the Division of Saskatchewan into Constituencies 
for the Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill sets up the conditions 
for changing the rules of electing the members of this legislature. 
The Bill could well be labelled as a Bill which sets up for a 
gerrymander. I want to speak to the fairness aspect of the Bill, and 
I want to ask the questions of why is this Bill being put by the 
government. 
 
We want to know, Mr. Speaker, was there any necessity, was there 
any necessity for this Bill to come forward? Was there any 
outburst on the part of the public? Was there anybody in any 
constituency, was there any group that felt slighted according to 
the way the boundaries were in the past? What is the reason for the 
switch? 
 
Now in my constituency I didn’t have anybody that came and said, 
look, our constituency boundaries really need to be redefined, or, 
we need a new way of redefining out boundaries. And I asked 
members, all from different parts of Saskatchewan, and talked to 
people in various parts of Saskatchewan, and no place did I see 
anybody say that we needed to have a different way of defining 
boundaries than we now do. 
 
So what we have here is a system that has been worked out, that 
has been accepted, but that this government has decided to change 
the rules for. The government is changing the rules for how the 
boundaries are being set, and the worst part of the whole thing is, 
Mr. Speaker, that when they’re changing the rules it sets it up for 
the possibility of violating a fundamental democratic principle, 
and that principle being that every person in Saskatchewan should 
have a vote that’s equal in weight to every other person in 
Saskatchewan, or as close as possible that we can come to it. 
 
When we get away from the principle of one person, one vote then 
we violate that fundamental democratic principle. so I’m asking 
the question, Mr. Speaker: if the rules were all right, why change 
them? If something is working, if it isn’t broken, why fix it — 
why fix it? 
 
We should review, Mr. Speaker, how the rules were set up for 
changing electoral boundaries. We know that in Saskatchewan 
there is an occurring population shift from the rural to the urban. 
We know that it’s occurring approximately at the rate of 3 per cent 
per year. We know that there have to be some adjustments made 
from time to time, every election, or second or third election, to 
accommodate for this, because if it wasn’t done, the  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

3988 
 

principle of one person, one vote would be violated. 
 
So certainly we have to have a mechanism to do this. If you’re 
going to have to change the rules once in a while, then you have to 
have a system put in place that is accepted and is perceived as fair, 
and is actually fair. 
 
Now the previous rules and the rules that are still in existence prior 
to the introduction of this Bill 55 had a three-person commission. 
And that three-person commission was made up first of all of the 
Clerk of the legislature, the chief Clerk, which is the chief officer 
of the legislature. That person is, by virtue of being an employee 
of the legislature, is an employee of members on that side and 
employee of members on this side of the House, and a place where 
you have to be impartial —has to be an impartial position. 
 
The second person that was on this committee, who was the 
chairman of the committee, was a person that was appointed by 
the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan, who was a federal appointee, 
and the person was to be appointed from the Court of Appeal, a 
judge from the Court of Appeal, who was also a federal appointee 
— which takes it away from the provincial political scene once 
again. So we have two people who were appointed to this 
commission, two people whose positions are impartial, or as close 
as you can come to being impartial. 
 
And then the third person, according to the old rules, would be a 
person appointed by Mr. Speaker, in consultation with the Leader 
of the Opposition and the Premier. So naturally the Speaker may 
have to make some judgement if you couldn’t get complete 
agreement, but the precedent had been set that the Speaker would 
look for a person and appoint a person that the two people would 
agree would represent the population fairly without any political 
bias. 
 
Now that is the fundamental condition — a commission which the 
people, and particularly the politicians on both sides, could rely on 
for being impartial. And then this commission would go, and they 
would set the boundaries according to some of the parameters that 
were in the Act. 
 
Now the new commission doesn’t do that. The new commission 
has the appearance of being impartial, but when you examine it 
carefully, Mr. Speaker, then it no longer . . . it does not bear up 
under scrutiny. 
 
There is one position that does bear up, and that is the position of a 
retired judge who is appointed to this. But what happens is the 
other two people do not pass the test of political scrutiny. The 
second person that’s appointed to this, under the new Act, is the 
Chief Electoral Officer. So the Clerk, who is an employee of the 
legislature, employee of both sides, is replaced by the Chief 
Electoral Officer, which is a cabinet appointee — a government 
appointee, one side only. 
 
And the third person, and this is the one that appears to be fair, but 
when you examine it carefully, Mr. Speaker, when you examine it 
carefully, the third person who is appointed is a judge of the 
provincial court named by the chief justice of the provincial court. 
 

Now the judge of the provincial court is a provincial appointee, 
and the Chief Judge of the provincial court is a provincial 
appointee, as compared to the previous method where you had a 
system where you were removing it from the provincial appointee 
scene to the federal appointee scene. So that’s why I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that the new commission, which will now set the 
boundaries, when compared to the old commission has the 
appearances, has all of the appearances of being a politically 
unbiased commission, but does have the possibility of being made 
up and having a political bias . . . being made up so that it does 
have a political bias to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is it that we mean by a gerrymander? And what 
is the significance of redrawing the boundaries in some way that 
may not be politically fair? Well what should happen, what should 
happen, Mr. Speaker, is that in any constituency, if there’s an 
average . . . in Saskatchewan now there’s very close to 670 or 
close to 700,000 eligible voters. And if you divided . . . Let’s 
assume the figure was 660,000 voters, and if the new Act allowed 
for 66 members, that would approximate 10,000 voters per 
member. So you can think of an average of having 10,000 votes 
for every elected member in this legislature. 
 
So if the principle of one person, one vote was to exist and to 
continue to exist, we should have an Act which makes it . . . or 
boundaries, we should have boundaries adjusted so that the 10,000 
voters per member should be followed as closely as possible. 
 
Under the old rules we allowed a variance of 15 per cent. That 
would allow for growth in some areas, and it would allow for a 
little bit of discrimination in favour of the rural areas because it 
was felt in the past that we should have, should discriminate 
slightly in favour of the rural areas because of the distances of 
travelling; it makes it a little more difficult to service the area. 
 
(1015) 
 
Now when this variance gets bigger than 15 per cent or 20 per cent 
or 25 per cent, to 25 or 30 or 40 per cent, eventually at some stage 
that tolerance of discrimination becomes a problem — becomes a 
problem because you start to wonder why in one constituency, if 
we have up to 25 per cent variance, as this particular Bill 55 
allows it to do, if you have up to a 25 per cent variance, that means 
that in one constituency you could go up from 10,000 votes up to 
12,500, whereas in another constituency the vote might go down 
by 25 per cent from 10,000 votes down to 7,500. 
 
So you get that tremendous variance in the number of people that 
elect one member, and that’s when it becomes unfair. And when 
you add to that the provision that allows for a constituency to grow 
beyond that, due to new growth, we may get a situation where . . . 
and if the boundaries are drawn in a specific way we may get the 
situation where you might get as many as 15,000 voters or maybe 
18,000 voters in one part of the province electing a member, and 
maybe 7,000 voters electing a member in another part of the 
province, where one person’s vote is worth twice as much as 
another person’s vote, and that’s a situation we want avoided 
because it violates the  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

3989 
 

fundamental principle of one vote, one person — one vote, one 
person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are times when we might want to discriminate, 
to have that kind of discrimination. There may be occasions when 
that is desirable, and the one that I mentioned earlier was that we 
might want to discriminate slightly in favour of the rural areas 
because of the distances covered. There are arguments as to how 
far you want to go that way. 
 
Really the job of a member . . . There’s two jobs for a member — 
the job of representation and the job of servicing. You want to 
represent a certain number of people and represent a certain 
number of people’s views, and you also have to service your 
constituents. 
 
When it comes to representation, the fairest way, in my mind is 
everybody should be represented equally. When it comes to 
servicing, we want everybody to be serviced equally as well. Now 
we can represent everybody equally by having one person, one 
vote. but we can service people equally by having good access to 
our constituents. 
 
And I say that can be accommodated other ways than just 
changing the . . . other ways than violating the one person, one 
vote policy. You can do that by adding staff to your constituency 
. . . or adding staff to your constituency or to your constituency 
office. So that if I had to service an area which had a tremendous 
amount of area to cover, a constituency that had a tremendous 
amount of area to cover, I might need a little more help in my 
office so that I can get the area serviced. It can be accommodated 
that way. 
 
It can be accommodated by increasing communications 
allowances so that the money can be put into making certain that 
people are contacted by telephones or by mail on a more frequent 
basis than they would otherwise because of the distances that had 
to be travelled to see the people. 
 
So I make the distinction, Mr. Speaker, of how to balance these 
two duties of a member. The first duty of representation should be 
done as fairly as possible — one person, one vote. And the second 
one, of servicing, can be done . . . servicing is quite often done, 
and a lot of it’s done, through the constituency office help, and 
that can be accommodated in the rural areas by just adding a little 
more help in terms of office assistance. 
 
Now there are some times other ways that we might want to 
discriminate; some other ways we might want to discriminate 
consciously in favour of some minority group. And that’s all right, 
I think. I think it’s all right if we decide consciously and openly 
that perhaps we want to discriminate in favour of a minority 
group. Perhaps we have a community of one ethnic group in a 
certain pocket of the province which is consistently unrepresented, 
and we might want to discriminate consciously on the basis of 
that. But I say it should be done consciously, no other way. We 
should have a lot of discussion on it. 
 
It should be done so that the people accept it, because I’ll tell you, 
there are other times when it may be set up so we  

discriminate on a different basis, like on the basis of income. And 
I think if we had a discussion on that we would probably come to 
a conclusion that we don’t want to discriminate on the basis of 
income. 
 
And let me give you an example. If we had a ward system in one 
of the cities where the boundaries were redrawn so that if the 
average ward had maybe 2,000 voters in a particular city in 
Saskatchewan, and the boundaries were redrawn so that there 
would be a pocket of maybe 500 or 1,000 voters as opposed to the 
average of 2,000 in one particular part of the city simply because 
they were a higher income or simply because they were a lower 
income, for either one of those two reasons I don’t think the public 
would buy it. I don’t think the public would buy that that would be 
a situation under which we want to discriminate. I don’t think we 
would want to do it. 
 
And certainly I don’t think we would want to discriminate on the 
basis of income. And I certainly don’t think we’d want to 
discriminate on the basis of political preference. And the problem 
with this particular Bill is that it sets up a situation where the 
commission can discriminate on the basis of a political tradition in 
the communities. 
 
Let’s take my own city for example, Prince Albert. This new 
boundary . . . the new Act, rather, sets up the rules so there shall be 
two seats in Prince Albert, two seats. But the commission is 
allowed to draw the boundaries. Now in Prince Albert there are 
approximately 20,000 voters. If the boundaries are drawn so that 
there are 10,000 voters on one side of Prince Albert and 10,000 
voters on the other side of the province, I would say that that 
would be a fair boundary. 
 
Now it’s possible for this commission to vary those by 25 per cent. 
It’s possible to have one set up as far as having only 7,500 voters, 
and the other constituency as having 12,500 voters. And it’s 
possible to take that line and carve the city up so that I would have 
a very, very safe seat. It’s also possible to draw that boundary so 
that my seat could be impossible for me to win if we use those two 
figures. It’s also possible. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, and that’s why I’m saying that this 
commission must not have any appearance, and must not under 
scrutiny have any possibility of having a political bias because 
those boundaries should be drawn without variance and without 
violating that one person, one vote principle. 
 
So I have one more comment to say about this, Mr. Speaker. 
Ordinarily, if you’re going to change the rules for any kind of a 
game, you do it by consulting. You do it by consulting with all of 
the people that are affected. 
 
We had this Bill tossed on us. We had it mentioned earlier, but we 
never had any consultation. People of Saskatchewan didn’t have 
any consultation. I’m sure the members opposite said yes, we 
consulted. But who did they consult with? They consulted with 
their same groups that they traditionally consult with. You consult 
with somebody that gives you the answer you want to hear. You 
don’t consult with the public openly. You change the rules. 
 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

3990 
 

Now when you’re changing the rules, the voting rules of 
Saskatchewan, you’re tampering with a fundamental democratic 
principle. So, Mr. Speaker, I predict that what will happen to this 
government is that they will . . . They are following the pattern 
that was done before them by the Liberal government. The last 
time we had a gerrymander under . . . and you will recall, it was 
person from Prince Albert, the member from Prince Albert — his 
name was Davey Steuart — at the time and it was . . . his name 
was Davey Steuart, and at the time the gerrymander was called a 
Daveymander that they gave us, that they gave the electorate, the 
government of Ross Thatcher was turfed. And that’s what’ll 
happen here too, Mr. Speaker. That what’s going to happen here, 
because it’s just fundamentally unfair. 
 
And I close then, Mr. Speaker, by saying we should vote against 
this. If you’ve got a system that’s working, don’t try to fix it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish the Deputy Premier would 
stay so he could learn a few things about the democratic principles 
in our society which, Mr. Speaker, must be cherished and also 
must be protected. 
 
One of the sad things that I have experienced in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, since coming back in 1986, is how we have sort of 
ignored and abused and disregarded the principles, not only the 
principles of democracy as they exist outside these Chambers but 
how we’ve done that same thing within these Chambers. That, Mr. 
Speaker, I think, just simply flows from the attitude that has taken 
place on the other side. We saw that happening last December 
when they brought in their motion on changing the quorums of 
committees and tried to ram it down our throats. Now only 
because we had a strong opposition on this side were we able to 
ward it off for some time, and the government pulled in its horns 
and said, all right, fine, we’ll back away from that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the principles of democracy, as my colleague 
from Westmount pointed out yesterday, have been fought over 
and fought for by our parents and our grandparents and have been 
well established in this country and elsewhere. And it should not 
be taken very lightly. I wish some of the members opposite who 
have done some studying in this area would take it to heart and 
find out exactly what your government is doing. You should not 
be conned by the members of the Executive Council that just 
because you may be in jeopardy at the next election, therefore 
anything is all right as long as we can save our hides. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the principle of representation by population is a 
principle that is very, very sacred and should not be taken lightly. 
In this province, Mr. Speaker, I well remember when I first started 
in politics in 1970 and ran in the constituency of Saskatoon South 
— Saskatoon Nutana South it was called at that time. I really 
couldn’t believe what was being done at that time by the former 
administration, the Ross Thatcher government. 
 
It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the present  

Minister of Finance, the present Minister of Finance was working 
for the attorney general, I believe, at that time and, it is said, had a 
hand in the fixing of that gerrymander that took place at that time. 
I remember being nominated in my constituency in June of 1970 
and the gerrymander had taken place. I put out a pamphlet to my 
constituents explaining what the government was doing with the 
gerrymander. I hadn’t intended on speaking on this, so I didn’t 
bring that . . . that I put out . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — But you’re not making sense. 
 
(1030) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — The Minister of Education says that I don’t make 
any sense. Well I make more sense standing here than he does 
chirping from his desk. 
 
And I want to say to the Minister of Education if he’d pay more 
attention to his Department of Education, he would also, also 
make sure that the principles of democracy are protected. And you 
have an obligation, sir, as the Minister of Education . . . you have 
an obligation as the Minister of Education to show some 
leadership on that side and show the children of this province that 
you as the Minister of Education won’t stand by and let the 
principles of democracy being flagrantly abused by your 
government. If you had any gumption at all, any courage at all, 
you’d stand up in this Assembly and you’d say, I oppose Bill 55 
because it abuses the principles of democracy, and I won’t stand 
for it as the Minister of Education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — If you had any gumption at all that’s what you’d 
do. But oh no, you don’t have any courage, you can just chirp 
from your chair and just let the members on the Executive Council 
abuse the principles of democracy. And you say, well I am the 
Minister of Education, I will protect the rights of our children. But 
oh no, you won’t do that. He hasn’t got the courage to do it. He is 
more concerned in saving his hide in the next election, and 
therefore he says this Bill is all right because it gives us the 
advantage and maybe, just maybe, we’ll be able to slide back in 
again and remain the government. 
 
I want to say to the Minister of Education, I know well what 
happened to Ross Thatcher in 1971 — I know well what 
happened. And I can tell you people, the same thing is going to 
happen to you. I want to go back, Mr. Speaker, and remind the 
members opposite what happened. 
 
In 1970 when I was nominated I sent out a letter to my 
constituents and I called it the gerrymander. And I got a number of 
calls from then Liberals who said to me, that isn’t true, what 
you’re saying isn’t true, no government would do that —no 
government would do that. And I said to those members, you 
phone your MLA, who at that time happened to be Austin Forsyth, 
who was called the conscience of the Liberal party. Austin Forsyth 
happened to be the member of that constituency — he was the 
conscience of the Liberal party. They phoned Austin Forsyth, and 
I remember some of those members telling me, if what you’re 
saying is true, you can count on me working for you in the next 
election. When that election is called you can count on our help. 
They found out it was  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

3991 
 

true. 
 
And what did they do to my constituency? What did they do? My 
constituency happens to be on the east side of the river. It was a 
relatively small constituency. The member from Riversdale, his 
constituency happened to be on the west side of the river and was 
a large constituency. So what did they do? Around the exhibition, 
those of you who are familiar with Saskatoon know well, around 
the exhibition it’s a relatively poor area — good supporters for the 
NDP. They took a whole section — they took a whole section of 
the west side of my constituency and threw it in with Mr. 
Romanow’s, at that time, into Riversdale area. Gave the member 
from Riversdale, I believe, about 16 or 18,000 voters, and mine 
was less than nine — less than nine. 
 
And they felt they had a very secure seat. They felt they had a very 
secure seat in Saskatoon Nutana South. But what did the people 
do? The people said, no, we won’t let that happen. You can’t do 
that in a democracy, and if you do we’ll turf you out. And that’s 
exactly what happened, Mr. Speaker, they turfed them out. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Excuse me. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask leave of the 
Assembly to introduce a group of young children. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you, perhaps the youngest group of people that we’ve had 
in the Speaker’s gallery this year. 
 
This is a group from the Creative Corner’s Co-operative 
Childcare, a group in my constituency. and we have, as you can 
see them there, I believe eight students, six kindergarten students, 
and one from grade 2 and one from grade five, Mr. Speaker. The 
teachers with them are Kelly Ann Jackson and Debra Sandgren. 
It’s nice to see you here today, ladies and children; it’s nice to 
have you here. Would the members please join me in welcoming 
this group to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 (continued) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, the member from 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — No, no, the guy that . . . Regina South. The 
member from Regina South, the guy that’s hard to see whether 
he’s standing or sitting, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, he made a 
comment that . . . Well this gives the member from Saskatoon 
South a chance for his brain  

catching up with his mouth. I would just say to the member from 
Regina South that at least there’s a brain to catch up in this 
particular instance, which probably would be absent in his. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members opposite, you can do 
whatever you wish to try and save your hides, but that isn’t going 
to work with the people of Saskatchewan. They will see this as an 
abuse of the democratic system, and they will not accept this. We 
had established, and I have not heard one member saying opposite, 
that the independent boundary commission that was set up under 
the NDP government in 1973 or ’74 was not fair — not one 
member said that it wasn’t fair. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there certainly had to have . . . There should 
have been some changes made in order to accommodate the 
growing areas in Saskatoon and Regina, and we all recognize that. 
But they could have done that under the Act that existed. But no, 
they found that they needed to make some fundamental changes. 
They had to abuse the principle of representation by population, 
and I’m very surprised, Mr. Speaker, because I know some of 
those members opposite. I know some of those members opposite, 
and I’ve talked to some of those members. And when you talk to 
them individually, they tell you how they want to protect 
democracy, how they want to protect this particular principle. And 
yet they sit opposite, say not a word when their government brings 
in a Bill that, as I say, blatantly abuses that principle, and say 
nothing, absolutely nothing. 
 
So I can only conclude one thing, that they’re hypocrites when 
they speak to you individually about the principle of democracy 
that they want to protect, and they put their own selfish interests 
before the interests and the well-being of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I’m surprised at that. I’m surprised that the 
members opposite, some of them will not speak out against this 
Bill. 
 
What was wrong — as the members opposite . . . as my colleagues 
have already pointed out, what was wrong with the independent 
boundary commission that we had? I couldn’t help but read some 
of the comments made by Norman Ward the other day when he 
was asked his impression of this particular Bill that was in the 
House. His comment was: never would I sit on such a commission 
— never would I sit on such a commission. 
 
He said the government should not, should not put the limitations 
on the commission that it’s doing. It should not state how many 
rural seats there should be, and how many urban seats there should 
be. That should be left up to the commission. why? Why did the 
government state that there should only be 29 urban seats? I am 
told that the city of Saskatoon grows on an average annually by 4 
or 5,000 people. That means by the next election we will have an 
additional 20,000 people in Saskatoon — over 200,000 people, 
over 200,000 in Saskatoon alone. And we are guaranteed only 11 
seats. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we believe in the principle of rep by 
pop, then we must try and carry it out as much as we can. We 
know that there is going to be some variances, and there have to be 
to accommodate peculiarities that may exist throughout the 
province. And  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

3992 
 

no one argues with that. My colleague from Prince Albert says, 
yes, maybe we should have some variance for rural Saskatchewan 
because of the scarcity of population, the long distance, but he also 
gave some very positive suggestions as to how they could help 
those MLAs to deal with that scarcity and the travel that they have 
to do. 
 
But you don’t do it by abusing the very fundamental principle on 
which democracy is based. There are other ways of doing that. 
There are other ways of doing it, and those were available to the 
government. But they did it . . . but they’re bringing in this Act, 
Mr. Speaker, primarily because the polls show that they are in 
trouble, and if they don’t change the constituencies in such a way 
that they can at least save a half a dozen to a dozen seats to their 
advantage, they will not be the government. They will not be the 
government. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is wrong. That is 
wrong, and I’m ashamed that the members opposite don’t 
recognize that — at least some of the members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time that we’ve seen this in this 
House — we’ve seen it with the Ombudsman — an excellent 
procedure put in place where the Assembly could agree, and the 
Premier and the Leader of the Opposition could agree, to a 
candidate who would be the Ombudsman and brought before this 
House. That was changed because they wanted to appoint their 
person without any consultation on this side. 
 
We saw the same thing happen with the auditor when they say that 
they didn’t like what the auditor was doing. So what did they do? 
They cut his staff. They try and curb his influence. He’s an 
employee of the Legislative Assembly, and his independence 
should be protected. But again, democracy — no problem, just 
push it aside. We’ll do what is best for us, not what is best for the 
people of Saskatchewan; what is best for the Progressive 
Conservative government and not for the people of Saskatchewan. 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is fundamentally wrong, and we should 
do everything we can to oppose it. 
 
We saw this same thing happening with PURC (Public Utilities 
Review Commission). When the chairman of PURC didn’t do 
what the government wanted it to do, what happened to the 
principle of democracy? Threw it out the window, and arbitrarily, 
just like we’ve seen with Bill 55, arbitrarily bring in an Act which 
scuttles the principles of democracy. We’re not doing what is best 
for Saskatchewan; we’re doing what is best for the Progressive 
Conservative Party. 
 
It ell the members opposite, you’re going to rue the day that you 
brought in this Act because the people won’t forget. The principle 
of democracy and the representation by population is sacred, and 
the people will not let you forget it, and neither will we on this 
side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say one further thing about the 
commission. We had an excellent commission. The procedures 
that were used in establishing this commission were 
unquestionably the best in Canada. 
 
And what was wrong in having on that commission the Clerk of 
the Legislative Assembly, an employee of all the  

people in this Assembly? He has served well on those 
commissions. He is now, I believe, serving on the federal 
commission for the province of Saskatchewan. He is an 
experienced man in that area. He is impartial. 
 
Why would they replace him with a Chief Electoral Officer who is 
and was a bag man of the Conservative government, of the 
Conservative Party? Why — if they aren’t doing it so that they can 
have someone on there that they can convince and persuade and 
tell and instruct exactly how they want those boundaries done? 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is what is wrong with this Bill. And I ask all 
members, not only on this side but on the other side, to oppose this 
Bill. 
 
I can’t see how some of the back-benchers don’t go back to their 
constituents and honestly face them and say . . . I see some of 
them shaking their heads. If you can honestly say to your children 
. . . Well all right, if you can falsify things and be honest, then you 
are a better man than most people. 
 
But some day you’re going to have to look in the mirror too, boy, 
and you’re going to have to say to yourself, yes, I was the one; I 
was the one that agreed with the demolishing, the destruction of 
the principle of representation by population; I was the one that 
was there; I did not stand up; I did not stand up and speak out for 
democracy; I supported Bill 55 because I knew it was in the best 
interests of the Progressive Conservative Party and not within the 
best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I want to simply say, I went through 
one gerrymander in 1971. I was hoping that I wouldn’t have to go 
through another one, but obviously we did. Obviously we’re going 
to go through another one. But I’ll tell the members opposite one 
thing: the people know what you’re up to. You’ve lost your 
credibility, and now you’re trying to blackmail them into voting 
for you again. It isn’t going to work — it isn’t going to work. Save 
at least your honesty. Save what integrity you have left — save 
what integrity you have left and withdraw Bill 55. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that in the conclusion of my remarks, I intend to 
move a motion to amend the main motion and will, in effect, read: 
 
That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
Be not now read a second time because: 
 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

3993 
 

(a) it severely undermines the fundamental democratic principles 
of one person, one vote; and 

 
(b) it fails to provide for a truly independent commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in opposition to Bill 55, The Electoral 
Boundaries Commission Act that the members opposite have 
designed to replace the existing Act. And I speak here this 
morning in sorrow rather than anger at this Act, because this Act 
and your actions opposite tell us something about the nature of 
man and the nature of politics. 
 
In the past 200 years, man has made more scientific and social 
progress than he has made in all the previous years of history. but 
the question that still has to be proven is whether man, who has 
grown up scientifically and intellectually, has also grown up 
morally and socially. 
 
I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that man’s greatest triumph has been 
the development of the principle of democracy — the ideal that 
each and every individual has an intrinsic worth and has, through 
the franchise or the vote, that opportunity to choose who they wish 
to govern them and why. 
 
Woodrow Wilson stated in April 1917, “The world must be safe 
for democracy.” And earlier, Abraham Lincoln in his Gettysburg 
Address gave us his own definition of democracy. “Government 
of the people,” he said, “by the people, and for the people.” 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that these are noble sentiments. And 
history tells us that the development of democracy has been one of 
the greatest moral and intellectual achievements of humankind. 
But democracy, of which we are so proud, are so proud, was not 
achieved, Mr. Speaker, without a great struggle. 
 
And even within the democratic system, the ideal of one man and 
one vote has sometimes been perverted by politicians. 
 
Governor Gerry, who lived during the period of 1744 to 1814, 
won the dubious immortality in history when he redistributed the 
boundaries in the Essex County in Massachusetts for partisan 
political reasons. The local editor said that the new constituency 
looked like a salamander, and some wit dubbed it “gerrymander,” 
and that phrase has stuck, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even with the democratic ideal there have been those 
who would seek to distort the democratic political process for 
partisan advantage. There are those who seek to perpetuate 
themselves in government by attacking the very touchstone of the 
democratic ideal — the principle of one man, one vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does one say about those who seek to cling to 
power by such means? Perhaps the members opposite might think 
again of the words of Lincoln when he said, in the Lincoln and 
Douglas debate: 
 
No man is good enough to govern another man  

without that other’s consent. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should remember that 
public office is a public trust, and that he who serves his party best 
serves the people best. 
 
And when you, the members opposite, use your majority to put 
Bill 55, the gerrymander Bill, into statute books, you will violate 
the public trust, you will disgrace your parties, and you will earn 
the disgust of the people of this province in doing it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I say, Mr. Speaker, they should keep in mind the 
words of William Moody: 
 
Oh ye who lead, take heed; blindness we will forgive, but baseness 
we will smite. 
 
And I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan demonstrated that in 
the last great gerrymander of this province, under the late Premier 
Ross Thatcher. And I say history will repeat itself with people in 
political life cowardly trying to cling to power that will go to any 
means in an unfair gerrymander. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as the members opposite consider their actions, 
they might reflect upon the recent history of this province. And 
prior to the election of 1971, Saskatchewan history has been 
replete with attempts to make the province safe — not for 
democracy, but for the incumbent government. All parties had 
sought to use the electoral system for their own advantage. But I 
say, Mr. Speaker, on April 15, 1970, the incumbent government 
went too far. In that Bill, any pretence of support for the principle 
of one man, one vote was stripped away completely. That Bill was 
seen by the people of Saskatchewan as the last-ditch attempt by a 
discredited government to keep itself in power by effectively 
disenfranchising both urban and rural residents alike. 
 
And let us look back at the history that is being repeated here 
today. let us examine the handiwork that went on in 1971. I want 
to demonstrate how tremendously in 1971 that the gerrymander 
affected the right of one man, one vote. And I want to give a few 
examples, Mr. Speaker, of what can happen when a political party 
interferes with the democratic process. In 1971 there were 5,759 
voters in the constituency of Gravelbourg who elected a Liberal 
with a majority of 44 votes. In the nearby constituency of Swift 
Current they had 13,288 voters elected a New Democrat with a 
majority of over 2,000. In the same election — I want people to 
listen to this — in the same election in Regina, Regina Park had 
4,573 voters . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Albert Park. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — . . . Albert Park, in Regina Albert Park had 4,573 
voters, and they elected a Liberal with a majority of 971 votes. 
 
And in Regina Centre, Mr. Speaker, 17,599 voters elected a New 
Democrat with a majority of 5,552 votes. The majority in Regina 
Centre was larger than the constituency of Albert Park. That’s the 
game that these  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

3994 
 

members opposite are playing. And people . . . and I say to you all 
across the province the pattern was the same — enormous 
majorities in enormous seats, tiny majorities in postage stamp-size 
seats. It was most blatant attempt in Saskatchewan history to 
thwart the will of Saskatchewan people. 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker, it failed, as the actions contemplated here 
by the members opposite will also fail. You will think that these 
people opposite would learn from history. But in their unseemly 
lust for power, with all pretence of morality stripped away, we see 
them for what they are, Mr. Speaker, a second generation of 
vipers. We see the premier for what he really is, a carbon copy of 
the ghost of politicians of the past. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas, I think said it well 
when he said this: 
 
Let me remind you (Tommy Douglas said) let me remind you 
what Fascism is. It need not wear a brown shirt or a green shirt; it 
may even wear a dress-shirt. Fascism begins the moment a ruling 
class, fearing the people may use their political democracy to gain 
political power, begin to destroy political democracy in order to 
retain their power of exploitation and special privilege, and that is 
what is carrying on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Speaker, those of you who shared a 
common philosophy in 1971 and attempted to pervert democracy 
in 1971, will, I say, in 1987 fail once more. The tragedy is that you 
are even attempting such an action. 
 
Mr. speaker, following that same election in 1971, even after the 
most vicious gerrymander in the history of this province, indeed in 
Canada, I want to say that what happened in 1971, a New 
Democratic Party government, led by the Leader of the 
Opposition, came to office, won overwhelmingly in spite of the 
gerrymander, and he came to office, and the people had asked him 
to represent them fairly. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition said that never again in 
Saskatchewan would an incumbent government have the 
opportunity to impose tyranny of the elected minority on the 
wishes of the majority. Never again, said the leader, the former 
premier, would an incumbent government be allowed to 
manipulate electoral boundaries to serve itself. Never again, he 
said, would an incumbent government have the opportunity to 
create an electoral system in which one person’s vote was worth 
four times that of his fellow citizen. But “never again” in politics, 
Mr. Speaker, it would appear is not a very long time. 
 
Those who would seek to pervert and twist the democratic process 
to serve their own discredited advantage have crawled out of the 
graveyard of history and seek once more to turn back the clock to 
a disgusting, discredited past. So much for the public trust. So 
much for political integrity. So much for political courage. Once  

more the draftsman’s pen will be used for political advantage. 
 
And following 1971 the New Democratic Party established, as I 
indicated, an independent boundaries commission, Mr. Speaker, 
an independent boundaries commission that would be truly 
independent, based on democratic principles, and that would 
involve the public of Saskatchewan directly for the first time. For 
the first time in Saskatchewan we had a commitment from an 
incumbent government that the sole purpose of the boundaries 
commission was to serve the people of Saskatchewan and not the 
political needs of the government of the day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — For the first time in Saskatchewan we declared in 
statute that each and every citizen of Saskatchewan could rest 
assured that regardless of where he lived, or how much he owned, 
or what political party he supported, his vote would be worth 
approximately the same as each other resident in Saskatchewan. 
And this Act, Mr. Speaker, was the final realization of what 
democracy is all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, they looked at last year’s 
election results, they looked at the latest polls. They looked at their 
future and knew that there was no political future. Mr. Speaker, 
they had no future if fairness was applied. So somewhere over 
there in the dark closeted room, behind closed doors, out of light 
of day, they met, and the only order of business was very simple, 
Mr. Speaker: how can we avoid political disaster? How can we 
prevent the people from venting their electoral spleen on our 
candidates? How can we save the people from themselves, they 
said. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they thought about banning elections, but they 
had to discard that idea. Even some of their own members said 
they couldn’t go that far. So finally, Mr. Speaker, after reviewing 
all of the options there was only one avenue left to the members 
on the government side, one last resort to cling to power. If you 
couldn’t avoid an election — although they are trying to do that in 
Saskatoon Eastview, the largest constituency in Saskatchewan, 
where over 18,000 electors have been without a member of the 
legislature since last spring — yes, if you couldn’t avoid an 
election, then try and turn the electoral system to your own 
advantage. 
 
So that was the result, Mr. Speaker. Out of the back room they 
came, secure in their thought that if they were to avoid the Devine 
retribution that they would need a divine redistribution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — So out of their machinations came Bill 55. Now I 
know the members opposite will stand up — not many of them. I 
doubt if they’ll join the debate and defend this Bill, but anyone 
that will stand up — and there’s only been one of them — that 
they will say that this Act does not even draw up political 
boundaries. And they’ll say,  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

3995 
 

how can we make such accusations. They say, trust us. They say, 
we care about democracy. And they will say, believe us. They will 
say that, but the people will not believe. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, I ask: what was wrong with the 
existing Act? Why did they have to dismantle that which was 
introduced by the former premier of this province that gave 
fairness throughout this province, until this government decided 
that apparently it was objectionable. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, why 
did it have to be dismantled? What was it in that was so 
objectionable to the members opposite? 
 
So I looked at the existing Act and I quickly saw why the 
members opposite were so concerned about the mechanism that 
was in place before. And you know why it bothered them? That 
Act was fair. Secondly, it was equitable. Third, it was democratic. 
Fourth, it was truly independent. And five, it allowed for public 
involvement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I say, can you imagine their horror, 
Mr. Speaker, when they found out that the existing Act respected 
democracy, respected the individual worth of each and every 
citizen in this province, was in fact, horrors of horrors, Mr. 
Speaker — it was truly independent. They would not be told what 
to do, Mr. Speaker, in fact it would have to be listened to by them. 
It was obvious that the Act had to go. Such legislation had no 
place in the Tory Saskatchewan. 
 
It was obvious that under the previous Act that they would have 
little or no control over the fairness of the application of that Act. 
And when you realize, Mr. Speaker, how fragile democracy is — 
or do the members opposite? They knew that it needed all the help 
it could possibly get. So I say, Mr. Speaker, what they did is scrap 
the Act and today we are debating this new Act. 
 
And what, Mr. Speaker, are some of the features of this Tory Bill. 
Is it independent I ask? Not any more, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 
independent. Is it democratic? Not any more, Mr. Speaker. Does it 
allow for public input? Certainly not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, Bill 55 should be renamed not the electoral 
boundaries commission; rather, Mr. Speaker, this is an Act 
establishing the Devine right to rule. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Or perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it should be called an 
Act preventing the tyranny of the majority. Or an Act for the 
preservation of the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan, because that’s what it’s designed for. Whatever 
you call it, Mr. Speaker, it is an unseemly and ill-advised piece of 
legislation that violates all the moral precepts of politics. 
 
What does this Act do, Mr. Speaker, that is so bad, some members 
opposite will say. It is fairly independent they will claim. True, the 
Leader of the Opposition will no longer be consulted as to the 
members on the commission, but after this Act becomes law he 
will be  

Leader of the Opposition for life. He will not need to be involved. 
Certainly the fact that the members of the commission will include 
the Chief Electoral Officer, a political appointment by the 
members opposite, as opposed to the Clerk of the Legislative 
Assembly, may seem to some to be partisan. But not by us, say the 
members opposite. It’s all a tempest in a teapot, they say. They 
will claim: you can trust us. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have some difficulty and so does the people 
of Saskatchewan trusting this government any longer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that they say one thing 
and they do the opposite. Can the dental workers in the province 
trust the members opposite? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Can the highway workers in this province trust 
the members opposite? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No way! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Can the people who are paying huge drug bills 
trust the members over there? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No, never again! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Can students trust the members over there? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Teachers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Workers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Can these people trust the members opposite? 
And the answer is no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This legislation, Mr. Speaker, is a licence to electoral theft. And if 
that is not their purpose, then why did they change the Act? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have stripped their commission of its 
independence. They have removed public input and involvement, 
but they have done more. They have also attacked the very basis 
on which our democratic system is founded. They have legislated 
an end to the principle of one man, one vote. They have legislated 
a class system of voters. 
 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

3996 
 

They have created two classes of voters: those who would vote 
Tory and who, because of their particular acumen, are rewarded as 
the privileged class; and there are those who have the good sense 
to vote NDP, who shall be classed second class. 
 
This Act, Mr. Speaker, is the Titanic of the electoral Acts. But we 
know what happened to the Titanic. The unthinkable happened; 
the unsinkable sank — just like this government will sink, Mr. 
Speaker, out of sight when they dare to call the next election. 
 
And why will this happen, Mr. Speaker? It will occur because if 
there is one quality that is found in every resident in 
Saskatchewan, that is fairness. The people of Saskatchewan value 
fairness. They value equality. They believe that each and every 
person in Saskatchewan should be treated fairly, and this new Act 
violates that fundamental concept of fairness. 
 
The new commission is bound by statute to create two northern 
seats, 35 rural seats, and 29 urbane seats. And as my colleague 
from Saskatoon South indicated, that Dr. Norman Ward, the head 
of the political science department, University of Saskatchewan, 
so contemptuously looked at this Act and said, I wouldn’t even sit 
on that Act . . . I wouldn’t even sit on that commission because of 
the outline and the drafting of that legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I want to say, in dividing the province up 
into two northern seats, 35 rural seats, 29 urban seats, that this is a 
significant change from the format of the Act which it replaces. 
 
The net result of this change is that the commission no longer has 
the option to combine urban and rural areas. It must now operate 
within the three parameters; the north, the rural regions of the 
province, and the urban regions. It is further restricted because the 
decision by the government to establish a fixed number of seats 
for each of the three regions, two for the North, 35 for rural, 29 for 
urban. This number remains constant according to the new Act. 
For the next two elections, that means that eight to ten years from 
now, in 1997, regardless of any populationship that occurs in the 
province during that time, there will be two seats in the North, 35 
seats in the rural, and 29 seats in the urban. 
 
Two years ago, Mr. Speaker, the 29 urban seats contained 316,817 
voters, an average of 10,924 voters per seat. The 35 rural seats 
contained 333,122 voters, an average of 9,517 voters per seat, that 
was in the last election. Two years ago there were 14,007 more 
voters in each of the urban seats, on average, than there were in 
each of the rural seats. As I indicated, this amounts to about a 13 
per cent overall differential that was within the tolerance of 15 per 
cent specified under the Act that this government is abolishing, 
because under the old Act there was a 15 per cent plus or minus 
tolerance. 
 
This differential reflected that the so-called quality of 
representation argument put forward by the proponents of some 
differential between urban and rural seats, as  

such it would fit the criteria of equality and fairness held by most 
people of Saskatchewan. But now, under this Act, we have fixed 
the number of seats: two northern, 35 rural, 29 urban seats. This 
government has arbitrarily declared that regardless of what 
happens in the next eight to ten years to the population of 
Saskatchewan there shall be those set amount, two northern, 35 
rural seats, and 29 urban. 
 
And let us look now at what has happened in the past 10 years in 
Saskatchewan. Has our population remained basically constant? 
Relatively, it has. It has declined a bit since the Premier made the 
export of young people one of his major priorities, but basically 
our population has remained relatively stable. But has the 
population remained stable within the provincial boundaries? No, 
Mr. Speaker, it has not. There has been a continuing shift from 
rural Saskatchewan into our cities, and therein lies the significance 
of boxing the number of seats by statute. 
 
(1115) 
 
What this government is doing is establishing a permanent system 
of disproportional representation on escalating disenfranchisement 
of urban voters. Every day, every week, every year, the urban vote 
will be worth less and less as the population shifts to the urban. 
Every day, every week, every year, as the number of rural voters 
decline, the votes will be worth more and more. This Act is truly 
an Act of morbid genius. 
 
And let us assume, Mr. Speaker, some assumption in respect to 
this Act. Let us assume, Mr. Speaker, that there is a population 
shift of 3 per cent per year from the rural to the urban based on the 
previous movements. This is a conservative estimate. What will 
happen in 1991 is as follows: in rural Saskatchewan, 283, 153 
voters will reside in 35 seats — an average of 8,090 voters per 
seat. In urban Saskatchewan, 351,817 will reside in 29 seats — an 
average of 12,131 voters per seat. So what they have in rural seats 
by 1991, 8,000 voters, and the average seat in the urban would be 
over 12,000. 
 
By 1995, two elections from now — and remember, Mr. Speaker, 
this is as specified in the Act — in rural Saskatchewan, using the 
same principle of the 3 per cent shift, 240,680 voters will reside in 
35 seats, rural — an average of 6,800 voters per seat. In urban 
Saskatchewan, as decreed by your legislation, 394,317 voters will 
reside in 29 seats, an average of 13,597 voters per sat. So you have 
the discretion of 2:1 ratio that is proposed, which is blueprinted in 
this Bill. One rural vote will be worth two urban votes — and they 
talk so much for equity, so much for fairness, and so much for 
democracy. There can be no justification under any system of 
representation for such an enormous discrepancy: 394,000-plus 
voters will reside in 29 seats, 240 . . . in 35 seats in the rural — 
153,637 more voters, six less seats. What do you call it, Mr. 
Speaker? You call it a gerrymander. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it gets worse; within those limits the Tories have 
built in the 25 per cent differential, so that the rural seats would be 
25 per cent above the 6,876 and 25 per cent below the 6,876, so 
we could have rural constituencies with as few as 5,300 voters, 
and we could have urban constituencies with as many as 18,300 
voters. 
 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

3997 
 

That’s what the Act does — 5,300 is what they could have in a 
rural seat, and 18,300 in a city — an electoral system that weighs a 
rural vote three times more than its urban counterpart. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is the most flagrant abuse of democracy 
perpetrated by the members opposite since they arrived in this 
House. Mr. Speaker, the ideal of one man, one vote, the ideal of 
democratic representation, has been abolished in this Bill. Mr. 
Speaker, the supreme Court of United States decided in 1964 that 
the fundamental principle of representative government was equal 
representation for an equal number of people in electoral districts, 
since legislators represented people. And the Supreme court in the 
United States prevented a gross gerrymander in the United States. 
People, Mr. Speaker, not farms, cities, or economic interests, is 
what we represent. And that appeared to be a sensible decision, 
Mr. Speaker, and under the present Act I say that that fundamental 
principle that the legislators represented is gone. 
 
But under this new Act, Mr. Speaker, political scientist Norman 
Ward stated in an interview, “If a commission is to be 
independent, it should be really independent. It shouldn’t be 
directed to do this and to do that.” Professor Ward stated that 
when he worked on the federal boundaries commission in 
Saskatchewan, “We could arrange the boundaries any way we 
liked, provided we stayed within the guide-lines for population.” 
He went on further to state, “I don’t know what government’s 
motives are, but I wouldn’t myself want to sit on a commission 
given that kind of a directive.” And that’s a man that has sat, head 
of the political science department, sat on the federal boundaries, a 
man who is respected throughout Saskatchewan who says this Act 
is so bad that he wouldn’t even sit on it. That’s how bad it is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that any person of integrity would 
agree with Dr. Ward. The guide-line that motivates this Act is the 
political survival of this government. The fact that they are 
prepared to sacrifice very principle of democratic representation in 
this vain attempt to retain hold of their political power is a 
measure of how much they realize they are despised by the vast 
majority of the people of this province. The Act confirms that the 
polls are already told us, that this government has a serious 
problem with the people of the province. It has always had a 
credibility problem. Now it has added to than an integrity 
problem. 
 
When the question is called, I ask, will any of the members 
opposite have the political courage and the integrity to stand in his 
place and say that this Act is morally and politically wrong, that it 
erodes the basic foundations of the democratic principle. Or will 
they dance like the monkey to the organ-grinder’s tune? And I 
suspect that’s what they will be doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been in this House for a number of years, over 
12 years, and I say that I respect the democratic process, and this is 
a sad day when you see the very basis of democracy being eroded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I have disagreed with the members 
opposite when they have brought in their legislation, but I have 
never felt what they did was not within their right. But with this 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, they are prepared to take away rights of 
the majority of the Saskatchewan people to pass judgement on 
their actions. 
 
With this Act, I believe they are violating the Charter of Rights 
and Freedoms which stress that every individual has the right to 
equal protection and equal benefit of the law. 
 
And I can say, Mr. Speaker, that in fact the gerrymander that was 
perpetrated by the Social Credit and other right-wing government 
in British Columbia is being challenged today. And the courts 
have decided that they have a right to look at unfair legislation 
similar to this. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, it is a sorry day when the party of John 
Diefenbaker stooped so low that it violates everything that John 
Diefenbaker stood for. As early as 1952, John Diefenbaker stated: 
a Bill of rights would do more; it would make parliament freedom 
conscious; it would make parliament realize that rights are to be 
preserved; it would make parliament more cautious in passing 
laws that would have the effect of interfering with freedom; it 
would give to Canadians the realization that parliament would be 
jealous of his rights and would not infringe upon those rights 
which are dear to us all. 
 
John Diefenbaker would see this Act as a violation of all that he 
stood for. he would see this Act for what it truly is, the march of a 
government towards arbitrary power, the arrogance of men clad in 
a little brief authority. I say, Mr. Speaker, in 1960 he said, “I am a 
free Canadian, free to choose those who shall govern my country.” 
Twenty-eight years later, in the province he loved and which he 
represented so long, members of his own party, in this Act, are 
violating everything that John Diefenbaker held dear. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, nothing illustrates more clearly the 
hypocrisy of the members opposite, that at the same time as they 
are found funding to keep the John Diefenbaker centre open, that 
they would introduce this Act. I say this is a tragedy for the 
memories of John Diefenbaker and his most cherished ideals. This 
is a tragedy for the Progressive Conservative Party in that it would 
stoop to such low levels of morality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I say, Mr. Speaker, this is a tragedy for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously I’ll be voting against this Bill, and I want 
to move a motion: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted, and 
the following substituted therefor: 

 
Be not now read a second time because: 

 
(a) it severely undermines the fundamental democratic 
principles of one person, one vote; and 

 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

3998 
 

(b) it fails to provide for a truly independent commission. 
 
I so move. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I never 
thought, when I came into this legislature . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — He never does, I know. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — . . . that I would ever have to stand here and 
listen to a government opposite cackle over a serious matter, but 
that I would ever have to stand here and defend the people against 
the government they elected . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a Bill here that is tearing apart democracy. 
and I ask, what is the need for this Bill? Whenever something 
comes up for legislation, there’s always a need. And the 
government, I think, establishes those needs a number of ways. It 
establishes the needs by listening to the people — direct contact 
— people phoning in or talking on the street. It establishes needs 
for legislation by polling to see how popular their programs are, 
and this government has seen how popular its programs are in 
recent polls. We see special interest groups — doctors, nurses, 
educators, farmers — all coming on the government, telling them 
no, their programs are wrong. We see people, a hundred thousand 
strong, presenting petitions to the government, saying no, your 
program’s wrong. 
 
So there are needs for legislation. But does the government listen 
to the people and the needs, the response that is necessary? I 
believe that a response should be to make things better for the 
people. I believe legislation should be put in place to make sure 
that the people do not suffer and do not have hardships, and so that 
the economy continues to work. 
 
But what we have here is something totally opposite. We have a 
situation where, instead of responding to the needs of the people, 
because a government who can’t manage and who doesn’t know 
how to run the affairs of this province, who do not respond to 
needs of people, they’re governing for themselves. Many of the 
major Bills in this legislature this sitting have been as the result of 
a government that can’t manage, whether it be taking money from 
the people and giving money to the government to spread around 
in patronage and other ways that relate to terrible management. 
 
So what we have, Mr. Speaker, the situation in 1982, the word was 
out, we need a change, and the people of this province responded 
to that, and they got a change. At that time they didn’t realize the 
incompetence that they had received, so they got an incompetent 
government. Incompetent and inexperienced governments tend to 
not be able to manage. They got that, a government that couldn’t 
manage. 
 
(1130) 
 

A government that was so vindictive they ripped apart the civil 
service; they ripped apart any position of power that was held by a 
New Democrat just for no other reason than being vindictive, and 
through patronage put back people who were incompetent, simply 
because they were Tories. 
 
And as a result of that, the public started to hurt, they started to 
feel the results of the mismanagement, the bad programs, the cuts. 
And so there was the backlash. And so the government would 
come along with a few cosmetic cures, but it didn’t help because 
the people continued to say no, through petition, through letters, 
through demonstration and phone calls. 
 
So the government starts to panic. It panicked three years before 
an election if you can believe it. The Premier says well, when 
talking about the polls, well we have a honeymoon period after the 
election and now the honeymoon’s over. Well, Mr. Speaker, I tell 
you the marriage is over because the people of this province won’t 
accept this. 
 
And so then, the government panics and it has to do something — 
we have to do something to maintain ourselves. So instead of 
governing for the people, we’re going to govern for government, 
and that’s the whole principle behind this Bill: governing for 
government. It’s anti-democratic, Mr. Speaker, and it’s terribly 
unfair. 
 
It also shows that the government has no confidence in itself. 
Because of their own programs they’re scared that they’re going to 
get turfed out of office, and so to remedy that they gerrymander 
the province in showing direct lack of confidence in themselves. 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when a government’s got no 
confidence in itself, how do they expect the people to have 
confidence in them ever again? 
 
So what do we have? There ought to be a Bill. We’re going to 
save ourselves; there ought to be a Bill. So they come up with this 
Bill, and in the whole process they’ve disregarded democracy in 
an attempt to stay in power. They’re making what I call 
orchestrated democracy, manipulating democracy, and 
disregarding the democratic principles that we have built over 
time, over the centuries. 
 
And that’s a common theme of this government — tear things 
apart simply for power. That’s the thing they’re concerned about, 
is power, maintaining power for oneself. How sad! And, Mr. 
Speaker, let’s look at an example. This government now has the 
opportunity to carve up this province to ensure themselves 
government. And we have people in a constituency that they have 
hacked out for themselves who do not believe in the principles put 
forward by this government. And so in a democracy, if you don’t 
believe in the principles put forward by a government, you know, 
you have the right to vote for some other party. But that right, Mr. 
Speaker, has been taken away. 
 
The right to have a government member, for many people in this 
province, a government member of their philosophy, has been 
taken away from them. And you talk about your repressive 
regimes. You talk about communism. You talk about all the 
countries of this world  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

3999 
 

who are supposedly, as members opposite say, oppressive 
regimes, and these people act the same way — by taking away the 
fundamental right of expressing your ideas through your party, 
taking away the fundamental right of one person, one vote. The 
equality — it’s gone. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I say that this is a very, very sad tale being told in 
this province, a tale that started as a fairy tale. It started a fairy tale 
by a party who promised that it was going to improve things, 
promised that it was going to improve the economy and the social 
programs and the health programs, and all of a sudden this little 
fairy tale has turned into a nightmare for many people in this 
province. And because they know that, they know it’s a nightmare 
for many people, they know that the future of this government is 
very, very, very doubtful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, they’re 
clinging to power, desperately trying to cling to power. and with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say at this time, I will be voting 
in favour of the amendment and against the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 
(1145) 
 

Yeas — 20 
 
Blakeney Atkinson 
Prebble Anguish 
Brockelbank Hagel 
Shillington Lyons 
Koskie Calvert 
Rolfes Lautermilch 
Mitchell Smart 
Upshall Van Mulligen 
Solomon  Koenker 
Kowalsky Goodale 
 

Nays — 27 
 
Muller Sauder 
Duncan Johnson 
Berntson McLaren 
Taylor Hopfner 
Swan Petersen 
Muirhead Swenson 
Maxwell Baker 
Gerich Gleim 
Hepworth Neudorf 
Hardy Gardner 
Klein Kopelchuk 
Meiklejohn Saxinger 
Pickering Britton 
Martin  
 

(1148) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Muller Sauder 
Duncan Johnson 
Berntson McLaren 
Taylor Hopfner 
Swan Petersen 
Muirhead Swenson 
Maxwell Baker 
Gerich Gleim 
Hepworth Neudorf 
Hardy Gardner 
Klein Kopelchuk 
Meiklejohn Saxinger 
Pickering Britton 
Martin  
 

Nays — 20 
 
Blakeney Atkinson 
Prebble Anguish 
Brockelbank Hagel 
Shillington Lyons 
Koskie Calvert 
Rolfes Lautermilch 
Mitchell Smart 
Upshall Van Mulligen 
Solomon Koenker 
Kowalsky Goodale 
 
The Bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly, 
referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Provincial Secretary 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 30 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to ask the 
minister, with respect to executive administration on page 74 of 
the budget estimates, a question relating to that. I would ask the 
minister: could we get the names, the qualifications, as well as the 
job descriptions for the eight people that are paid the $325,000 in 
salaries, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t have them all. I can get them, and 
I will forward those names and job descriptions and salaries to the 
hon. member . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Good Heavens, there’s only half a dozen, 
you should have them memorized. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, I should have them memorized but I 
don’t. There are only, I think, two people in my office that are 
considered to being Provincial Secretary people and they are not, I 
believe,  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

4000 
 

among the names that are set out as a complement there of eight 
per annum. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Could we also have on that list the related 
political staff, their qualifications and salaries attached to the 
department and to you with respect to being Provincial Secretary? 
 
Who is your deputy minister now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — As of a few, one or two weeks ago, it’s 
Bill Clarke. It was Marj Jermyn for several years, and she retired, I 
think, in June of this year, perhaps July of this year, and Bill 
Clarke has been my deputy for the last two or three weeks. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Was this Marj Jermyn the same Marj Jermyn 
that was the secretary to the former leader of the Conservative 
Party, Dick Collver? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — This Marj Jermyn is not only one and the 
same, but has worked very closely with me and my party, our 
party, for the last, I think, 12 years. Prior to that she was with 
Agribition, has her roots very deeply into agricultural 
Saskatchewan, and she was just a very fine deputy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I would appreciate as well, Mr. Minister, a 
listing of her qualifications and salary that was paid to her during 
the course of the last year, if possible? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nemo problema. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Pardon me? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sure. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Sure. Okay. Is any of the money in the 
Provincial Secretary’s budget — has it been spent on any polling 
or advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No. I should take . . . I wonder if I could 
introduce my staff, Mr. Chairman. On my left is Bill Clarke, the 
deputy provincial secretary; on my right is, Elizabeth Smith from 
the Department of Finance. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Now you could ask the tough questions. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — That was the tough one, yes. That was the tough 
questions. I see in estimated expenditures 1987 to ’86, a total of 
$1,432,800. That’s the payments you were making to the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. Could you 
please explain what that is for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. Since the property management 
Crown came into being, the administration for space and operating 
has changed somewhat, and that 1,424,500 that you’re talking 
about is for the operating expenses of this building, except for 
space used by the office of Executive Council; for the Legislative 
Library storage at 3211 Albert Street; for the Legislative Library 
satellite office in the Walter Scott Building; for the provincial 
inquiry centre in the T.C. Douglas Building;  

and for the office of the Lieutenant Governor in Government 
House; and for electoral office storage in the Roll-o-Flex Building, 
electoral office in the school trustees’ building, and the office of 
the Premier in Saskatoon, previously in the Sturdy Stone Building. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Why would we have, under this budgetary item, 
expenses related to Executive Council and other departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s simply a decision made in the new 
scheme of things, administratively. Somebody had to pay the rent, 
and so it was decided that, to the extent that we could, it would be 
handled out of one house, as it were, so Provincial Secretary was 
chosen. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — But does not the other departments that you 
referred to also pay funds into the property management 
corporation for the purposes of rent. And if that’s the case, I can’t 
understand why you would roll into your budget the amounts that 
should be allocated and attributed to Executive Council if that’s 
what it was for. 
 
It seems to me, Minister, that for $1.4 million, where there was no 
figure that’s corresponding to that in the previous year, it’s an 
expenditure which averages about a $100,000 per employee of 
your department for rent, and that seems to be fairly steep rent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Of course if you interpret it that way I 
suppose, but the fact is we are paying the operating for this total 
building, and I expect that that covers the heat and light and so on 
that lights your caucus room as well. And so it’s not a million 
dollars or a million and a half for the rent for the eight people in 
the Provincial Secretary’s department, it was an administrative 
decision taken to handle it in this fashion, and it’s as simple as 
that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And last year the rents came from where for all 
of these places? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It was handled in the Department of 
Supply and Services previously. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Okay. Could you please tell me what the 
responsibilities and functions of the Department of the Provincial 
Secretary are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — In a general sense we are responsible for 
the provincial inquiry centre, the Saskatoon cabinet office, the 
Office of the Lieutenant Governor and, of course, the prime 
purpose for the existence of the Provincial Secretary is that of the 
custodian of the great seal of the province of Saskatchewan, and 
recently we were responsible for the budget of the royal visit of 
Her Majesty, the Queen. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — How many people are paid out of the Provincial 
Secretary’s budget that work in the cabinet office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There are two employees paid by the 
Provincial Secretary that work in the Premier’s office in 
Saskatoon, and I’ve already undertaken to provide the  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

4001 
 

job descriptions and qualifications of those. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I notice that there’s no expenditure here for the 
cabinet office that’s defined in the Estimates, and I was wondering 
if you could also explain, when you provide the written material, 
under which budget they’re paid? 
 
And also I’d like to have, Minister, some indication as to whether 
there’s any ministerial expenses that came out of this budget? Is 
there? And could I have some figures as to what the estimated 
expenses will be for this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, the ministerial expenses included 
in that budget are my salary and my travel. And the salary is pretty 
easy to project; the travel we estimated, I think, $5,000, and 
year-to-date none has been used. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — None has been released. Should one assume 
that none has been claimed then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — None has been used or claimed as 
Provincial Secretary. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Just one final item, Minister, and it relates to the 
Coopers & Lybrand study that’s being done for the government. 
We get conflicting numbers in terms of dollars that’s being spent 
on it. I have a confirmation here from one Norman Riddell, deputy 
minister to the Premier, that you are the minister that’s heading 
this study up and that any questions related thereto should go 
directly to you. My question is: is the Department of the Provincial 
Secretary at all involved with regards to any of the expenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, the Department of the Provincial 
Secretary has no responsibility for the Coopers & Lybrand 
exercise. As minister responsible for Crown Management Board, I 
have responsibility for that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So you’re managing . . . You’re in charge of the 
Coopers & Lybrand study as a result of your relationship with the 
Crown Management Board, and they’re the ones who’d be paying 
for the study and related expenses. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’d be happy to deal with those questions 
in Crown Corporations Committee. But again, that was a 
convenient way to do it, and the actual costs, when everything is 
all in and calculated, will be appropriated to the various 
departments on a prorated basis. But that has nothing to do with 
Provincial Secretary. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Final question. The staff that worked under the 
Provincial Secretary’s department, could you also provide, when 
you provide the background and salaries and expenses, whether or 
not they qualify for government cars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, it’s getting easier. The eight 
positions include my deputy and two clerical positions in 
Saskatoon, and five vacant positions and . . . oh, and one in my 
office . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Five vacancies. Right. So I 
will give a job description as the earlier  

undertaking was, and the cars, etc. My deputy has a car, but I 
don’t think anybody else has one, but I’ll confirm that and provide 
that in writing. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Just a codicil to my final question. Item 3 under 
vote 30, I note that the other expenses of the Office of the 
Lieutenant Governor is increased from 42.9 to 55.5. What would 
be the reason for that large increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, the Lieutenant Governor advanced, I 
think, a pretty compelling argument that he did quite a lot on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan representing the Queen here 
in the province of Saskatchewan and previously he had no 
entertainment budget. And so this year, for the first time ever, we 
have from the province granted him $1,000 a month entertainment 
budget. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Would you give us the terms under which 
that $1,000 . . . Is that something that he pays himself and submits 
receipts for expenses for, or is this something he submits bills and 
the bills are paid. I’m curious as to how the $1,000 a month 
expense allowance . . . entertainment allowance, rather, works. 
How does the payment system work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We told him we’d provide him with 
$1,000 each month, and then on a quarterly basis he provides a 
statement, and there’s a reconciliation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So I gather this is an allowance that’s 
available to the Lieutenant Governor to entertain anyone, 
including the minister himself if you were to have lunch with the 
Lieutenant Governor. I assume this is an allowance to entertain 
anyone. I recognize this is a delicate subject, but $1,000 a month 
entertainment allowance to be used entirely at the discretion of the 
office holder is a very rich allowance. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What are the restrictions? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My colleague suggested a question which 
should be asked. What are the restrictions, if any, on the use of the 
entertainment allowance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The expenditures are made at the 
discretion of His Honour, and there is an accounting quarterly. 
And as it relates to the minister dining with the Lieutenant 
Governor, the only time I recall that happening, I was sitting at the 
table next to the Leader of the Opposition, and that was during the 
recent visit by Her Majesty. And I’m told that there were other 
people in the room that saw us sitting together there and said that 
we were both alone so . . . 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to preface my remarks by saying that I 
have no concern about the present incumbent misusing that. The 
present incumbent I know from a different movie when he was 
chief justice. He was the soul of discretion and integrity. But 
$1,000 a month expense allowance to be used at the discretion of 
the office holder is just way too much in a province of $1 billion 
. . . 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder what . . . as I say, no reflection on the 
present incumbent whom I would not have any  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

 

4002 
 

concern about, but that as an expense allowance is just way too 
much. Mr. Minister, what other expenses are available — free 
flights — what other expenses does this individual get? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, it’s up to $1,000 a month. He’s not 
compelled to spend it. And it will be a long time, I suspect — if 
these are patronage appointments — before one of your people 
ever get in there. 
 
So I think that, having taken my cheap shot, the fact is that 
compared to other jurisdictions and the way that their lieutenant 
governors are treated in this respect, this $1,000 a month is very, 
very modest. And I will give you the undertaking — I don’t have 
it here — to provide you with that comparison when I give all the 
other information. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well compared with some of the things this 
budget has seen and the cuts we’ve seen, $1,000 a month is a fair 
sum of money. 
 
Mr. Minister, what other expenses is he allowed to claim? What 
travel expenses, what other perks is he allowed to claim? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, salary and all out-of-province 
travel and expenses are paid by Ottawa. The province pays the 
operating cost of the office, provide him with a car and 
in-province travel. And he has access to CVA executive air as 
well, in-province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If the federal government pays all of his 
travel expenses and so on out-of-province, do I assume then that 
since we are intraprovince the expense allowance is used 
intraprovince and not outside the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That’s absolutely correct. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I’d sent over a note for the 
minister with regard to space and consultant studies, and I wonder 
if the minister could send that over as soon as possible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, we can give a list of the properties. 
And understand that some of the things that we’re paying for 
aren’t properties at all. Like this building, we’re paying for the 
operating costs of this building. That would include operating for 
space that you occupy and I occupy, and so on. So it’ll get a little 
. . . Well we’ll provide information, is what I’m saying. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I’ll be sure to read the minister’s footnotes 
that’s on the information that will explain that and make it 
adequately clear. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Items 3 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Provincial Secretary 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 30 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 
 
I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to 
thank my officials. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 
 


