













































September 14, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN\ 

September 14, 1987 

  

 

 

2509 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditures – Vote 36 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, in the last few weeks it has 

come to light that the Legal Aid Commission has imposed a 

user fee on the individuals who use the services of legal aid 

lawyers, and this has been imposed with the agreement in 

sanction of the PC government. The imposition of such user 

fees, Mr. Chairman, greatly restricts accessibility to legal 

services to those with limited incomes. 

 

And to begin with, only the most poor of people receive legal 

services, and many poor people can’t afford the user fee that is 

intended to be imposed – the $60 fee to a maximum, I think, of 

$400. Many people can’t afford that and may still not be on 

welfare. 

 

I know that what I will hear and what we heard this afternoon, 

and what we’ve heard on a number of occasions from the 

members opposite, is that, for example, in the case of the drug 

prescription question, what’s $40 a month? What’s $30? What’s 

$40 a month to an individual? That’s all . . . that’s the 20 per 

cent that they’re responsible for. 

 

Well that’s an easy thing for someone to say when they’re 

earning a high income – $40 a month is significant to someone 

on a $60,000 salary, for example, which I understand is the 

cabinet’s salary, what a cabinet minister would earn. But let’s 

just take a look at what that means to somebody on a $1,000 

income for example — $40 per month on a $1,000 income is 

approximately 4 per cent of their income. Now if we take 4 per 

cent of a $60,000 income . . . if we take 4 per cent of $60,000, 

that’s $200 a month – $200 a month on a $5,000-a-month 

income – $2,400 a year. 

 

So when the members opposite say people can afford the $60 

for user fees on legal aid, or the $40 on the prescription drug 

plan, they must remember that when they’re talking about 

people with $1,000 income, which is more than what somebody 

on minimum wage earns on a monthly basis, that’s 4 per cent of 

their income, which would amount to $200 of a cabinet 

minister’s income if the percentages were taken into 

consideration. The other thing one has to consider is the fact 

that on a $5,000-a-month income, the balance that’s left over, 

$4,800, goes a lot further than the balance left over on a $1,000 

income. 

 

So I’m trying to put this problem into perspective, and it’s easy 

to come out and say, well what’s 60 bucks? They can afford 

$60 for user fees, and that is just not acceptable when you think 

in relative terms with respect to the earning capacity that the 

dollars bring. It’s not acceptable, and I believe the members 

opposite would scream and holler if they were asked to put 

forward that sort of money too, on a regular basis, in percentage 

terms. 

So what it leads me to believe is that this government, in 

imposing these user fees and in their general attitude towards 

legal aid, that they are trying to say that legal aid is a charity 

and not a right. But, Mr. Chairman, it is a right. People have a 

right, and I would suggest that the law clearly sets that out in 

the charter of rights. They have a right to protection by a lawyer 

when they are in the courts or to legal representation, and 

without that representation, they are not equal before the law. 

It’s a right, Mr. Chairman, it’s not a charity. 

 

And I suggest that the whole attitude with respect to making 

legal aid a charity is one of the reasons why they’ve moved it 

from the Department of Justice to the Department of Social 

Services. They are looking upon it as another social service as 

opposed to a legal right. 

 

We also have to remember that when we’re talking about legal 

service in legal aid, we are not talking simply about people who 

are defended against criminal charges in our courts – although 

that’s a very valid and important function that the legal aid 

lawyers play – but we’re also talking about women who are 

fleeing violent situations, Mr. Chairman, women who are 

fleeing violent situations. We’re talking about parents whose 

children may be taken away from them, and these parents have 

to be defended in the courts. They have to put forward their 

point of view. And I would argue very strongly that when the 

government is trying to take children away from their parents, 

that these parents should be represented by a lawyer, and the 

fact that they may not be able to afford the $60 user fee, for one 

reason or other, should not be an impediment to them being 

represented in the courts in a case like that. 

 

And there’s no question that the overwhelming majority of 

family law cases opened by legal aid are filed by women, and 

many are women in desperate situations, and they require 

immediate legal action for themselves. And if, for example, 

they fled a violent situation and don’t have the $60 up-front 

cost, or the $400 – whatever the Legal Aid Commission may 

feel that they can ultimately pay – but because they don’t have 

their act together, they haven’t had a chance to make the 

arrangements and they don’t have the necessary money 

available, they should not be denied representation in the courts. 

They should not be denied their day in court. And yet I 

understand that one-half of the poor people, both men and 

women, who qualified for legal aid, will face bills of $60 or 

more, and perhaps up to a maximum of $400 in some cases. 

And in spite of this, we’ve seen the Legal Aid Commission cut 

by an actual cut, I understand, of $500,000, and I have been told 

that the effective cut amounts to close to 800,000 because of 

inflation and increased case-load. 

 

So what we will see in the province of Saskatchewan is people 

who are forced to plead guilty, people who will be forced to 

plead guilty even though they may not be guilty, simply 

because they feel they cannot afford the $60 user fee, or the 

$400 user fee, whatever may be imposed upon them. The 

members opposite say, well if they can’t afford it, you know, if 

they’re on welfare, they’re going to be getting assistance. But I 

remind you that there are  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2510 

 

many, many people on salaries who are still on a sufficiently 

low income that they can’t afford . . . That $60 is a substantial 

amount of money to them. It may not be a lot of money to some 

of the members opposite, but it is to those people on lower 

incomes, because relatively-wise, it’s very, very substantial. 

 

So these individuals will be forced to plead guilty. Now I know 

that’s not an unreasonable speculation on our part, not at all 

unreasonable because I’m sure the member from Melville, the 

minister responsible for the Legal Aid Commission, in his own 

law practice has had people come to him and say, I want to 

plead guilty and just get it over with, in spite of the fact they are 

innocent of the charge. They would rather get the thing over 

with than pursue it in courts, and I’m sure, like any lawyer, he 

advises them: no, you must never plead guilty to an offence that 

you’re not really guilty of; you must defend it. 

 

Well what do these individuals do who feel that they just can’t 

take the $60 out of their food money or their rent money that 

month in order to pay the user fees for legal aid? But in spite of 

this, in spite of the fact we have many people on low income 

who are finding it very hard to make ends meet, Mr. Chairman, 

in spite of that, we have the minister responsible for legal aid 

saying in this House words to the effect that prostitutes and 

drug dealers don’t deserve free help from the Saskatchewan 

Legal Aid Commission. That’s what the minister said. 

Prostitutes and drug dealers don’t deserve this free help. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, most of the people who receive legal aid 

are not prostitutes and drug dealers. The member from 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden says, are you saying that . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Allow the member from 

Lakeview to make her comments. 

 

Ms. Simard: — The member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, 

former minister of Justice, says: are you saying they do deserve 

legal help? We are saying that the majority of people – and I 

believe that that is substantially set out; it’s established by 

evidence – the majority of people who receive legal aid are not 

prostitutes and drug dealers. But what has happened is the 

minister from Melville has left that impression. The minister 

from Melville has left that impression with the people of 

Saskatchewan in a deliberate attempt to mislead them as to who 

receives legal aid in the province, and I say that’s very, very 

unfair to those women who are fleeing violent situations and 

require the services of legal aid lawyer. I say that’s very unfair 

to those people who have been wrongly charged with an 

offence. I say it is very unfair to those parents who may need 

legal services to attempt to prove to the court that they are a 

good parent and should retain custody of their children. I say 

that’s very, very unfair to, by far, the vast majority of people, 

Mr. Chairman, the vast majority of people who use legal 

services in this province to suggest that prostitutes and drug 

dealers don’t deserve free help. 

 

That’s an easy statement to make. But to say that’s an answer 

for the imposition of user fees, when most of the people who 

use legal aid don’t fall into that category, is very, very unfair. I 

believe it’s playing up on a sentiment  

in this province that it’s very unfair to those people who 

legitimately use legal aid for purposes such as fleeing from 

violent, life-threatening situations – very unfair to those people, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

And I want to quote right now from a newspaper article dated 

August 6, ’87, in the Leader-Post, that said: 

 

The figures in the report give no indication that any 

prostitution charges were handled by Legal Aid in 

1984-85. 

 

That’s what it’s referring to and actually it’s referring to the 

minister’s comments. 

 

Of the 11,483 charges dealt with during that period, only 

389, or 3 per cent, were drug-related. And many of those 

would be simple possession charges, not trafficking cases, 

Lawyers for Equal Justice (said) . . . 

 

And the title on the article is: ‘Legal aid clientele unfairly 

portrayed.” I certainly agree with that sentiment. I believe that 

was very unfair to portray the legal aid clientele in that fashion 

– very unfair, Mr. Chairman, to label people in that fashion. 

 

Now the minister may say that, well, he didn’t mean to hurt 

anybody. That may be his explanation, Mr. Chairman. The fact 

is: the facts don’t support his allegations, Mr. Chairman. The 

facts don’t support his allegations, so he can’t continue to make 

that sort of statement in the sense that he’s attempting to let the 

public think that those are most of the people who are receiving 

legal aid. 

 

And he may say, as I said before, that he didn’t intend to hurt 

anybody. But that’s a poor excuse, Mr. Chairman, that’s a poor 

excuse because people were hurt by it. Even if he didn’t intend 

it to, they were. I think, as a minister of the Crown, he should 

be much more careful about what he says that will impinge on 

people’s lives and affect them in the eyes of others. I think he 

should be much more careful. 

 

And obviously, Mr. Chairman, the Premier supports him in 

what he does and says because he has never been asked to 

apologize; he hasn’t been asked to resign. Obviously, he’s the 

Premier’s hatchet man in that regard – there’s no question about 

it in my mind – and he condones the insulting remarks that the 

minister makes with respect to the people of this province. 

There’s no question he condones those remarks because there 

has been no apology or correction forthcoming from the 

minister responsible for the Legal Aid Commission in this case 

and the social service commission in other cases. 

 

So in light of the fact, Mr. Chairman, that the allegations or the 

impression that the people of the province were left with, that 

most of the legal aid client are prostitutions and drug dealers, in 

light of that, in light of the fact the facts don’t substantiate that, 

I would like to ask the minister whether he’s prepared to 

acknowledge the fact that the facts don’t substantiate that, and 

whether he’s prepared to withdraw his statement in that regard 

to the extent that it may have misled the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2511 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I am going to show for 

you what is misleading and who is misleading this Assembly 

and the people of Saskatchewan. First of all, I quote from 

Hansard, July 24, 1987. The member opposite from Lakeview 

would want us to say that this individual, this Minister of Social 

Services, is on record as having said that prostitutes and drug 

dealers should not have legal counsel. And if you check the 

record, that’s what she just said. 

 

I quote from Hansard: 

 

Surely the prostitutes of Regina and drug dealers, who have 

capital to deal in drugs, can come up with a little bit of 

money towards their defence. 

 

That is a far cry from what the member from Lakeview has 

attributed to me. And I’m not going to raise it; I’ll let the people 

judge. But I should be standing here on a point of personal 

privilege, not answering the question. 

 

That member from Regina Lakeview wants to be credible, 

expects people to believe what she says. And I have read the 

quote exactly what I said. I did not say at any time that drug 

dealers and prostitutes in Regina, or anywhere else, should not 

have legal counsel. I said, surely they can come up with a little 

bit of money towards their legal fees – and if they can’t, they 

won’t have to pay, but if they can, they should pay. 

 

If the member from Regina Lakeview thinks that I am going to 

apologize to the prostitutes and drug dealers of Regina, never, 

ever will that happen. She is in dream-land. 

 

I was going to answer him before 5 o’clock, to the member 

from Regina North East. We were talking about social 

problems, and he suggested that I was cruel and insensitive, and 

he was concerned about my fate, whether I would continue as a 

cabinet minister in this province. The NDP should not be so 

concerned about Grant Schmidt. Grant Schmidt is not interested 

in saving himself. I am interested in saving Saskatchewan. And 

to suggest that it is cruel to expect people to work, to suggest 

that it’s insensitive to ask people to feed their children is exactly 

the kind of nonsense the NDP deal with. If we have a social 

problem in this province, the biggest social problem is the NDP 

and their mentality. That is a social problem in itself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — On legal aid. We have heard this all 

before, and I’ve answered all these questions before. And now 

the member from Regina Lakeview suggests that I should 

apologize to Regina prostitutes and drug dealers. First of all, I 

don’t know any. How would I be able to apologize to them? 

Who do I apologize to? I’ve never met one. But wherever they 

are, I do not apologize to them, and that is specifically clear. 

And people suggest that I have gone out and insulted people or 

offended people – not intentionally – but if I offend drug 

dealers and prostitutes, I can tell you right now I’m doing it  

intentionally. I intend to insult them. I hope that is clear, Mr. 

Deputy Chairman. 

 

Now here is the situation with legal aid. Legal aid has said that 

they are asking for people to contribute toward their legal fees if 

they are capable. People who are on social services do not have 

to contribute. People who have incomes equal to social services, 

the cut-off line, do not have to contribute. They are talking 

primarily here about people charged with criminal offences, and 

they are saying that it is discretionary with the clinics, and the 

clinics will determine whether the individual can pay something 

towards their defence. 

 

Now to get on to a tangent that I said everybody who is served 

by legal aid is a drug dealer or a prostitute, that I have never 

said. They are quoting statistics that 3 per cent are. That may be 

the case. But what we’re talking about here is, it was clearly 

indicated in the Regina Leader-Post about the same time this 

controversy arose that the Regina prostitutes were taking a legal 

issue to the Supreme Court, if necessary, when they lost their 

case. And I challenge the member from Lakeview to deny that 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan were not paying the legal costs 

of their charter challenge. And I’m saying that if they can afford 

to contribute to that charter challenge, they should. And I do not 

apologize, nor will I ever apologize. 

 

So I think what you have here is a clear-cut difference between 

the NDP and the PCs in this province, and the public can clearly 

tell who we stand for and who the NDP stand for. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, what the minister actually said 

was, and I have this in quotes here: 

 

Surely the prostitutes of Regina and the drug dealers, who 

have capital to deal in drugs can come up with a bit of 

money towards their defence. 

 

But it was said in such a context that it was . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Just a second. The title to the Leader-Post 

article . . . And he knows what he was attempting to do in this 

House. He knows very well what he was attempting to do, and I 

will still assert that. The attempt was to leave the impression 

with the public – and he very successfully left the impression 

with the public – that the legal aid clientele were, for the most 

part, prostitutes and drug dealers. In fact, a Star-Phoenix, July 

24 article, Mr. Chairman, a July 24 article started out with a 

paragraph to the effect that prostitutes and drug dealers don’t 

deserve free help and with the whole general thrust that the 

majority of the clientele in with legal aid were prostitutes and 

drug dealers. There’s absolutely no question that the people of 

the province were left with that mistaken impression. 

 

And we’re not asking the minister to apologize to prostitutes or 

drug dealers; we’re not asking him to apologize to them. We’re 

asking him to apologize to those women who are in need of 

legal aid, who are fleeing violent situations. We’re asking him 

to apologize to those parents who are attempting to keep 

custody of their own children, who were branded by his unfair 

statements in this House, statements which left us and others 

with the impression that he felt that most people on  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2512 

 

legal aid were prostitutes and drug dealers. And I suggest that 

that was what the minister was attempting to do. But, in any 

regard, I want to know whether or not . . . I believe that the 

minister also said that low-income families and single mothers 

would continue to get legal aid help, as has been the case in the 

past, or words to that effect. 

 

And so I would like to ask the minister what he has done, what 

guide-lines he has set out, what sort of policy he has developed 

in order to ensure that those single-parent mothers, those 

women who are fleeing violent situations, those low-income 

families . . . You know, what sort of guide-lines and policies 

has he set out to make good on that promise that I understood 

him to make in this House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I am 

pleased to see that the member from Lakeview has now 

consulted Hansard and has, as they say in my constituency, 

pulled in her horns a little bit and now concedes that I did not 

say the things she attributed to me. I am pleased she admits to 

that. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Accept the apology. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — There are suggestions I should accept 

the apology, but I think we’ve heard enough about apology. 

 

The low-income and single mothers, I gave a commitment, 

would receive legal aid, as always in the past. The answer to 

that is: it is happening. I have received no complaints, not even 

from the NDP, and I’m sure they’ll try to find some or have 

been trying hard. 

 

Legal aid is to use their discretion. The member from Regina 

Lakeview is a lawyer. She knows what discretion means. And I 

believe they are exercising their discretion fairly and that only 

those people who can contribute anything towards their legal 

fees are being asked to contribute. There may be a dispute in 

some cases over whether a person can afford to contribute or 

not afford to contribute. There is an appeal mechanism. The 

challenge cases that the NDP and their friends have set up 

where they were going to take court challenges have been 

resolved by the appeal mechanism. They no longer have their 

test cases before them. They’re still looking for test cases. 

 

They are looking for trouble where there is no trouble, and 

things are operating quite smoothly. Therefore, the answer is 

that single mothers, low-income people, people on welfare, are 

receiving legal aid as always. I don’t know if there’s any 

statistics on the number of guilty pleas or the number of not 

guilty pleas, but I can tell you that, as a lawyer, people would 

plead not guilty if they weren’t guilty. As a matter of principle 

they would not do it, and if that principle costs $60 and the 

person can afford to contribute $60 towards a principle that 

might cost $600 to fight, but they have to pay $60 or 10 per cent 

of the cost of that principle, that’s not unreasonable. 

 

And I have yet to see any of those cases, but you may see some 

cases where people are saying, well I can get a free 

consultation; I get a consultation from legal aid, and a legal aid 

lawyer advises what my punishment might be, and I know I’m 

guilty and I go down and plead guilty. But  

if I want to fool around and adjourn it a few times, I’ve got to 

come up with $60. So I say, well I’ll take my punishment now. 

 

And so you may see a few more guilty pleas, but the innocent 

are not pleading guilty, and nobody believes that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to hear that 

the minister responsible is going to be flexible with respect to 

low-income families and single mothers, and I hope that that 

proves to be true, because as far as the opposition is concerned 

we’ll be monitoring it closely in order to ensure that he is 

flexible in how he handles, and that people don’t go without a 

defence. 

 

Now for him to say that people never plead guilty on the basis 

of principle, or words to that effect – I’m not sure exactly what 

he was saying – I would suggest, if that’s what he was saying, 

that that’s a very naïve statement because people do plead 

guilty because they can’t afford legal fees. There’s no question 

about it. 

 

In many situations, if the judge determines that that is the case, 

the judge may direct a lawyer to take over, a legal aid lawyer. 

But the members opposite are saying, aw come on, aw come on; 

and it’s clear, Mr. Chairman, it’s perfectly clear that they don’t 

have any understanding about what happens out there. Perfectly 

clear. 

 

And I take it that the minister from Melville, the minister in 

charge of the Legal Aid Commission, has agreed with me that 

it’s not prostitutes and drug dealers that, for the most part, use 

the legal aid plan. He’s agreed, in effect, by his comments, by 

saying that he wasn’t intending to offend all these other people. 

I take it he agrees that it’s not the case that prostitutes and drug 

dealers are anything but perhaps a small minority of people who 

use legal aid. And this article says that there weren’t even any 

in this one particular year with respect to prostitution charges. 

So I am pleased to see that he recognizes that that’s not the 

case. 

 

The other question I have for the minister is: what about young 

offenders or homeless people who may not be on SAP 

(Saskatchewan assistance plan), for example, or people who 

come in the province and who many not live here for a long 

period of time – transients, if you wish to call them – or people 

who may only be on SAP for a few months out of the year? Can 

the minister assure us that these people will not be hit with legal 

aid fees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the transients 

would qualify for social assistance. If they don’t have any 

money and they don’t have any assets, they would qualify, and 

therefore they’d qualify for legal aid. And young offenders 

qualify because young offenders wouldn’t have any means of 

support. We don’t yet have a system where the parents have to 

contribute anything towards the fees. Maybe it’s something we 

should consider. Where the parents can afford to contribute, the 

parents should. A lot of cases the parents are more at fault than 

the children. So that’s something we’ll have to consider. 

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2513 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, another question I would ask 

the minister: as I understand it, the commission’s guide-lines 

with respect to the user fees clearly state that money must be 

paid up front before services are rendered. And the guide-lines 

also state, Mr. Minister, if the client doesn’t keep up the 

instalments, service will be discontinued. 

 

(1930) 

 

Now as I understand the agreement, the federal-provincial 

agreement in this regard requires that very flexible rules be 

applied as to whether or not an individual is entitled to receive 

legal aid. And I also understand . . . I’m also of the opinion that 

if you’re requiring money to be paid up front or if you are 

saying services will be discontinued if they don’t come up with 

the money immediately, that it is not flexible within the 

intention of that agreement that I referred to. 

 

Now the minister had said earlier tonight that he’s going to be 

very flexible with low-income families and single mothers, and 

I would like to know whether the minister is intending that 

these particular guide-lines, that seem to be rather inflexible to 

me, whether the minister is intending for these to be also 

administered in a flexible fashion and with discretion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, it’s the commission that 

exercises the discretion. You’re talking about flexibility; I think 

discretion means more than flexibility. Flexibility means that 

you can change to suit the circumstances. 

 

But discretion also has another element, the responsibility of the 

person making the decision to make a wise decision in 

exercising the flexibility. So that’s what discretion is. 

Discretion is more than flexibility. There is flexibility and there 

is discretion here, so we have both of them covered. 

 

But when the member from Regina Lakeview speaks of having 

to continue making payments as people are capable of making 

their payments – you might call it an instalment plan – that is 

nothing more than responsibility, the responsibility that people 

have everywhere: the responsibility to pay their power bill, the 

responsibility to pay their rent, and the responsibility to pay 

their lawyer the small amount that it is. You’ve got to 

remember, you’re talking here about 10 per cent of what a 

regular legal bill would be. Surely you can have the 

responsibility to pay that small sum even if it’s on a monthly 

instalment, or a weekly instalment, or whatever instalment plan 

it is. We’re talking about responsibility. 

 

And I have no problem with single mothers and with 

low-income families in domestic disputes, and civil cases in 

legal aid, because those people are responsible. When you’re 

talking about . . . You’re lumping everyone together. You’re 

lumping the criminals with the mothers, and that’s not fair. 

 

When you’re talking about criminal element of society, you 

have a certain degree of lack of responsibility, and learning a 

little responsibility will not hurt that element of  

society. So I do not apologize for requiring some responsibility. 

 

Ms. Simard: — You made a distinction between mothers and 

criminals at this particular point in time. Are you suggesting 

that people, who are not mothers, who have been charged with 

criminal offences are criminals before they’ve been convicted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Criminals are people who are convicted. 

When I last checked, the ratio of acquittals to convictions was 

running at 90 per cent. So as not to generalize, we would say: 

90 per cent criminal, 10 per cent innocent. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Then how, sir, do you determine this before 

they’ve had a fair trial? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well unfortunately we’re talking now 

about the fundamentals of our justice system. If a person with 

an income of whatever it might be – whether it is mine, the 

member from Regina Lakeview – but if a person is hiring their 

lawyer and defending themselves against a charge that is not 

properly laid and they are not guilty of anything, unfortunately, 

in our justice system they have to pay 100 per cent of the cost 

of defending themselves even though they may have been 

totally innocent. And we should maybe talk about that and 

whether the state should refund people’s legal fees if they are 

acquitted. That’s something I would consider. 

 

But you’re talking about something entirely different here. 

You’re talking about people having to pay about 10 per cent of 

their regular legal fees. And there’s always some degree of 

unfairness. The unfairness is that any person in our society who 

has to hire a lawyer – whether they pay full tariff or 10 per cent 

of tariff – and are acquitted have probably been treated unfairly. 

But that is the cost of justice whether you are rich or you are 

poor. If you are poor, your cost of justice is one-tenth of those 

that are rich, or maybe not quite poor enough to qualify. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Now, Mr. Minister, you also made a statement 

that the Legal Aid Commission decides about the flexibility as 

to whether or not someone will have to make a payment, 

whether they’ll have to pay it up front, whether they’ll have to 

continue to make instalments and they proceed with the case. 

You said that that’s up to the Legal Aid Commission to do that. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I suggest to you – and I want to know if you 

agree with me or not – that this is ultimately your responsibility 

because the agreement, as I understand it, is between the 

Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada. 

And that agreement on cost sharing with respect to legal aid 

requires the Government of Saskatchewan to exercise flexible 

criteria with respect to the imposition of any sort of legal aid fee 

or with respect to the access to legal aid. 

 

Now when you make a statement off the record, or very quickly 

in the course of others, that it’s up to the Legal Aid 

Commission, I want to know whether you acknowledge the fact 

that you are ultimately responsible for how that agreement with 

the federal government is handled and therefore you are 

ultimately responsible for whether or  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2514 

 

not a flexible criteria is implemented in determining whether or 

not someone has access to the legal aid system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the law that we refer to 

in Ottawa was made by Liberals, is now being administered by 

Conservatives. And as long as the Conservatives, or at the very 

worst, the Liberals are in power we will be within the law. 

Should the NDP ever be in power in Ottawa, I don’t know 

where we’ll be. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, you 

made a statement that I’m going to respond to. I don’t intend to 

get into a long wrangle with you. I understand well enough the 

impossibility of ever achieving anything like a sensible debate 

with you, but I do want to respond to your comment that there’s 

no innocent people pleading guilty. 

 

Mr. Minister, that is happening, and I suggest that you ask 

anyone, any lawyer, who spends time in the provincial courts, 

in the criminal courts. It is happening. Everyone has seen cases 

where a person comes forward – the judge, as they often do, 

asks them whether or not they need counsel; they consider this 

matter, they say: I’ve been refused by legal aid, I don’t have the 

60 bucks or whatever it is, don’t have the money. Everybody 

has seen it in court, and then they go and plead guilty. 

 

Mr. Minister, anyone who has spent any time in criminal court 

knows that a percentage of those people are innocent but have 

no means of putting their case forward. There is no way a 

person with a grade 6 or 7 education, which is what some of 

these people have – some of them are illiterate – can go into 

court and, in the very complicated procedure that is in the 

criminal court, put their story forward. The system doesn’t work 

without lawyers. 

 

Without counsel, Mr. Minister, anyone who has spent any time 

in criminal courts knows, without counsel, innocent people are 

going to plead guilty because some of them don’t have any 

options. There are people going before the courts who don’t 

have counsel and who plead guilty. Mr. Minister, you know as 

well as I do that a percentage of those people are innocent. They 

just have no options. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, when you say that innocent people are not 

pleading guilty, you are being naïve or you’re being less than 

candid with this Assembly. And I don’t think you’re, on this 

particular subject at least, Mr. Minister, you’re naïve. 

 

Mr. Minister, you and I both know, I think, of one very recent 

case that the lawyers who came to see you and asked you to 

reconsider this – whom you branded a bunch of left-leaning 

lawyers, I think, was the way you endeared yourself to them . . . 

They, Mr. Minister, as you well know, took one case – it just 

happened to be the first one that came forward – took one case 

of a person who had pleaded guilty because he didn’t have 

counsel, and the Legal Aid Commission gave him counsel. So 

that particular case is not a good illustration, but that group of 

lawyers isn’t catching them all. 

Anyone who is in criminal court these days knows there’s 

people going there who are pleading guilty because they can’t 

get counsel, and you and I both know a percentage of those 

people are innocent. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, if don’t return this system to a more 

sensible footing, as it used to be, if you don’t do it voluntarily, I 

really believe you’re going to wind up doing it anyway because 

I think there’s going to be a constitutional challenge to what 

you’re doing. The charter of rights guarantees people due 

process. The American jurisdictions have all held that due 

process cannot be had without counsel, and I think you’re going 

to find that the Canadian courts are going to say the same thing, 

and then you’re going to wind up giving them all counsel. 

 

Mr. Minister, you are wrong when you say that there are 

innocent people who are not pleading guilty, and if you don’t 

believe me, I suggest you ask the Crown prosecutors because 

they’ll tell you exactly what I’m telling you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I’ve seen just about everything 

now. The member from Regina Centre says I should go out and 

interview people who pleaded guilty to theft, or break and enter, 

whatever, and say: did you do it? And they say: no, I didn’t do 

it. Well why did you plead guilty? Well . . . I didn’t know what 

I was doing. 

 

Well, I mean, do we expect me to go out and interview people. I 

mean, I have dealt with more criminals than you’ve ever seen. I 

can come and document for you how many criminal cases I’ve 

had for either the prosecution or the defence. And I have dealt 

with criminal cases for years. It’s not that I haven’t seen any 

criminal cases. 

 

And to the member from Regina Centre, can he prove that he 

voted NDP in the last election? Can he? He can prove that he 

voted. Well someone who pleaded guilty can prove that they 

pleaded guilty, but can they prove or can the member from 

Regina Centre prove that they were innocent? Or can he or they 

prove that they were not guilty. They don’t have to. They 

admitted, they pleaded guilty. Now I’m supposed to go around 

and ask people who admitted they were guilty whether they still 

admit they were guilty. Well what do you expect for an answer 

from those people? They admitted they were guilty. 

 

So this is a hypothetical point we’re talking about whether these 

people are not guilty or innocent. These people have gone into 

court, stood in front of the judge and said: I plead guilty; I did 

it. All right. They’ve done that. No more can I prove that – or 

you or any one else prove – that they’re not guilty in any way 

than you can prove that you voted NDP. And that is really the 

same kind of nonsense. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I didn’t ask that of you. Mr. 

Minister, I ask very little of you because I expect very little of 

you. But I think, Mr. Minister, you might consult with the 

Crown prosecutors because I suggest to you, in private, they’ll 

tell you what I’m telling you, and that is that people are going 

before the courts without counsel and pleading guilty, and a 

percentage of those people are going to be innocent, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the member from Regina  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2515 

 

Centre has changed his speech a little bit. He’s saying people 

are going before the courts without counsel and pleading guilty. 

That’s a far cry from innocent people pleading guilty. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A percentage will be innocent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well now he suggests a percentage of 

them will be innocent. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Agreed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, I mean, that is really nonsense 

because how are you ever going to establish that any of them 

are not guilty? 

 

As a prosecutor, and I was one once until the NDP determined 

that I was no longer competent, I think, was the term they were 

trying to use. I was no longer competent to prosecute due to a 

problem – and I don’t complain about this – due to a problem in 

philosophy that, as a prosecutor, I didn’t have the same 

philosophy as the NDP. I don’t complain about that. I knew 

that. When I joined the PC party, I knew it would cost me about 

$50,000 in legal work. I knew that; I don’t complain about it; 

that comes with law and politics. I know that; I’m not 

complaining. 

 

I just want to point out to you that when you’re prosecuting, if 

you believe the man is not guilty, you should not even take . . . 

the guilty plea should stand up and say no, I don’t . . . the 

Crown won’t accept this plea; we insist this man get counsel. 

That is a duty of a Crown prosecutor – not to get convictions, 

but to get justice. 

 

So why ask a Crown prosecutor. If any Crown prosecutor 

admitted to me that he took or she took a guilty plea from a 

person that they believe was not guilty, then they are not 

following the responsibilities of what a lawyer and a member of 

the law society should do. They should be dropping the charge. 

So I’m not going to get an answer like that from any prosecutor 

unless they admit they are incompetent, and I don’t believe they 

are. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, Crown prosecutors don’t have all 

the information in every single case. There are often times – and 

you should know this if you acted as a defence lawyer – that 

there is evidence there that the Crown prosecutor does not know 

about. So when a person is unrepresented, Mr. Minister, when a 

person is unrepresented, the Crown prosecutor may have no 

way of becoming privy to this particular information. Not 

everyone may be as well educated as you, sir. 

 

Now my question to you is: do you or do you not respect 

Canadian law that says every person is innocent until he or she 

is proven guilty? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I do. But if they 

admit they are guilty, should I argue with them? 

 

(1945) 

 

Ms. Simard: — The question is should they admit their  

guilt . . . should I suggest they’re not guilty if they say they are. 

Some people will put in a guilty plea even though they may not 

be guilty. If they were defended, sir . . . They’ll put in a guilty 

plea because they can’t afford it, or for misunderstanding with 

respect to what they’ve been charged with, or any number of 

situations. For a lawyer to suggest that that never happens is, 

quite frankly, the best I can say for it, naïve. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — How can I feel sorry for a person who 

believes in their heart they’re not guilty, stands up in front of a 

judge and says, I’m guilty, who lies to the court and then 

somehow says that I’m not guilty. They’re lying to the court 

right there. Surely they can say, I plead not guilty and I’ll 

defend myself if I have to – and I don’t think anybody has to. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a few 

questions regarding the residents at North Park Centre in Prince 

Albert. The residents to whom you are paying no attention to at 

this time, and the residents to whose relatives you are paying no 

attention to this time – 180 weak and vulnerable people, who, 

when you announced this move, moving them out of North Park 

Centre by February, have resisted the move and are wondering 

why you did it. 

 

They don’t like the fact that you are doing it, and I am getting a 

great deal of letters, Mr. Minister, and I am sure you are getting 

a great deal of letters. I brought half of them here with me 

today. I want to read one sentence out of one letter, which I 

think you got as well, just to give you an indication of the 

extent of their discontent with your decision, your unilateral 

decision to do this. 

 

The sentence that I want to read goes like this: 

 

You, the government in power, do only as you please. 

 

And later on it says: 

 

I feel that it is only fair that you open your eyes and stop 

and listen to us for a change. 

 

And this is from a family, signed by four family members, who 

have a relative at North Park Centre. 

 

The letters that I have received, Mr. Minister – and my 

colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, and I suspect the 

member from Shellbrook-Torch has received some, and I 

suspect you have received some – are by and large sincere, well 

thought out, and responsible. My question to you, Mr. Minister, 

is: have you made yourself aware of the extent of the discontent 

of the relatives of the residents of North Park Centre? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is a 

particularly difficult thing to do to close an institution and have 

the residents go out and live in the community amongst us. It’s 

not an easy thing to do. And I’ve said in this Assembly that it 

was not my idea, but I am convinced by the experts in this 

country, in Europe, by the Canadian Society for Community 

Living, the Saskatchewan Association for the Mentally 

Retarded, it is the right thing to do. And if it is the right thing to 

do, then it should be  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2516 

 

done. And we are doing it, and it is not easy to do this because 

you are making change. Change is not easy. 

 

On the whole, the transition to community living is going better 

than we had anticipated, and the resistance we get are from 

those people who resist change. We are getting it from 

concerned relatives, and I acknowledge that. They should be 

concerned. Slowly the problems are being worked out. Their 

fears are being allayed. Slowly this process is going on, and 

every day we have a new family that is satisfied with the new 

arrangements. 

 

I haven’t replied to this yet, but I stood . . . For example, in my 

paper, in The Melville Advance, I read a letter from a man in 

Calgary, Alberta, who was complaining about his uncle in 

North Park, having to leave North Park. As it turns out most 

likely that uncle will come home to Melville and will live with 

other people who are level 4 people. And I don’t see what the 

problem is because if his uncle comes home, he will be closer to 

his relatives and live as a level 4 – he’s now a level 4 – in the 

same manner as other level 4’s who are not mentally retarded 

but are now all on level 4. I see no problem. I think his uncle 

has already been Melville to check out the facilities and was 

quite satisfied with the facilities. 

 

We are working extremely hard to solve these problems. There 

will be further solutions announced in the not too distant future. 

Slowly the families and the people are being won over to the 

idea that change is not necessarily bad. We are getting a fair 

amount of resistance from John Weldon and the CUPE 

(Canadian Union of Public Employees) union. And I expect 

that; it’s his duty to try to preserve the jobs. But even there, the 

staff is being reasonable about the whole thing. 

 

It’s not easy because staff will be displaced. But I have the 

difficult decision of weighing the welfare of the clientele and 

the welfare of the staff. And we have to remember that North 

Park institution was built not for the benefit of the staff but built 

for the benefit of the clientele that lives there. And North Park 

is being closed not to punish the staff but for the benefit of the 

people that live there. 

 

And so while there is no easy solution, we have to pick what we 

think is the priority of the people who live in North Park, and 

we have to stop putting people into institutions. They will be 

spread throughout the province as close to their community as 

possible; the plan is falling into place. We will be making 

further announcements as we go. Gradually people are getting 

used to the idea, and more and more cases, they’re happy with 

the results. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I would suggest that you are 

not aware to the extent of which the relatives are reacting to this 

particular position, to the position you have taken, the position 

that it has to be closed by February. There . . . I think the 

position which you have put – the rational end of the position 

you have put – would be brought very, very, almost totally, by 

people who have members of their family who are retarded but 

not yet in the institution, who haven’t spent 20 years in the 

institution but who were maybe now at the school age or just 

getting into their early twenties. 

 

They’re looking for a place to put them, because if you  

would receive the extent of concerns and letters that we have – 

my colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake and I have – then 

you would realize your error and you would abandon ship and 

try to lengthen the stay or provide for those people, at least, not 

to have to move under such quick and rapid . . . under such a 

rapid condition. 

 

Because the way they feel, Mr. Minister, is that you have given 

them an ultimatum, a forced choice. Eight people already that 

had, at least to my understanding, that had been moved out have 

not been given the choice of staying at North Park Centre. You 

see it’s like putting a gun barrel to their head; one barrel says, 

you get shot to Valley View, and the other one says, you get 

shot out to a private institute or to a private home. 

 

Now a lot of those folks that are in there were in private homes 

20 or 30 years ago or 50 years ago, hidden in closets, and that is 

no place for them to go back to. When you accelerate, when you 

accelerate this thing to that extent without having the 

community prepared to meet those people, that is what is liable 

to happen again, and we’ll be full circle to where we were 30 

years ago or 40 years ago. 

 

You’ve taken a very dogmatic position on it and I would give 

you a comparison. If you went to one of your senior citizens’ 

homes in Melville or any town in Saskatchewan and you said: 

you’ve got to move, you’ve got to move back to a private 

institution or to someplace in Moose Jaw or Swift Current or 

Lloydminster or wherever, how would they feel if they didn’t 

have that choice? 

 

And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: why don’t you get 

them out of this double mind? Why didn’t you give them one of 

the options as staying in North Park Centre by, say, considering 

it and making it into a geriatric centre or something like that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, what the member from 

Prince Albert is suggesting is that we simply leave the people 

hidden away at the institution until they die. And I believe that 

they have some good life left yet, that they can do some things 

that we don’t even know about, that while the change is not 

easy that they will enjoy the change. Some of them have been 

out in the van that the government provided going to check out 

the facilities they’re going to go to. 

 

But to simply say . . . Remember you’re talking about people 

here who don’t have the legal capacity to make their own 

decisions. And you’re saying to them: do you want to stay here 

or do you want to go to some new place? And then the question 

is . . . Anybody, any person, including myself, would say: well 

what’s this new place like? Gee, you know, I’m kind of used to 

it here so I’ll stay here. And even if you say, well it’s a very 

nice new place, you’ll be very happy there – it is a change. And 

people even who have the capacity to make their decisions will 

most likely not want the change. 

 

I recall that when my grandfather went to the nursing home or 

when my grandmother moved off the farm and into town, they 

didn’t want to make the change. But it got to the stage where 

they had no choice. They made the change and they found out 

they liked it. In both cases,  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2517 

 

where my grandfather moved to the nursing home, he liked it – 

didn’t even want to go back to his house to visit. My 

grandmother moved off the farm into the city and then liked it. 

But change is something that’s hard for people to make, but 

once it’s done they usually appreciate it. 

 

And so I would expect in this case most of those people will get 

used to it and enjoy things. And the alternative is that we can’t 

run a half an institution or a quarter of an institution. We have 

to get on with the plan. We have a large institution that operates 

in Moose Jaw and therefore we can’t run a half an institution in 

each place. And so the Moose Jaw one was first, North 

Battleford was an overflow. We no longer need the overflow 

and so change has to be made. The change will be for the better. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Minister, you mention that you 

have to get into one institution. I’ll come back to that in just a 

minute. 

 

In my discussion with the professionals and also with relatives 

there and with the local branch of the SAMR.(Saskatchewan 

Association for the Mentally Retarded), my best estimate is that 

there will be 100 of those people, plus – over a hundred of those 

– that will have to be transferred to Valley View. Now I have 

no . . . that you will be very unlikely to find group home for or 

be able to place in a private institution, or in a private home, 

rather. 

 

Now I visited Valley View and I say the Valley View . . . And I 

admit to you I have nothing against Valley View. They have the 

facilities equal to the facilities in North Park Centre with the 

two exceptions, the exceptions being that the maintenance of 

the place just is not comparable to North Park Centre. And 

anybody that visits the place will walk up to it and you can see 

immediately that the grounds at North Park Centre are better 

kept and that the paint is not peeling all over the place in North 

Park Centre. That doesn’t mean that Valley View can’t be put 

into better shape and I hope that you will allow some budget 

money to get it into good shape that way. 

 

The other thing, of course, is the proximity and the smallness of 

the place, the proximity to people in the northern area. Now 

when I was in Valley View, I kept asking myself the question: 

what advantage will there be for those people, whom I 

approximate at 100 plus, that will have to move? Is there any 

distinct advantage? Could I think of one advantage? And 

unfortunately, I couldn’t. And I went back to your statement 

that you said, well we’re not doing it for financial reasons. You 

have been quoted as saying that, and if there’s no financial 

reason, then it just makes it more of a conundrum. 

 

Now today, however, you state that, well we should be having 

only one institution. So I ask you, Mr. Minister: what is the real 

reason that you’re doing this? Is it for financial purposes? Is it 

for a financial saving of $100 per person or $200 per person per 

year, or is it because of your sort of dogmatic approach that, 

heck, you’ve got to try to privatize or at least use a disguise of 

privatizing when you know full well that less than half of them 

will be able to go into private institutions? 

 

(2000) 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, that 

my staff advises me that many of the residents —- I’m not 

saying all of them – but many of the residents are saying when 

can we go? When can we go see our new place? When can we 

move to our new home? That’s the information I’ve gotten from 

our staff. 

 

The member from Prince Albert suggests that 100 out of the 

180 will have to go to Valley View. I can assure them that we 

will do better than that and we will get a greater percentage than 

that living out in the community. And so we are not as 

pessimistic about that figure. We are optimistic. 

 

With respect to Valley View, if it is deficient, we will get it into 

shape, and I can guarantee you that. There is no reason for 

deficiency there. The staff at Valley View is paid the same as 

the staff at North Park and there’s no reason why they can’t do 

their job in the same manner. And I don’t accept the fact that 

Valley View is not as good an institution as North Park was. 

And I use the term “was” because North Park is being phased 

out and the people moved into the community. 

 

And so if there . . . We are now in the process of advertising for 

a new director at Valley View and the first criteria for that new 

director is to make Valley View the best institution possible. 

But it’s still going to be an institution and the second criteria is 

to try to limit the number of people in Valley View and have 

those people out in the community. So it is not a matter of 

dogma, it’s not a matter of money. It’s a matter of doing what is 

accepted throughout the western world as the right thing for the 

retarded people to live in institutions. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Now, Mr. Minister, a lot of the relatives feel 

that the right thing for them is to remain where they are and 

they have been happy. And I think what’s happening, and I 

commend the staff for it, that they feel, well this is part of our 

job so we are going to create the atmosphere where the people 

certainly should feel happy about going out. And they’re going 

a good job of that, and I commend them for it, although when 

you talk to relatives, they wish they weren’t being put in that 

position. 

 

But the other question that I’ve had residents ask . . . And I 

wrote you a letter on July 22 and I’m wondering whether you 

will reply to this letter at any time. I ask you that question: are 

you going to give me a reply? And, specifically, to the one 

question which I asked in here about the legal rights of the 

residents, what is the department’s position regarding the legal 

rights? Suppose they say, no, we won’t sign. The relative says, 

we won’t sign to be moved out of the centre to go to a private 

home or to go to Valley View. What is their legal position? And 

will you answer my letter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I could just generally lay out the 

proposal. 

 

Our planning process recognizes and supports the rights of the 

residents as follows: (a) The residents have the ability to decide 

where to live, and will decide for themselves where their new 

home will be as much as possible. Okay? As much as they can 

decide. All residents  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2518 

 

will have access to an external advocate, in this case the 

Saskatchewan Association for the Mentally Retarded. 

 

And when necessary, we would get them legal advice. But the 

Saskatchewan Association of the Mentally Retarded are their 

advocate and represent them. 

 

The residents are involved in site visits. That means they go out, 

they have been out in other parts of Saskatchewan, in a van 

taken out to visit their proposed location. 

 

The residents who do not have the ability to decide for 

themselves where to live – we take a consensus approach, 

conferring with the relevant parties. In the end result, if a 

guardian or if a parent refuses to have the individual live 

elsewhere, and when the time comes that the institution in 

North Park is closed, they will have to make a choice of either 

finding their own accommodation, providing for that individual, 

or co-operating in helping us locate a place. 

 

So I can say that anyone who intends to be so stubborn that they 

say, I will not take my relative out and I will not take my 

relative anywhere else, when the final day that the institution 

closes comes along, will have to decide if they’re going to care 

for the relative themselves or make their own arrangements. We 

will co-operate at all times in finding new locations, but 

certainly we can’t in the end have people sitting in an empty 

institution; they have to be cared for. So if the relatives won’t 

make the decision on how they’re to be cared for, then in the 

very, very end of the bottom line, the government will take over 

and care for those people. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Some more 

questions regarding North Park Centre. And it’s pretty clear 

from your statement referring to North Park Centre as being a 

“was” that you’re not willing to change your mind, Mr. 

Minister. Clearly you’ve made your decision and that’s where it 

stands. 

 

So let me ask you about the future of the facilities that were 

known as North Park Centre. And I don’t know what you might 

to title them, or the new owners if there are any. And so I would 

ask you, Mr. Minister: are the facilities, are the buildings and 

the equipment at North Park Centre being sold? I would like to 

know if there are any ongoing discussions, if there have been 

any ongoing discussions with any interested parties, and I 

would like to know as well, Mr. Minister, what you department 

would value those assets at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, when the 

department no longer has a need for the facilities then they will 

become the responsibility of the property management 

corporation. The property management corporation will lease 

out, sell, or otherwise dispose of the facility for whatever public 

or private purpose suits the property management corporation 

and is in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

That’s the only answer I can give on the future of the particular 

building. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — So, Mr. Minister, you’re suggesting that 

none of the . . . that Extendicare or Ranch Ehrlo or Jubilee have 

not purchased the assets. Is that what you’re  

saying? 

 

Mr. Minister, another question, I ask you: surely you must have 

a dollar value on those facilities. Given the fact that you’re 

paying lease rates to the property management corporation, you 

must have some idea of what those assets are valued at, as well 

as what the assets at Camp Thunderbird are. And another 

question I would say is: what about the future of Camp 

Thunderbird? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, with respect to 

the assets, I wouldn’t have any idea what the assets are worth. 

There’s a general rule in real estate that a piece of property is 

worth what someone is prepared to pay for it. From what I can 

see of the assets there, you would have to consider the specific 

use of the property and what it is capable of being used for, and 

there is not a big demand for institutions these days. 

 

I would think that the assets don’t have a great deal of value. 

They’re getting to the stage where they need considerable 

renovations, and a change in use would cost an awful lot of 

money. So I don’t believe the assets are anything significant 

that the government would take into account in reducing a 

deficit, or in saving money in any way with regard to 

converting them to anything. But I am not opposed to them 

being examined as for what future use they could be put to. 

 

With respect to Camp Thunderbird, our proposal is to operate it 

next year through our community living division, which is 

headquartered in Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I think clearly, Mr. Minister, by your 

statement that that’s relatively a worthless piece of property, 

indicates to me another example of what you people do with 

public assets when there’s some negotiations going on. I think it 

indicates to me pretty clearly another example that your 

government is incapable of handling public funds. 

 

We haven’t, Mr. Minister, had satisfactory answers as to the 

future of North Park Centre, but I’m going to put that aside 

because you haven’t given satisfactory answers to any of the 

questions that have gone on during your estimates, Mr. 

Minister. And I merely stood up this evening to confirm in my 

mind, and in the people’s mind of this province, that you’re 

incapable of handling your department, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some other statements that you made earlier tonight – that the 

staff are accepting your decision and that the families are 

accepting your decisions and that the residents are accepting 

your decisions – well, Mr. Minister, my colleague has indicated 

that he feels your position regarding these three different groups 

of people has been callous and uncaring. And it tells me that 

you aren’t in touch with what’s happening in Prince Albert. It 

indicates to me why you’ve got such a problem with your 

Department of Social Services or Human Resources, and why 

the number one problem in every member’s constituency office 

comes from your department and the biggest case-load comes 

from your department. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Minister, regarding your decision, that the 

people – the staff, and the families, and the residents 

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2519 

 

– are waiting to make their decision, and their decision, Mr. 

Minister, will come when the next election comes. I want to 

quote to you from the red book the results of the 1986 election, 

and it shows the member from Shellbrook-Torch River as 

having won that particular poll to the tune of 51 to 35. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How many spoiled? 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — There were . . . How many spoiled 

ballots, my colleague asks? Let me look – 27. But the point, Mr. 

Minister, I want to make is that those residents are not going to 

be in there to give support to the member from Shellbrook-torch 

River next time. They’re going to spread throughout this 

province. 

 

But I want to also indicate to you that they’re waiting to make 

their decision as well. And I would suggest rather than 51 to 

30-some, you’ll see 80-some to nothing, because that’s the kind 

of respect that they have for this government that would treat 

people as callously and uncaring as you have. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, you deserve no less than to be soundly 

defeated because of this kind of a callous and uncaring 

treatment. And I just simply want to say to you that the people 

out there are willing to make their decision. They’re waiting to 

make their decision, and I want to say that come election 

morning next that we’ll be standing up and applauding their 

decision to dump you as unceremoniously as you have dumped 

them from their homes in North Park Centre. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — And I want to tell you that on behalf of 

the people of Prince Albert and behalf of the residents of North 

Park Centre — wherever they might end up — that the 

members on this side of the House want to wish them best and 

wish them well, in spite of what you’re doing. And we hope 

that the families will be able to settle their people in, to settle 

their family members in, and to make them as comfortable as 

what they are in North Park Centre. 

 

Your decision was made for nothing for monetary reasons. 

You’re cutting back. You want to chastise the members of 

CUPE that work at that facility, and in doing that, you’re 

chastising 180 residents and their families. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I have no more questions of you, but the 

people of this province will continue to have questions of you. I 

rest my case. I think it’s clear where you are. You are a 

heartless man. You are a heartless man that doesn’t deserve to 

serve the public as a minister of the Crown. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, if you’d see 

what’s happening in this area in 1974, and that’s not that long 

ago, Valley View has 1,100 people living there and a waiting 

list of about 600; North Park had 300 people living there and a 

waiting list of about 200. North Park now has 180 people – 

nearly half – about 60 per cent of what they had in 1974, and 

really no waiting list at all. 

This province under the NDP, North America, and the western 

world have been going away from institutions. And now the 

member from Prince Albert comes out here with what I detect 

to be a very calloused attitude that somehow how the people 

voted has something to do with what’s best for how the people 

should live. 

 

You know, if . . . I don’t think the voting has much to with it, 

but if those people voted Conservative, then they’re a lot 

smarter than a lot of other people in Prince Alberta. And if 

those people voted Conservative, we are rewarding those people 

with their freedom to live outside of an institution. So if I’m 

accused of rewarding Conservatives then, I don’t know, that has 

nothing to do with the whole plan, but somehow he ties this into 

it as to how people voted. 

 

(2015) 

 

What we’re doing here is what is best for the people that live in 

the institution and will no longer live in the institution. He is 

trying to go contrary to the trends for the last 15 years, and we 

are not going to turn around now. This province, North America 

has gone too far in community living to turn around now and 

start reversing back to institutions, and we’re not going to do it. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, there 

have been some trends in care for mentally handicapped 

persons in the province of Saskatchewan that have been 

established and developed over the past 15 years, and I think 

there are some positive lessons to be learned from those trends, 

Mr. Minister. Some of the principles, some of the principles in 

the movement towards normalization to allowing handicapped 

people to live in communities, as opposed to institutions, have 

been done in a very calculated and a very humane, a very 

sensitive kind of way for the past 15 years. 

 

I think Saskatchewan has been recognized – let me change that 

– I know Saskatchewan has been recognized as a jurisdiction 

over the past 15 years to have provided a leadership in this kind 

of community living model for mentally handicapped persons, 

some of the mentally handicapped residents of our province. 

 

We have to keep in mind, as we’re looking at North Park 

Centre, that we’re not dealing with any immature, naïve notion 

of little children in big bodies; we’re dealing with adults who 

have the same right to expect dignity and respect from those 

who deal with them from their government. And, Mr. Minister, 

at North Park Centre we have a centre with – I would take it 

from your numbers now – 172 people. One hundred and 

seventy-two people who have a handicapped condition, all of 

them adults with an average age of 62 – seniors by anybody’s 

definition, Mr. Minister. Many of those residents having been 

living at North Park Centre for a large number of years. Many 

of them having been living there and calling it home since it 

was opened back in the ’70s. 

 

Mr. Minister, there have been some suggestions come forward, 

some suggestions made to you that consistent with the concept 

of normalization and the integration of handicapped people into 

our society in Saskatchewan –  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2520 

 

and I think that’s a noble objective – that North Park Centre 

could be transferred to a geriatric centre to allow those people 

who live there and who are in their sixties and seventies to 

maintain that home that they have now, and at the same time 

integrate that living situation with others who may not have the 

same kind of handicaps but who require some care in their 

senior years. And that appears to have been rejected. 

 

You made reference, Mr. Minister, to external advocates and 

the role that the SAMR.(Saskatchewan Association for the 

Mentally Retarded) could play in serving as external advocates 

for many of those residents of North Park Centre. And many of 

those residents have family members who are more than happy, 

in fact they quite willingly, to accept the responsibility of acting 

as an external advocate for their family member who has called 

North Park Centre home for many years. 

 

And you’ve said in this House this evening that come February 

28, contrary to the principle, to a very, very important principle 

– for those who are delivering services in this province 

sometimes a frustrating principle but always a very, very 

important principle – that it would be the right of those external 

advocates who are family members to have significant say, to 

have significant say as to where their family members would 

live while the Government of Saskatchewan carries out its 

obligation to provide homes for our handicapped citizens . . . 

And, Mr. Minister, what I’ve heard you say here this evening, is 

that if family members, after consultation, conclude that the 

best place to call home is where they are now, is the place that 

they’ve called home for a number of years in North Park 

Centre, what I’ve heard you say is the bottom line is come 

February 28 the door will be closed and they will be kicked out. 

And so as not to mince our words, Mr. Minister, that’s my 

interpretation of what I’ve heard you say. 

 

And there has been confusion, there has been fear, and there has 

been frustration experienced by many family members of 

handicapped residents of North Park Centre. Let me read to you 

just in part a letter that was written to me September 6 by a 

family member of one of the North Park residents, and I think 

she very aptly sets out the reason for the confusion and some of 

the frustration that has been felt by very many of those families. 

She says: 

 

In May, I got a letter telling me the North Park Centre 

would be closed on February 28, 1988. This was 

announced on the news before I got my letter, which was 

very upsetting to me and my family. This letter was sent to 

me from Mr. Bastian, director of North Park Centre. 

 

She goes on to say: 

 

I’m also sending you a copy of a letter that was read to my 

son without my family or I being notified. 

 

And I underline that phrase, “without my family or I being 

notified.” He would be unable to understand any of this,” she 

says, Mr. Minister, and then she goes on to say that she had a 

conversation with John Marckoski, a social worker for mentally 

handicapped. 

And at that time I told him we do not want our son moved 

to Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw. We wanted him to 

stay at North Park. 

 

And she concludes by saying: 

 

The residents there in North Park Centre got very good 

care and my son really is happy there. Why take this away 

from him? 

 

And I think the lady has a point, Mr. Minister. She’s nothing 

more, be nothing more, nothing less, than a good mother who is 

expressing concern for the proper care for her son. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you’ve outlined here in the House this 

evening how you intend to deal with people, whether they agree 

with your plan or not, your resistance to considering a 

normalization of North Park Centre by allowing the community 

to integrate with it. You’ve rejected that suggestion out of hand. 

 

So I ask you, Mr. Minister: can you assure me – and more 

important than assuring me, Mr. Minister, I ask if you can 

assure the families of the residents of North Park Centre – that 

there will be homes available to them and that those homes will 

have the proper resources in order to provide quality care, and 

that all of those things will be in place by February 28, 1988? 

And can you also, Mr. Minister, tell me how you will determine 

that the quality of care that those people receive in homes 

around the province of Saskatchewan will be acceptable, and 

most importantly, acceptable to the families of those 

handicapped people, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’m pleased that the member from 

Moose Jaw North acknowledges that we are doing what has 

been the trend and that there is acknowledgement that this is the 

right thing to do. 

 

Now we were discussing about how to go about closing an 

institution. And the NDP had planned to close North Park, but 

the NDP did not have the nerve to get on with the job because 

they had a conflict between CUPE union and the welfare of the 

residents there. And when they had a choice to make between 

what was best for the mentally retarded people of Saskatchewan 

and what was best for their CUPE masters, they chose CUPE 

ahead of the mentally retarded people. 

 

And now it falls upon me to do something that should have 

been done quite a long time ago, and I don’t relish the idea of 

doing this. The member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake was 

very put out. He said I was incapable of running my 

department. And what he really meant was that we are here 

governing and he is standing over there criticizing, and that 

grieves him greatly. That’s really what he meant, and so much 

so that he couldn’t stand it any more and he won’t listen to this 

because he grieves greatly that he is not government. 

 

But it falls upon us, the government, to make the decisions and 

proceed with what has to be done. And if doing what is 

necessary and what is right shows an incapable way of running 

a department, then I let the  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2521 

 

people be the judge. 

 

I have also indicated that the very absolute fewest number of 

people required will go to Valley View in Moose Jaw. I’ve 

heard accusations that Valley View in Moose Jaw is not as good 

of an institution as North Park in Prince Albert. I’ve heard 

allegations here today from your colleagues that Valley View in 

Moose Jaw – and I believe he toured Valley View – that Valley 

View is somehow an inferior institution. Well I can tell you 

this: that in the city of Moose Jaw, the budget for Valley View 

is $17.1 million a year. And I can tell you this, and you will 

agree, that for the benefit of the residents in Valley View and 

the benefit of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, those people that 

will have to go to Valley View, that remain in Valley View 

should get the very best care for that $17.1 million. And I 

challenge you, I encourage you to point out to me what is 

wrong with Valley View, and we will make the necessary 

changes if that is the case. 

 

So now the question is we’ve agreed that the institution should 

be closed and that retarded people should live in the 

community. It costs approximately $28,000 per year to keep a 

retarded person in an institution now, whether it be Valley View 

or whether it be North Park. And I would be more inclined to 

spend that $28,000 per year or whatever it takes to have them in 

the community. So if there’s anything wrong with Valley View, 

please let me know as soon as possible. 

 

I’ve heard allegations, I’ve had TV reports, I’ve had everything, 

and I don’t disagree that Valley View can be improved, and I 

will do everything possible to improve it. But if you have any 

specific problems with Valley View, then let me know. I mean 

nobody’s ever suggested that we close Valley view and leave 

North Park open as the provincial institution. But if you give 

me the slightest suggestion, I would consider it if it’s that bad of 

a place, but I don’t believe that that is accurate. I believe for 

that $17.1 million, that the workers there down in Valley View 

are doing a good job, and if they can do a little better, I’m sure 

they will try to do a little better. 

 

You’ve read me a letter. Again you haven’t given me the name, 

but I tend to detect who that letter is from because I’ve probably 

received those letters myself, and I’ve read all of those. And 

what I am saying is the person is telling you – and I don’t know 

the date on that letter – that they would rather have their relative 

live in North Park than in Valley View. But have they 

considered the option and the other possibilities? And is it 

possible that they would rather have their relative live 30 miles 

from where they live today? 

 

Some of the people that are sending those letters will turn out to 

have their relatives living either with them, right in Prince 

Albert, or within 30 miles of where they live now, or in some 

cases, 50 miles, instead of 200 or 300 miles. Tell me that is 

wrong. 

 

Tell me that mentally retarded adults in North Park should not 

live with other people who have their same capacity in a group 

home-type situation or in a private-care situation. Tell me that 

they should  

not be able to sit out on the front lawn in the sun and see other 

people in the community drive or walk by. Tell me that they 

should not have those small pleasures in life. Tell me that some 

of them should not go into other homes and places where they 

. . . Some of them play piano. Some of them can do some things 

that they are not encouraged to do right now. Tell me this is 

wrong. 

 

I don’t believe it’s wrong and you don’t believe it’s wrong. And 

you do not believe that an institution should not be phased-out. 

You are caught between your brain and your heart, and I 

suggest that you follow your brain because your heart lies with 

CUPE. 

 

Mr. Hagel — Well, Mr. Minister, the woman who writes the 

letter is one of the lucky ones. I don’t know whether she wrote a 

letter to you or not, but if she did she’s one of the lucky ones 

that didn’t get a snide postscript at the end of it. 

 

Mr. Minister, you tell me that your government is spending 

$28,000 a year to provide care for residents of North Park 

Centre. I ask you: do you commit that amount of money to 

provide proper quality care to people, to adults, to handicapped 

adults who will be leaving North Park Centre to go to other 

parts of the province? Do you give me that firm commitment? 

I’m afraid I’m going to have to repeat the same question I asked 

before because you refused to answer it. And the question I 

asked you, Mr. Minister, let me repeat it, is this: will you give 

your assurance that homes will be available, quality care homes 

for all those people who leave North Park Centre, and that those 

will be available by February 28, 1988? 

 

(2030) 

 

I assume that you have some plan in mind that you said already 

does not involve the saving of money but a rechannelling of 

money. You have ruled out, Mr. Minister, I think, a very 

credible option. I said to you before, and if you would listen, 

then you would perhaps learn a thing or two, I don’t know. 

What I said to you is it’s possible to carry out normalization in 

two kinds of ways. One, is to have people move from institution 

to community, and there are also – out of respect for people 

who are seniors, who have called North Park Centre home for 

many years – there is the option to, through attrition, to phase 

out, and you referred to phasing out. And clearly you’re not 

talking about phasing out, you’re talking about slamming the 

doors shut on February 28, 1988. 

 

You have an option to phase normalization into that institution, 

if you chose to do that. You’ve chosen not. Mr. Minister, will 

you assure those families that the homes will be in place to 

provide quality care, that you’re going to be spending $28,000 

per person to assure that? I want to know how you will 

guarantee the quality of care for those people in those homes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I can assure you, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, that every effort will be made to have the North Park 

residents closer to their homes, their originating homes, than 

they are now – or at least as close. The Saskatchewan 

Association for the Mentally Retarded will monitor all the 

placements to be certain that they are satisfied, on behalf of the 

residents, that the  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2522 

 

facilities are adequate. I can also assure you that there will be 

new group homes built in various places in the province. I can 

assure you that the commencement of these will start very soon. 

 

I would like to see the phase-out completed by the end of 

February, but should there be any unforeseen delay outside of 

the institution, that would be taken into account. But we would 

not tolerate any delay caused inside the institution. 

 

Now we expect people there . . . I know it’s not easy for them to 

do their jobs knowing that their time in that position is limited. I 

know it’s not easy, but we expect them to do their jobs to make 

life as comfortable as possible for the residents of North Park 

for as long as they do live there. 

 

So the target date is the end of February. I said earlier that the 

plan is proceeding better than we had anticipated, and that is in 

part due to the excellence of the staff that I have in that 

department, in that branch. It’s due to the co-operation we’re 

getting from the staff in North Park, the co-operation that we’re 

getting from the parents and relatives, and the co-operation that 

we’re getting from the Saskatchewan Association for the 

Mentally Retarded, and, above all, the co-operation that we’re 

getting from the community – that is, the people of 

Saskatchewan, here, there and everywhere, who are ready to 

accept these people nearer their homes, in their communities, as 

part of the normal world. 

 

So things are going well. I didn’t say they were going easy, but 

they’re going well, and you have assurances that we’ll do 

everything possible to continue to have things go well. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, would you try answering my 

question please. Let me rephrase it very simply for you and ask 

you to answer the question. 

 

You said that you’re spending $28,000 per resident for care. 

Now will you give me your assurance that you’ll spend that 

same amount of money to guarantee the quality of care that they 

will receive when they live in the community. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we will spend 

what is necessary to allow these people to live in the 

community in as normal a manner as possible. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I will be watching, as will many 

others, and I would certainly anticipate and hope that there will 

be no cases, as a matter of fact, where individual program plans 

for individual residents have as their objective to move to 

community living, who, as an interim, as an interim prior to 

community living, move from North Park Centre institution to 

Valley View Centre institution. If that happens, that is clearly a 

violation of your commitment to those residents and to their 

families in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let me ask you, Mr. Minister: what steps have been made? 

There is more to life than the home in which you live. What 

steps have been taken? What facilities or resources have been 

put in place to assure that those residents of North Park Centre 

who move to community  

will have employment and recreational opportunities so that 

they’re not simply moving into homes in communities and, in 

effect, just putting in time or vegetating in homes? What steps 

have you made to ensure their quality of life in all aspects 

beyond simply residential care? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we’re not just 

moving the people. We are setting up day programs for them. 

They will have new social workers. They will have 

occupational therapists. They will be receiving services 

wherever they are going in the province of Saskatchewan. We 

are arranging so that they take part in the community as much 

as possible, attend as many functions as they are capable, attend 

sporting events if possible. But we’re not going to force these 

people to go out into the community and do everything that you 

or I may like to do. We will try to let them pick and choose the 

things they like to do. And if there are some things that they 

could do, but they don’t want to do them, I see no reason why 

they should be forced to do it just because that’s what other 

people are doing. Not everyone in our society does the same 

thing. 

 

So it will depend also on their interests as to what they want to 

do. But they will be given the opportunity to be as much a part 

of the community as possible, and they will receive services and 

facilities, and we will do what is necessary to make their life as 

enjoyable as possible. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, that’s not an unattractive principle. 

I would suggest it might be one that you would consider 

applying to the residents, in terms of their opportunity to pick 

and choose whether they’d like to continue calling the same 

place home that they’ve called home for the last number of 

years. However you seem to have rejected that option, Mr. 

Minister. You have rejected that option and have determined 

that come February 28, 1988, if they have not chosen one of the 

options that you give to them, that you’re going to kick them 

out the door. And, Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that there is a 

bit of contradiction in what you say in this House this evening. 

 

Will you assure me, Mr. Minister, that the necessary sheltered 

workshop and activity centre placements are in place to provide 

those people who are going to community the opportunity to 

work in community? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, North 

Park may be their home but when you walk down the halls it 

looks like an old hospital, because it is an old hospital and the 

facility is ageing. It would need an awful lot of work to bring it 

up to modern standards. I’m not saying that it is now a 

dangerous institution, but it’s not up to modern standards. And 

it will always be an institution; it’s always going to look like an 

old hospital. And so you’re saying to people: this is your home; 

this old hospital is your home. 

 

Now the staff there have done as much as possible to make a 

comfortable home for them, but it is not a home. And we will 

try to find homes for them that look like homes and don’t look 

like old hospitals. Okay. I think that that is a reasonable thing to 

do. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I fully support providing  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2523 

 

options to mentally handicapped people and people who would 

happen to have the option of moving out of the institution in 

community. I would endorse and support and concur with that 

opportunity. 

 

But that’s not really what you have decided their choices shall 

be in this case, Mr. Minister. And I simply am standing here to 

say, it does not always make sense to throw out the baby with 

the bath water. And if you want to encourage and allow for 

people to live in community who are living in an institution, 

that doesn’t mean you have to close the whole darn thing down 

and send all of their lives into tail-spins, and by that I’m 

referring of course to those who prefer not to be making that 

choice. 

 

Mr. Minister, as we’re talking about community services for 

mentally handicapped persons, I would ask you whether you 

would support movements towards not exempting mentally 

handicapped persons from labour standards when they’re 

employed in sheltered industry. As you’re aware, today 

mentally handicapped persons who work in sheltered industry 

are exempted from labour standards. Mr. Minister, would you 

endorse a movement away from that to include mentally 

handicapped people to be covered by labour standards who are 

working in sheltered industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — What you’re saying is, do I support the 

concept that the state should pay people in sheltered industries, 

sheltered workshops, and activity centres the minimum wage of 

4.50 per hour. It is a noble concept but it has to be paid, you 

recall. I will look at the possibility and see what can be done at 

changing the operation of the sheltered workshops, and in some 

cases I believe that it’s possible, but I can’t say that it’s possible 

in all cases. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I understand and I . . . First of all, 

let me say that I appreciate your response. I understand that 

such a move would have administrative complications. It is my 

belief, as a matter of fact, many of those complications are less 

than we might first anticipate. And I can say to you, Mr. 

Minister, that there have been a number of presentations made 

to me by a number of mentally handicapped persons employed 

in sheltered industry who would think it would be heaven on 

earth just to have minimum wage and live in the same kind of 

workaday world as the non mentally handicapped population in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, as I have said on other 

occasions during these estimates, that if you undertake 

initiatives to provide equal opportunity for employment and 

coverage by labour standards for mentally handicapped persons 

in the province of Saskatchewan that you can count on my 

support and co-operation in undertaking that initiative. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to raise another issue with you. You will 

be aware that many of the group homes in the province of 

Saskatchewan were put in place some 10 to 15 years ago, in that 

period of time, and that one of the factors that they wrestle with 

and that has become a particularly painful point over the past 

number of years is the ability to upkeep the homes in which 

mentally handicapped persons are living. And I refer 

specifically to the budget items that would be referred to as 

home repairs  

and home maintenance and that sort of thing. 

 

Mr. Minister, there was a program that I recall was introduced 

by your government last September with a great deal of fanfare 

that provided the opportunity for Saskatchewan residents to 

upgrade their homes, to do renovations and get a matching 

$1,500 grant. You’ve described that in this Assembly many 

times as a job creation program that justified the elimination of 

the student employment funding for this year, because you said 

the home improvement program was creating all kinds of jobs. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell me why it is that group homes in 

Saskatchewan who are badly in need of funds to upgrade their 

facilities, who have not been granted increases – if they have, 

they’ve been small and certainly insufficient . . . They’re homes 

for permanent residents in many cases if not all cases, 

permanent residents in those homes. Those permanent residents 

happen to be mentally handicapped. Mr. Minister, can you tell 

me why it is that group homes are not eligible to apply for the 

home improvement program grant of $1,500? And can you give 

me your assurance, Mr. Minister, that you will take to your 

cabinet colleagues – most specifically the Minister of Urban 

Affairs who I believe has resisted this initiative – will you give 

me your assurance that you will take to your cabinet colleagues 

the recommendation to allow group homes in Saskatchewan to 

be eligible for the $1,500 matching grant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, it’s an 

interesting concept. I’m not really opposed to the idea, but it’s 

simply government money chasing itself around in a circle. We 

have to put up the money to maintain the group homes in any 

event so it doesn’t really matter to me whether it comes out of 

the Urban Affairs budget or out of my budget. I really don’t 

know why we have to bother chasing the money around in a 

circle. Our department will budget, into those group homes, the 

necessary repairs. I realize that you need some day-to-day 

maintenance and some year-to-year maintenance. I’m a home 

owner. I know the first thing you learn when you buy a house is 

that you have a mortgage to pay and constant painting and 

maintenance to do, and I realize that group homes are about the 

same. 

 

It’s an interesting concept; I’m not opposed to it; I’ll take it up 

with them. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. There, I suppose, 

could be two options. One would be, out of your budget, to 

grant an extra $1,500 per home, this year, for each group home 

in Saskatchewan to go to renovations of homes. 

 

(2045) 

 

The other would be, and quite frankly I would prefer, I would 

prefer to see group homes entitled to operate under the same 

rules as normal society, where if many . . . if people who do 

home improvements can go to the Minister of Urban Affairs 

and submit their receipts and for a $3,000 expenditure and get 

the $1,500 rebate, I think it would be a nice gesture for 

normalization, in the interest  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2524 

 

of normalization. And also recognizing that, yes, we know 

we’ve underfunded you for a period of time, these are tough 

times – I mean, we’ve been through that whole story – but we’ll 

give to you the same opportunity that we’re giving to other 

people in Saskatchewan, the $1,500 matching grant. 

 

Mr. Minister, I will take you at your word, that you will raise 

that with your colleagues. I would look forward to a positive 

announcement at some time in the future, when group homes in 

Saskatchewan can look forward to participating in the home 

improvement program, and I thank you for that assurance. 

 

Mr. Minister, you will know as well that many mentally 

handicapped people in Saskatchewan are living in approved 

homes around the province, and you’ll be aware of course, as 

am I, that approved home operators who provide homes for 

mentally handicapped people in their own private homes for a 

fee have not had increases since 1985-86. It’s been over two 

years now – or been exactly two years now, I’m mistaken. I 

don’t want to make alarming statements in this House. It’s been 

two years since they’ve received an increase, Mr. Minister. 

 

Could you tell me, Mr. Minister, whether you would see it in 

order to provide some increase to group home operators – I’m 

sorry, to approved home operators – something at the very 

minimum that would reflect inflationary costs, because that’s 

something that clearly they have to bear in providing quality 

homes for mentally handicapped persons in their homes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the NDP, for 

months now . . . I think the record now calling for my 

resignation is: NDP, 13 times; various other assorted groups, 

eight or 10. They shouldn’t wish for my resignation so much 

because at least I do have the strength to stand up for what I 

think is right. And what you’re suggesting, I believe, is correct, 

that there should be an increase there, and should I still be the 

minister next budget year, I will do my best to get an increase 

there. So don’t wish for my resignation. Don’t call for it so 

often. I can be very useful, and you and I agree on some things. 

So should I, contrary to your wishes, still be the minister 

coming into next budget year, I will work hard to try to get that 

increase because I think it’s justified. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I too am a person who says 

what I think, and there have been occasions on which I’ve 

thought that you’ve not carried out a specific part of your 

responsibilities very responsibly, and I’ve said that, and I will 

continue to do that. As a matter of fact, that is my responsibility 

to the people of Saskatchewan as Social Services critic, to hold 

you accountable to the objectives of the department and it’s a 

job I take very seriously and that I will continue to do the best 

of my ability. 

 

I certainly can’t claim ownership of all 13 calls for resignation 

that you have been notching in the handle of your six-shooter, 

Mr. Minister, but I would take it that, as you make an assurance 

in this House, that that would be something that would apply to 

your successor, should, for some strange reason, you not be in 

the chair that you’re in when we come to Social Services 

reviews next year. 

Mr. Minister, while we’re on the topic of approved homes, 

would you consider in recognizing the difficulty that . . . the 

difficult situation that approved home operators often find 

themselves where there may not be a lot of security in the 

numbers of people or the consistency of their clientele who are 

staying in their homes? And, Mr. Minister, would you consider 

a movement towards a funding for approved homes which 

would allow for some base rate, for some base rate to assure the 

availability of the approved home, plus a certain amount for 

each resident, depending upon the needs of that resident. Would 

you give some consideration to that kind of funding proposal, 

which is a departure from the current practice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairperson, the approved 

rates are level 1 – and they’re based on the level of care needed 

– $424 per month; level 2, $536 per month; level 3, $684 per 

month. And there is a suggestion from some people that we 

consider a retainer type rate, where you can operate no matter 

how many people you are caring for. And it’s a bit complicated 

because you then are paying for care that you’re not receiving, 

and there are arguments, you know, to say that, well we’re a 

stand-by situation and we’re prepared to take more people, but 

when you look at the overall situation it’s quite hard to justify a 

retainer rate type system. We’ll weigh it and see what’s 

reasonable, but it’s quite hard to justify it. When you’re paying 

a retainer, you’re really paying for the service being available 

but not for the actual service being provided, and if there is a 

compromise possible, we’ll look at it, but you understand that 

it’s complicated. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, clearly, I do understand it will be 

complicated. And I guess I’m trying to do my best, Mr. 

Minister, to put forth some constructive suggestions to deal 

with the problem that you’re faced with, having made the 

decision to close North Park Centre and to have to scramble to 

find some 80-odd community placements for people, for 

mentally handicapped people within the next, I guess, we’d be 

talking about six months or so now. And that’s a problem that 

won’t go away, Mr. Minister. 

 

I guess I simply want to recognize in this House as well the fine 

work that approved home operators do, because in many ways 

without being dramatic, Mr. Minister, they are unsung heros. 

They operate their homes and provide a good quality care of 

service and do that without a lot of financial remuneration. And 

in the interest of the security, of the resources for mentally 

handicapped persons in our province, I think it makes sense to 

look at the funding system to make it possible for approved 

home operators to consider making their homes available for a 

long period of time and sometimes without falling victim to the 

whims of people who move and make those decisions, and I 

endorse that, but it often makes it difficult for the home 

operators when their clients are coming and going. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I’d like to move to a different part of the 

operation of your department now. And to deal very briefly, I 

admit very briefly, in light of the time this evening, I don’t 

think we can do justice, but perhaps, with a statement or two, 

we can attempt to address that. I have some concerns as I know 

the Ombudsman had that were  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2525 

 

presented to you in January. 

 

I have not heard a lot from you or from your department since 

that time, Mr. Minister, in terms of constructive acts to provide 

protective care for children who are abused. And most 

seriously, Mr. Minister, I think of children who are not only 

physically but sexually abused. It’s an unfortunate reality, Mr. 

Minister, that is just starting to get a higher public profile. Not, I 

don’t think, to say that it’s a more common problem, but simply 

one that is attracting more public attention. 

 

Sexual abuse is a devastating experience for young children. 

And I’d simply like to first of all, Mr. Minister, share with you 

and with the public of Saskatchewan some statistics that very 

briefly outline a stark and alarming reality for little children. 

 

I quote from a Leader-Post article of June 30 of this year, and 

in reference to a report by The National Coalition of American 

Nuns offering chilling statistics about sexual abuse, Mr. 

Minister. A book, the report I should say, points out that 92 per 

cent of women in alcoholic recovery therapy have suffered from 

incest at some time; 70 per cent of adolescent female drug 

addicts have been sexually abused; 75 per cent of adult female 

prostitutes were sexually abused; 90 per cent of women in 

prison have family histories of sexual abuse. 

 

And it goes on, Mr. Minister, to point out that 50 per cent of 

incest crimes are committed against girls 10 years of age or 

younger. That, Mr. Minister, is a reality that I must admit, and 

my human instincts caused me, first of all, to do as the ostrich 

does and stick my head in the sand and pretend it didn’t exist. 

But it is a reality, and it is a reality in Saskatchewan as it is in 

other parts of Canada and North America. And I simply want to 

ask, Mr. Minister, what kinds of initiatives your department has 

in mind to deal with the problem of child sexual abuse. It’s not 

something that I’ve heard from your department since you’ve 

become minister, and it is a problem that, as I’ve said, I don’t 

know if it’s becoming more prevalent – it’s certainly becoming 

more obvious, publicly – and I would ask, Mr. Minister, what 

plans your department has in place to deal with them in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — With respect to child care, I’m prepared 

to crack down and get tough on sexual abuse of children and 

anyone in particular. And when I’m ready to make 

announcements and when I’m ready to do that, I would hope 

that I get the co-operation from the opposition and I don’t hear 

human rights, the civil liberties association, jumping up and 

down and saying that I’m getting too tough, infringing on 

rights. I’m prepared to do that as much as the law of Canada 

allows, and I’m prepared to look at something like a child 

protection squad. I’m prepared to sit down and negotiate and 

discuss the problem with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation because we have to be able to detect this, and 

children are in schools and that’s where they are found. 

 

How far can we go on this? I would be prepared to consider that 

all children in Saskatchewan be interviewed by the most 

professional of people, but this is not yet government policy, 

and I don’t think it is yet your  

policy. I’m prepared to look at all possibilities, and I’m 

prepared to crack down. But you have to realize that whenever 

you crack down on detection, somebody’s rights will be 

infringed on a little here or there, and we’ll have to balance and 

weigh whether the rights of the children override, maybe, the 

rights of the parents. 

 

As soon as we complete these estimates, I’m going to 

immediately go to work on the finishing touches on a new child 

care Act, and we’ll look at the aspects of child protection. 

We’ve got a constant debate there between parents’ rights and 

children’s’ rights, and I lean towards children’s’ rights. But as 

soon as you start saying “rights,” all of a sudden are you saying 

that children have a right to take their parents to court, or what 

happens? I use the word “rights” in a broad concept. But clearly 

children should have the priority over parents, and yet you 

understand the complications of prosecutions, of criminal law. 

All of those things will have to be taken into account. So we 

will work on the new Act. I hope to have it here for you before 

a year has expired. It’s been talked about for a long time, and I 

hope to have it ready for the spring session. We’ll see how 

things go. 

 

The foster parents’ care, we’ve made improvements there. 

We’re going to have better training for foster parents. As you 

know, a lot of the problems end up in the foster home, so that’s 

where they need the extra assistance. 

 

We are in the process and very near to completing some Indian 

child care agreements because not much has been happening on 

the Indian reserves. The province has jurisdiction, the federal 

government has financial responsibility, and the Indians on the 

reserves want some control over their own affairs and the 

protection of their own children, so we have to give up our 

jurisdiction. The federal government is prepared to . . . and we 

won’t give it up but we will assign our jurisdiction for the 

bands, and they will do it on behalf of the province. We will 

keep our jurisdiction of course. 

 

We are prepared also . . . The federal government is prepared to 

live up to their financial responsibility. And so in the case of 

child protection with treaty Indians, we expect to see some 

progress in the near future. As you know, of the 2,087 children 

in custody right now approximately 65 to 70 per cent are of 

Indian and native ancestry, so there’s a lot we can do in that 

area. And I’ve already suggested some form of a child 

protection squad or some initiative beyond the usual 

information campaign because I don’t think that is really 

solving the problem. 

 

I’m prepared to take stern measures. Hopefully we can have 

some agreement when we proceed with sterner measures to 

protect children. I think the first step would be to discuss it with 

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation to see how their group 

could take part in that, that and the medical profession and 

those. And we have taken some measures and some joint 

measures, interdepartmental, and we’ve set up some protocols 

as to how these things could be detected. 

 

I don’t know if you agree with me, I think you will, that merely 

setting up these interdepartmental measures and  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2526 

 

everything else . . . we’re going to have to get out into the field, 

find the problems and get them solved. And I’m prepared to 

take stern measures, and I hope you’ll go along with that. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, believe me, I do understand 

that the issues in addressing changes to the child and family 

services Act are complicated. It’s really in anticipation of the 

introduction of a new Act that I said that I felt probably we 

could get by with a relatively small attention to that here 

tonight, because I assume it’s something that we will have an 

opportunity to discuss and debate in this Legislative Assembly 

in much detail when a new Act comes into place. 

 

It’s a long overdue Act, Mr. Minister. You know as well as I 

that the review started in 1982-83 and that there’s been a draft 

Act in place for two years now. 

 

Mr. Minister, just for my clarification, could you advise me, 

when you say that you would be presenting it in the spring 

session, are you talking about this spring session we’re in now, 

or are you talking about a spring session in 1988, which could 

start, I suppose, sometimes as late as, if we’re to repeat this year 

– as June 1988. So are you anticipating bringing in that new Act 

in this session that we’re currently in now, or after it is 

prorogued and we have a new Speech from the Throne, 

bringing it in at that time. 

 

Before answering that too, Mr. Minister, please, I would give 

you my assurance again that I would be more than happy to 

work in co-operation in advance of the introduction of a new 

Act, if you would provide that opportunity. And I would also 

encourage you, if you haven’t already got it in your plans, to 

provide for some public input into the revision of a new Act. 

It’s a very complicated process, and I would hope that both you 

and I and our colleagues on both sides of the House could keep 

in context our debate on that Act, recognizing that even though 

children, even though we’re politicians and even though 

children do not have a vote, that we all, as legislators in this 

province, owe responsibility to children to provide for their 

safety and their security in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, just a simple question then: is it your intention to 

introduce that new Act in this spring session or the spring 

session that we will be anticipating some time next year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, on the topic of child 

protection and the new Act, it being near 1988, I would expect 

that we’d be looking at the spring of 1988. The problem we’ve 

got with the new Act is that public consultation is all right; 

we’ve already had a lot. If we have any more, we will have lots 

of consultation and no action. I am prepared to get down to 

action now, so we’ll see what we can do about that. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well so am I, Mr. Minister, so am I. Quite 

frankly, I had anticipated that Act coming before this Assembly 

in this spring session, and it does get confusing when the spring 

session doesn’t start until June, I will admit. 

And so I just wanted to ask that question for clarification 

because spring sessions, the meaning of that term doesn’t seem 

to mean today what it once did. So we’ll look for that in 1988, I 

would conclude that you’re suggesting. 

 

Mr. Minister, as we’ve discussed the whole range of services, 

and there are some, unfortunately, we haven’t yet discussed – 

services delivered by your department – it is normal in the life 

of government services to, every generation or so, to rethink the 

delivery of social services, period, in the broadest sense. And I 

think you will recognize, as do I, Mr. Minister, that it was 1973 

when that last kind of an initiative took place in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would ask, Mr. Minister, if you would be considering that it is 

about time to review the delivery of social services in the 

broadest sense, and whether you would support an all-parties 

committee of the legislature to undertake a review of social 

services to provide for input and review of delivery in other 

jurisdictions, and to bring to this House recommendations for 

updated delivery mechanisms for social services that represent 

modern-day values, modern-day problems, modern-day 

concerns, and modern-day solutions for the problems of the 

‘90s and the turn of the century. Mr. Minister, would you 

endorse that kind of initiative from the Legislative Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy . . . Mr. Chairperson, 

welcome to the Table. Only if I wanted to get nothing done 

would I endorse an all-party road show going around 

Saskatchewan listening to all of this and discussing it and 

debating it and politically arguing about it. And that would be a 

good way of doing nothing for a few years. 

 

But I want to get some changes made, and I don’t really want to 

use that as a forum to do nothing. So it’s best that we get on 

with the job and not have the political debate leave the 

Assembly and go on a tour of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have 

three or four questions for the minister. I have provided him 

with a copy, in advance, of my questions. Mr. Minister, my 

concern is that with the introduction of The Young Offenders 

Act, Kilburn Hall in Saskatoon, which was the stabilization and 

assessment facility for youth in crisis in Saskatoon, has been 

taken over and used essentially as a jail. It has not been 

replaced, and that’s the primary concern that I have. Its original 

function has not been replaced in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

The Department of Social Services is now using a group home 

in Saskatoon as a short-term receiving home for youth in crisis. 

It has only five beds and it is not staffed or designed to be used 

in this manner. Presently many, many youth from the Saskatoon 

area are having to be transported to Regina or to Prince Albert 

because of the lack of availability of resources in Saskatoon. 

This takes them out of the community, and it makes planning 

with their families virtually impossible for social workers in 

your department. 

 

There is also a critical lack of other resources for youth in crisis 

in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Minister. For the whole  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2527 

 

of the Saskatoon district there are only 15 treatment homes 

which house a total of about 35 young people. There is a 

monthly average of about 570 youth in care. The balance of 

youth are housed in foster homes which may have up to 12 

occupants at any one time in the city of Saskatoon. Some are 

housed without supervision in hotels or motels due to a lack of 

resources. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I should say that I find that situation to be 

particularly unacceptable. Your department, as you well know, 

has regularly been using the Colonial Motel, and I assume other 

motels in Saskatoon, for the purposes of housing youth in crisis 

in our city, essentially with no supervision to speak of or 

counselling to speak of for the young people involved. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe that the situation in Saskatoon has 

become so serious. There’s such a critical shortage of homes for 

young people in crisis in our city, and because there is no 

assessment and stabilization centre for young people in our city 

– the function that Kilburn Hall used to serve – it is virtually 

futile as a result of that for social workers to find homes for 

youth in crisis in a situation, shall we say, such as child abuse 

unless the abuse is of a very, very serious nature. 

 

And I might point out to you, Mr. Minister, that after consulting 

with professionals in the health and social services field in the 

city, I am told that there are over 100 children in Saskatoon who 

are in crisis and who are literally living in garages or in homes 

with other children. I find that to be an appalling situation, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

I think that one of the very serious problems in the city of 

Saskatoon is that there is a lack of any real safety net in the city 

for young people who are not succeeding in high school, who 

can’t cope with high school, who leave school and, literally, 

have nowhere to go. 

 

And so, Mr. Minister, my questions to you as a result of that are 

as follows, and as I say, I’ve given them to you in writing in 

advance, so that you’ll be able to answer them more easily. 

 

Number one, what are we . . . When are we going to receive a 

stabilization and assessment unit for young people in crisis in 

the city of Saskatoon; and number two, whether you are 

prepared to establish a series of new group homes for teenagers 

in crisis in Saskatoon, geared at an in independent living 

situation but in a very supportive environment with professional 

counselling services available to those young people? Will you 

answer those questions, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, with respect to the 

Colonial Motel, we haven’t used that facility in the last five 

months. What we have done is with respect to . . . There is a 

need for some form of stabilization of youth, we agree, in the 

interim we have taken short-term measures providing 10 spaces 

at Carmel House – facilities operated by Youth for Christ. It has 

taken the immediate pressure off the situation. 

 

We are looking at whether we should go to an institution-type 

route or whether we should develop specialized stabilization 

foster homes. We are trying to  

work that out with the Saskatchewan Foster Parents 

Association, and come up with a system where we would have 

super foster homes that would specialize in this type of thing. 

And they would not be in your traditional foster homes, but 

would really be a unit that would be based in homes with 

families because we think these children should see how . . . 

what you might say “normal” families live and should have the 

benefit of a normal family atmosphere rather than a group 

home, if at all possible. 

 

So we’re going to try that as a new concept and we’re working 

on the details of that. If we can’t get that finalized, we’ll have to 

go to the second choice, which would be a stabilization unit. 

 

The answer to your second question on new group homes for 

troubled youth, the answer is yes, we’re looking at that and we 

will be making some final decision in the not too distant future. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m glad to hear that at 

least you’re giving some serious thought to the problem. I’d 

urge you to put a solution into effect as quickly as possible 

because it literally is a crisis situation in the city of Saskatoon, 

and I don’t agree with your assessment that the 10 units at 

Carmel House have taken the pressure off the situation. On the 

contrary I think the situation is far more grave than you suggest 

but I’m glad to hear that at least you’re doing some consulting 

and thinking about it. 

 

I want to raise one other issue with you very briefly, and that is, 

that as you will know, sir, people with special health problems 

under SAP are only eligible for a maximum of $25 if they have 

special dietary needs or special medications such as vitamins 

that they need to take as a result of their illness. And, Mr. 

Minister, there are many patients across this province who are 

suffering from things like cancer, or ARC (Aids Related 

Complex), or AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) 

who need a great deal more than $25 to meet the needs for their 

special diets and their special medications. 

 

And my question to you, sir, is whether you will increase that 

limit of $25 to meet the dietary and medical needs of people 

suffering with problems like cancer, ARC, and AIDS in our 

province?  

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, I suppose the answer 

is, yes. But really it’s not necessary because there is no $25 

limit. It’s a guide-line. We pay the actual special dietary needs. 

Those are considered to be a special need. It’s based on a 

doctor’s recommendation.  

 

The information I have from my department is that if the 

doctor’s recommendation is that a certain type of diet be 

followed, based on the doctor’s recommendation we will pay 

the actual cost of the special diet. And I have a chart here that 

gives us an indication, and it goes as high as $80 . . . the 

examples on the chart go as high as $80 per month, special 

needs. Pregistimil rate includes cereal, juice, etc., and that one 

is the top of the chart at $80 per month, and it varies depending 

on the calorie levels, the type of diet required. You have a bland 

or ulcer diet, $11 a month; high protein diet, $24 a month; high 

calorie diet, $40 a month; pregnancy, $30 a month. And it goes 

on and on that way. So that it is not an upper limit but only a  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2528 

 

guide-line. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, your social workers in many 

cases – certainly in the dealings that my constituents have had 

with your office – have been indicating that $25 is the limit. I’d 

be grateful if you could give us a copy of that chart. I’d be 

grateful if you could send it over. 

 

I just want to conclude by asking you whether you’ll give me 

your commitment that you’ll provide a written answer to my 

final question there. Will you provide in writing the number of 

young people in Saskatoon who were housed by the Department 

of Social Services at the Colonial Motel or at other motels in 

Saskatoon in the past 12 months; what does it cost per youth per 

night at the Colonial Motel; what was the total cost to the 

Department of Social Services of housing young people in 

Saskatoon motels in the past 12 months; and how many contract 

hours did the department purchase? Would you provide that to 

me in writing, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, we don’t have that 

available, information available right now. We will be giving 

instructions for them to get the information and send it to you 

so that you have it. 

 

The chart that you refer to, you have a . . . I sent a copy of the 

policy manual to your caucus office. If you look at chapter 13, 

section 1, page 5, you will have it there, and it’s right in the 

policy manual. I give you the citation so that you have it, easy 

to find. I suppose we could find a photocopier and get it copied 

for you, but it’s right there. And it says: 

 

Special food needs. An allowance for special food needs 

may only be granted on the basis of a doctor’s 

recommendation. The doctor should indicate the length of 

time the special diet is required. The actual cost or the 

following guide may be used in addition to the regular 

food allowances. 

 

And then it goes on and sets out the chart. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, 

on September 3, my colleague, the member from Regina 

Lakeview, spoke to you at length about some of the difficulties 

that interval and transition houses are experiencing in the 

province. And as you will remember, interval houses or 

transition houses are used to house battered women and their 

children. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just want to relay to you a situation in Saskatoon 

at Interval House, and I suspect that it applies to all transition 

houses across the province as a result of your budget brought 

down on June 17. Mr. Minister, many of the budgets were 

struck for these interval or transition houses and they have now 

received some of their funding. Unfortunately, with your 

change in the gas tax, many or all of those transition houses or 

interval houses have to pay an additional 7 cents per litre for a 

litre of gasoline, and as you know, the transportation costs at 

these houses are part of the overall budgetary process. 

Consequently, Mr. Minister, the boards of directors did not 

budget for this increase in cost – the 7 cents a litre increase in 

cost – when setting their budgets, and I’m advised that because 

they’re not eligible for any rebate that in some cases they are 

looking at the possibility of having to find an additional 2 or 

$3,000 in their budget in order to transport these battered 

women and children to doctor’s appointments, to find new 

housing, etc., etc. 

 

I’m wondering whether or not your department has made any 

provisions for increased funding to the boards of directors of 

the interval or transition houses to take into consideration your 

increase in transportation costs as a result of your 7 cents a litre 

gas tax that was implemented in your June budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairperson, we don’t have 

an exact calculation on what percentage of their operating 

budget gasoline costs would be, but we don’t expect that 

gasoline costs would be a large proportion of their budget and 

should not be a major factor in the operations. 

 

With respect to Saskatoon, the number of beds in the last four 

years has increased from 16 to 30, plus four emergency spaces. 

And surely this is not a new phenomenon in our society, so we 

were making progress in trying to solve the problem. 

 

In addition, the Department of Health funds a treatment 

program for men who batter their wives or women, and that’s 

one out of the Pastoral Institute. So in addition Interval House 

in Saskatoon did not receive a reduction in their funding this 

year; they received the same amount as last year. And, in 

addition, we have a Saskatchewan employment development 

program where we pay for the wages of people hired off the 

welfare rolls to assist there, and they received an additional 

$21,753 as compared to last year. And certainly not consistent 

with the cuts, cuts, cuts that the member from Lakeview keeps 

talking about, so they have the same amount of funding plus a 

Saskatchewan employment development project which pulls 

another $21,753. 

 

We agree that that more will be done in the future, and it will be 

done, and it should be done but we also have to weigh where 

the needs are and which city and which location. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, just in response to that. Any 

time you don’t increase the budget, and we do have inflation 

here in Saskatchewan of about 4 per cent this past year, that in 

fact is a cut. And when you increase the gas tax by 7 cents a 

litre and don’t make any provisions for that in the budget, that 

in fact is a cut – a cut which Interval House in Saskatoon is 

going to have to somehow find the money for. So I wanted to 

bring that to your attention, Mr. Minister. It’s obvious that 

you’re not prepared to make any kind of adjustments in your 

budget to interval houses or transition houses to take into 

account your government’s tax increase of 7 cents a litre, which 

people should note non-profit organizations are not eligible to 

receive the rebate. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you did talk about this batterers’ program 

that the Pastoral Institute has in Saskatoon. Mr.  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2529 

 

Minister, I note in this final report of the 

federal/provincial/territorial working group on wife battery, 

Saskatchewan’s position is laid out in that particular report. 

And one of the 1984 recommendations was to examine ways of 

developing discreet counselling services for victims of violence. 

 

And I note, Mr. Minister, that there was one support project in 

1984-85 or ’85-86, and a second one was to be funded in 

1986-87. And I gather from your remarks on September 3 that 

those two support groups are, in fact, the family service bureaus 

in Saskatoon and in Regina. And I note in your remarks that 

they receive a grant of approximately $25,000 per year. I’m 

wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can advise us whether, in fact, 

those two family service bureaus have received an increase in 

grant for the ’87-88 year. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, you refer to the pastoral counselling for 

batterers – men who batter – and I would be interested if you 

could tell this House how much the Pastoral Institute in 

Saskatoon receives in grants, and how many batterers they’re 

involved in treating. And I would be interested in knowing how 

many women who are battered are being treated by the family 

service bureaus in Saskatoon and Regina, for $50,000, if you 

combine the two programs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, the statistics are as 

follows: the Family Service Bureau of Regina for counselling, 

this year’s budget, $105,500, teen-parent, $24,720, for a total of 

$130,220; the Catholic Family Service Society of Regina, 

counselling, $78,910, teen-parent counselling, $24,720, for a 

total of $103,630; Saskatoon Family Service Bureau, 

counselling, $106,810, teen-parent, $24,720, for a total of 

$131,530; Catholic Family Services of Saskatoon, counselling 

and the teen-parent, total $102,000; Minto family life in Moose 

Jaw, education centre, counselling and teen-parent, total 

$97,430. Total of counselling budget, $435,570; total 

teen-parent counselling budget, $129,780. The total in that area 

for counselling is $565,350. In addition to that, there is $25,000 

to the Family Service Bureau of Regina for the wife battering 

service and their special needs there, and there’s another 

$25,000 in Saskatoon added onto that total sum. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you didn’t answer my question, 

and I understand why you didn’t answer my question. I just 

want to point out to people of this province that there are six 

treatment programs for batterers of women and children in this 

province, and there are two treatment programs for victims of 

violence in this province who are women. More money is spent 

to treat batterers than money is spent to treat women who are 

victims of that violence. And as far as I understand, very little 

money is spent in terms of treating the children that come out of 

violent situations, who often become the batterers of tomorrow. 

But you don’t want to answer the question, you don’t want to 

address the question, so we’ll go on. 

 

Mr. Minister, on August 4, the Children’s Community Co-op 

Day Care wrote your department, and in that letter they applied 

for an after school on-site day care program. In addition, I wrote 

you as well and asked what your  

response was going to be to their request. Now you have said in 

these estimates that there are going to be an additional 225 

spaces created for new day care in this province, yet in your 

letter of August 20 you advised me that you are presently in 

discussions, and you’re not making any decisions until the 

federal initiatives are announced. Now my question is simply 

this: are we going to get 225 new day care positions or spaces in 

this budget year or are we not? Are we going to have to wait for 

you to continue your discussions with the federal government 

before we see any new initiatives in Saskatchewan when it 

comes to the creation of new day care spaces? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I’ll answer your other question. I 

forgot about it because the battering Pastoral Care Institute part 

of the budget is paid out of Health. I don’t know what is paid 

out there, so I can’t answer your question. I don’t know. You 

can ask the Minister of Health when we get to the estimates 

there. That’s why I didn’t answer it. We don’t have the answer; 

it’s not our department. 

 

(2130) 

 

But certainly you must agree that whatever the cost, you’re not 

opposed to prevention and cure. Last time I was accused of not 

doing anything about solving the problem, then I find out that 

Health is spending money on solving the problem. Now you’re 

saying Health is spending too much money on solving the 

problem. So I don’t know. You can take that up with Health 

when you get to the Health budget. 

 

The day care that you refer to, a request for after school day 

care, is a particularly complicated question because you’re 

talking there about after school day care, so you have before 

school starts, possibly noon hour, and then you have – and I 

don’t think you have to have a noon hour. And then you have 

after school day care. And it’s a very expensive type of day care 

because The Labour Standards Act provides that they must pay 

for a three hour shift when they call their staff out. So to have 

day care run before school they would have to run it then from 

six in the morning until nine in the morning to have their three 

hour shift because they don’t have the children there during 

school hours. If you did it over noon hours, another particular 

complication. And after school you would have to run it from 

3:30 to 6:30. So it becomes a very expensive form of day care 

and that’s why we’re taking our time trying to consider whether 

that is most appropriate, or if the need is not greater with the 

pre-school age children. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, just in response to your 

assumption on my position on where money should be spent, I 

just wanted to simply bring to your attention the fact that there 

are six programs in this province for men who batter their wives 

and children, and there are two programs in this province for 

women who are victims. All I’m doing is pointing that out to 

you and suggesting that perhaps you should allocate some 

additional funding in order that women in this province can also 

receive counselling. It’s not an either/or, it’s both, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, in response to your day care position.  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2530 

 

If that is in fact your view, why don’t you simply just tell 

people that. If that is your view on day care, just tell them. 

Don’t lead them down the garden path with some form of 

expectation when in fact you’re simply going to do nothing. I 

think people in this province want to be levelled with. 

 

Now on another topic, Mr. Minister, I have written to you on a 

couple of occasions bringing to your attention the problem that 

teenage girls have when it comes to your department. And these 

teenage girls are under the age of 18 years of age, and they have 

children. They are teenage parents. And it is your department’s 

view that if they were 18 years of age, or if they were on their 

own, that they would be eligible for some form of day care 

assistance in order that they could continue their high schooling 

or continue their studies. I’m wondering why, Mr. Minister, it is 

your view that if a young girl, teenage girl who is under the age 

of 18 and has a baby, and she’s living at home, and even though 

her family circumstance is such that her family cannot afford 

child care in order for her to continue her education, why is it 

the department’s view that she should not be eligible for any 

kind of baby-sitting assistance or day care assistance in order 

that she can continue her education? 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d simply point out to you that one of the most 

important things that we can do as a society to assist teenage 

parents is to do everything that we can to support them in the 

continuation of their schooling. To do otherwise, Mr. Minister, 

means that those young people are going to end up on social 

assistance, and all I can say is Heaven help them if they do. 

Heaven help them if they do, because they will be subjected to 

the inappropriateness and the inhumanity of your government 

when it comes to young people on social assistance. 

 

So I’m asking you now, why can’t you and your government 

assist those young people to continue their education, with a 

little bit of money for child care for their young child or young 

children? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, let’s say that the 

mother there is age 17: she would receive family income plan of 

$100 for the child; the family allowance is $30. If that child is 

placed in a day care, and when you take the subsidy into 

account, her out of pocket costs would be $110. She would have 

$20 a month beyond the day care costs. Then you shake your 

head and you say, well okay, you can’t live on $20 a month. 

But what we’re saying then is she also qualifies . . . if the family 

qualifies, it goes on families; if you’re under 18, you are 

considered to be part of your family. And so then you go the 

question of how much her parents can assist, and these are the 

grandparents of the child. If they cannot assist, Social Services 

would pick up the cost. If they can assist, then they should 

assist. 

 

And here you have the grandparents of the child. If the 

grandmother is working outside of the home, there’s some 

income coming in there – and we have a two-income family – 

and they should be in a position to assist their daughter and 

their grandchild. 

 

I have had situations that, I agree with you, are special  

situations and we’ve tried to look at those. But I’ve also had 

situations where the grandmother and the grandfather of that 

child are both employed in the work-force and will not assist 

their daughter in completing her education. What I’m saying to 

you is that the costs, with the subsidy and the family income 

plan, would cover the baby-sitting, and we would be asking the 

parents to assist for the other necessities of the child, if possible 

– that’s the grandparents. And if not possible, the family would 

be considered on their total needs and the Saskatchewan 

assistance plan would cover those needs. 

 

So I’m not saying it’s easy, and certainly anybody who thinks 

about it, it’s not easy for someone to go to high school and care 

for a child at the same time, but we are saying that it is possible 

to continue with education. Nothing can replace the assistance 

of two parents and larger incomes, but certainly with a little 

help from the parents, they can carry on. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, if that young person that you’re 

referring to were to move out with her baby, she would be 

entitled to social assistance. Mr. Minister, she would be entitled 

social assistance. So in effect what you policy is doing is 

forcing that young person out into the world, or into society, 

without the support of her family. And really when you’re in 

that position, you need the support of your family. 

 

So I just wanted to, once again, Mr. Minister, draw to your 

attention the inconsistencies of your policy and how, in fact, 

your policy can be quite harmful to young teenage parents with 

children and their families. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, if the 17-year-old girl 

with a child moves out, she is more or less in the same situation. 

The government will then pick up her food and shelter costs, 

which, if she stays at home, the parents are picking up her food 

and shelter costs. It’s a question of whether the parents or the 

grandparents of the child pick up the food and shelter costs at 

home, do something for their own daughter, or whether she 

goes out and the government does the same thing for that girl. 

But she can continue her education, and I think everyone will 

agree that they should continue their education. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, the 

cruelty of your social assistance policies is sometimes too 

painful to even face in terms of talking to constituents in 

Saskatoon Centre who are so very badly hurting. And just this 

weekend I talked to a single, employable male who . . . UIC 

(Unemployment Insurance Commission) payments came to an 

end and he had to get emergency service. 

 

I’m asking you for clarification of your policy regarding food 

vouchers because this young man was told that he was not 

entitled to a food voucher, that the policy for single, employable 

men was that they should go to the Friendship Inn or to some 

hostel where they could get a free meal, but they were not 

entitled to food vouchers. 

 

Now there seems to be a conflict in the Department of Social 

Services in Saskatoon regarding this policy, and I’m just taking 

a moment to ask you to clarify it for me,  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2531 

 

please, so that I can get back to the people in Saskatoon 

immediately. What is the policy regarding food vouchers for 

single, employable men? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, I didn’t hear closely. 

Did the member from Saskatoon Centre, is it . . . yes. Did she 

say that this person was actively looking for a job and needed 

some food? I didn’t quite hear the total facts on this but there 

are some jobs available in some places. He maybe needs some 

assistance on where to look, and as a matter of fact we could 

probably help him out at our department. We do have some 

positions that he could probably fill. 

 

But my understanding is that everyone who is in an emergency 

situation would get assistance and would get assistance for food 

and that that would also apply to the individual involved. If 

you’ll send over the name, we’ll check over the case, and we’ll 

see what we can do to assist him if he’s having any problems. 

 

Ms. Smart: — My question was regarding the food vouchers. 

Do you mean assistance for food means that he’s entitled to a 

food voucher, or is he told that he has to go and get his meals at 

the Friendship Inn? Which is the policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, there are short-term 

$25 food vouchers for everyone who is in a position to qualify 

for assistance. Most likely our workers did not feel at the time 

that the individual was qualified for assistance. 

 

I cannot look into the case unless the member from Saskatoon 

Centre sends over the name – I won’t make it public – but we 

will try to do what we can to help this person. If she doesn’t 

send over the name, I will then have to assume that the need is 

not as great as she suggests, or that this person can help himself. 

But if she sends over the name, we will quietly try to help solve 

this person’s problem. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I just have a question 

that’s related to something the minister was just saying in 

response to my colleague from Saskatoon Centre who brought 

forward the case of an unemployed person; the minister said – 

and I paraphrase here and I want him to correct me if I was 

wrong – but he indicated something along the lines of: this 

person might come see my department; we may have a job for 

him; there are positions we need to fill here. Am I correct on 

that? Is that what the minister is saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I don’t really know what the member 

for Regina Victoria is asking. It’s not a position in the 

Department of Social Services. What we are looking at here is 

positions through the Saskatchewan employment development 

program. Examples would be at Par Industries in Prince Albert; 

another good example would be the Meewasin Valley Authority 

in Saskatoon. And there are other examples that go beyond, 

across the whole province, except we haven’t had any uptake in 

the city of Regina. And we will try to encourage the city of 

Regina in this area to get on with some community work as 

well. 

So there are positions where this individual could be fit in. And 

with respect to trying to look for a job, it is a requirement of the 

Canada and Saskatchewan assistance plan that you be looking 

for work before you can qualify for social assistance, and 

therefore I asked whether this individual was looking for work. 

I still haven’t got the name of the individual sent over, so I 

assume that he’s going to solve his own problem, or the 

member from Saskatoon Centre is going to solve the problem. 

But that was what I was referring to. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have 

questions in two particular areas that I wish to address to the 

minister this evening. And I know there is an anxiousness in the 

House to see if we can make progress on this set of estimates 

tonight, and I’ll try to limit my questions to the essentials. But I 

hope the minister can provide me with some information in 

these two particular areas. 

 

(2145) 

 

First of all, with respect to the Saskatchewan assistance plan 

and the program changes that the minister has announced to be 

effective on October 1. Mr. Minister, I am anxious for a little 

more information about the impact of those changes on the 

current case-load of some 30,000 clients of your department. 

The bottom line of the changes, by my analysis, will indicate 

that some of the existing clients in that 30,000 case-load will 

stay basically at the same rate of benefit which they now 

receive, but that most will lose substantially in the changes that 

you have proposed, especially the working poor who are trying 

to help their own situations with some part-time earnings. And 

in studying the changes, I can detect really only one category of 

winner, if you wish to use that term – that is a person who 

would be actually better off – and that would be a single, 

unemployable person with no other income and no other 

benefits except for a rehabilitation allowance. 

 

And I wonder if the minister could confirm that that is 

essentially accurate with that one exception which I have just 

mentioned, that essentially all others in the case-load will either 

stay the same or be reduced in the level of the benefits which 

they presently receive; and that generally across the board, that 

for the typical family unit of some four persons with an SAP 

entitlement now of something like $1,200 per month, and for 

example, part-time earnings of about $400 per month, that for 

that typical case there could, in fact, be cuts in benefits ranging 

from 15 to 20 per cent, and that that is the general experience 

that we can anticipate after October 1 when the changes come 

into effect. I wonder if the minister can indicate that that is 

essentially the gist of the changes that he will implement at the 

first of next month? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, I don’t believe the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was present the last time 

I explained this for the official opposition. I’ll try to explain it 

again. 

 

In brief, this time, we do not accept your calculations as being 

accurate. Maybe in one instance . . . we’d have to analyse your 

situation. But I did read into the record earlier, and you can 

check the details in Hansard, that a  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2532 

 

single mother with two children, living in subsidized housing, 

on assistance for more than three months, who has some income 

– works part-time or whatever the case might be – receives 

maybe some maintenance from her spouse, but an income of 

$500. When all is said and done under the new formula, this 

individual will have an extra $23.75 – no, it would be $23.25 

per month, over and above any sum that she had before we 

made these changes. 

 

The second example was two adults with two children on 

assistance for more than three months, living in subsidized 

housing with an income of $600 per month – possibly a 

part-time job or who knows what their income might come 

from – but they have this income where one of them can work 

part-time, maybe the other one is disabled. In that case again, 

that family will have an extra $23.25 per month. 

 

As far as your example, we would have to go through the 

calculations and see where they would apply and where they 

wouldn’t apply. As I indicated earlier, the object of the reform 

is to give an incentive for people to earn more income and over 

a period of time to be able to become self-sufficient and work 

themselves off of the welfare rolls, and we believe that this will 

happen under the new reforms. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I would submit to you that the 

arithmetic, in most of the cases, will in fact run exactly contrary 

to the very objective which you have just mentioned in the 

House. By the calculations that I’ve been able to do, that others 

in this House have been able to do, and many of the general 

public have been able to do, it would appear that where you 

may be able to identify perhaps a case or two of possible 

advantages under your new system, that there will be far more 

cases of disadvantages, actually reduced incentives and more 

difficult circumstances, and that there are far more losers than 

winners in the type of arrangement that you have proposed to 

implement on October 1. I suppose we could argue the 

arithmetic for some considerable length of time, and probably 

will do that on other occasions other than this evening. 

 

But I want to ask you a specific question about the changes, Mr. 

Minister. I think you would have to concede that there will be 

many on October 1 who will actually find themselves worse off 

on that date as a result of the changes. You and I may argue 

about exactly how many, and of those people, how much worse 

off they would be, but I think you would have to concede that 

there will be a great many who will find themselves in a more 

difficult position as a result of the change. And my question is 

this: for those of us in this House, a reduction of $100 or $150 

or $200 a month may not sound like a very big thing. But for 

people who are struggling to make ends meet on the 

Saskatchewan assistance plan, that kind of a budgetary change 

for them in terms of their own personal budgets is a very big 

thing, and potentially a very painful thing. And I’m wondering, 

in anticipation of these changes, what you have done 

specifically within your department to communicate with your 

clientele on your case-loads to alert them specifically of the 

changes that are coming, and to give them detailed information 

as to how the changes will affect them. 

You have indicated in statements in this House, and elsewhere, 

the general nature of the changes. There have been some media 

reports about the changes. But I wonder if you have made an 

effort to communicate specifically with the people on your 

case-load to advise them in advance of what the changes are 

going to be. Because come October 1, some of those people 

could be in for a very rude and a very painful surprise if they 

suddenly discover that what they had expected would be their 

income level is dramatically and suddenly, and for many of 

them without warning, reduced. They obviously have to plan 

and budget their personal situations with great care. And I think 

it’s only fair to give them advance notice in detail about what 

the impact is going to be with respect to their own individual 

situations. 

 

And I wonder if the minister could indicate what advance notice 

has been communicated, apart from general public comments 

carried in the media. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, the member is correct 

about one thing. There was an extensive press release 

announcing the changes. He should also take into account that 

this area is so complicated that it is difficult for the members in 

this Assembly to understand all the details or remember all of 

the details, so it’s going to be somewhat difficult for the 

clientele of Social Services to understand all of the details. 

 

In addition to the information that has gone out, there will be a 

letter enclosed with the October cheque giving an explanation 

of changes. There will be a toll free number where they can 

phone and get information and have their questions answered. I 

don’t doubt that the Liberal/New Democrat opposition will trot 

out examples of people who have had a change, and I don’t 

doubt that those people who have increases will not come 

forward and cheer so that we will have all the negatives and 

very few of the positives. But what we are doing here is not 

decreasing the rates but changing the calculation on how earned 

income in addition to welfare is calculated into the welfare 

system. 

 

We are changing it to make it consistent with Conservative 

provinces in Canada, with Liberal provinces in Canada, and 

with one NDP province in Canada. We are making it consistent 

with the balance of Canada. I agree that there will be a change, 

a few people may see a lesser sum, a few people will see a 

greater sum, but the basic rates will go up on January 1 which 

will be a change in basic rates. There is no reduction now, and 

there will be an increase on January 1 

 

So taking that all into account, we will await the usual criticism. 

But I challenge the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg to go 

into his constituency and see whether the people are satisfied 

with the welfare reform that we are bringing in in this province. 

And I believe that in his constituency the people will be 

satisfied that we are making progress, and we are trying 

everything possible to help those people in need and still not 

have people take advantage of the programs. If there are people 

who take advantage of welfare, then we have less money to pay 

the people who should really be getting the money. And that’s 

what we’re trying to achieve, have  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2533 

 

the money go to the deserving. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, could I ask you about one thing 

in your extensive press release which I don’t have before me, 

but I read with care when it was published. Do I remember 

correctly that you indicated that the changes announced to 

become effective on October 1 will result in a certain saving to 

the government over a period of time? 

 

I believe you mentioned a figure in your news release. It seems 

to me that might have been $2 million, but I don’t recall the 

precise figure. Could the minister please indicate if that is 

exactly the figure that he referred to in his press release as the 

amount of money that would be saved as a result of those 

changes to be made on October 1 and only explained to your 

clientele after that time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well just the postal strike alone, if we 

follow up on what we learned from the postal strike, will save 

the taxpayers $2 million. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, but I don’t believe that is the 

same $2 million that you were referring to in your press 

statement about this particular program. Perhaps your officials 

could search out the release if it’s not immediately available, 

and we can look at it a bit later. 

 

The second matter I wanted to raise with you, Mr. Minister, has 

to do with certain administrative matters within your 

department. And would the minister, first of all, confirm that on 

a reading of the blue book, those pages relating to the 

Department of Social Services, pages 87 through 89, would you 

confirm that the cost of administration is the biggest single 

beneficiary of these estimates for 1987-88 compared to 

1986-87? Is that not, Mr. Minister, where most of the increment 

this year is going – to administration, and not to the benefits for 

people in need? 

 

When you look at the bottom line of your estimates, they 

increase by some $17 million, and I think it’s clear that 

administrative costs take up 15 million of the 17 million if 

that’s not correct. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, we answered this 

question on the very first day that we started the estimates, and 

we gave the explanation that the matter is how you do your 

accounting. Some of that increase is for staff training, for the 

costs of implementing the computer system, which have been 

substantial. And I insist that we see some progress in the near 

future; it’s been taking too long to get this computer system 

going. And in addition you have other costs that are included 

this year that were not included other years, so administration 

has not risen excessively. 

 

I explained this earlier; it’s in Hansard, and the detailed 

explanation is there. And I don’t really think we should go into 

the details again. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I’m delighted the minister mentioned his 

famous computer because I would like to ask him just a 

question or two about that as my final part of discussion in 

these estimates. 

It’s my understanding, Mr. Minister, that in 1983 the Bureau of 

Management Improvement in the Department of Finance issued 

a report on the Department of Social Services and especially the 

Saskatchewan assistance plan, and that report, the so-called 

BMI (Bureau of Management Improvement) report, called for a 

massive computerization of the social assistance plan. 

 

But to achieve any savings, or other benefits that 

computerization might offer, the BMI report suggested that very 

large managerial changes had to take place. The people had to 

be trained to use the new system properly, and it had to be 

constantly monitored and so on and so on. While the BMI 

report was very strong on the idea of computerization, it was 

also couched in terms of a number of safeguards that had to be 

implemented before the computerization was brought on stream 

in order for the whole system to work. 

 

I understand that the new computer was brought on stream 

somewhere in the 1985-86 period. And I gather from what the 

minister has just said, that the costs associated with that are 

included in the administrative items in the first part of his 

estimates, in those headings that are mentioned at the very 

beginning of his estimates. I wonder if the minister can 

describe, at least in summary form – or if he can’t do it in 

summary form on the floor of the House tonight, if he could 

provide in written form, at some reasonable future date in the 

next couple of weeks – could he describe the preparation done, 

in advance, to get the department ready to properly use that new 

expensive computer system. And were all of the BMI 

recommendations about advanced preparation, and planning, 

and monitoring, and so forth, were they followed in order to 

make this system effective and not just very costly for the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, it was about 

November 14, I think it was, of 1986, that I inherited the Social 

Services department, and I inherited an army, and it’s my duty 

to make it march. I also inherited a computer, and it’s my duty 

to make it run, and we’re doing everything possible to make it 

run. 

 

What we’ve done so far – what I’ve inherited – is that the client 

base is now computerized, and the department is working the 

Saskatchewan assistance plan system into the computer. We 

have Regina, Estevan, Weyburn ready to roll in the not too 

distant future. There will be computer benefits that will be quite 

visible, but I ask you to wait until we start the computer up and 

have it crunch out some of the things that it can do. You will be 

probably quite pleased with some of the improvements that will 

be made as a result of the computerization. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. I wonder if he 

would be so good in his explanations of this new system to take 

the suggestion I have made to him and to – not tonight if it’s 

going to take too long, but within the next short while, say, for 

example within the next two weeks – if he could provide for us 

a written explanation of what it was that BMI recommended 

and how those recommendations have been followed in order to 

properly implement a computer system within the  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2534 

 

Department of Social Services. It would appear, for example, 

that the computer system has had to be done and redone and 

redone again at least a couple of times. 

 

It would appear that a very large contingent of outside 

consultants have been hired on almost a permanent basis to try 

to get the thing up and running and functioning and not just 

costing money. And it would appear, Mr. Minister, on a quick 

look at the situation from the outside, that this whole process of 

implementing this new scheme was rather poorly planned and 

poorly implemented, and quite frankly botched up from day 

one. 

 

I appreciate the point that you only arrived on the scene last 

November and may well not have been responsible for what 

went on in the year before that and the year before that, but 

none the less you have the obligation now to make some sense 

out of it. 

 

I wonder if you could give us that explanation as to just exactly 

what transpired during that period of time that this brilliant 

machine was supposed to work miracles; and how is it that still 

at this late stage it’s not properly functioning, as I think one 

could conclude from your previous answer that you yourself are 

not satisfied with the level of functioning of the computer and 

the preparation that went into bringing it into the department. I 

would think, Mr. Minister, it would be helpful if we could have 

your written explanation of just exactly what transpired and 

where we stand now with that computer project. 

 

I would ask you in that answer, Mr. Minister, to include what 

was the original estimated cost of the computerization project; 

how much in total has been spent on that project to date; 

specifically, how far are you along in the implementation of the 

computerization project? Who was in charge of that project 

from the beginning? And who is responsible now for 

monitoring and controlling the project and making sure that it is 

in fact bringing some useful results, and not just added expense 

to the cost of the Department of Social Services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, this computer system 

is the first of its kind in North America – Systemhouse. The 

consultants are now using it throughout the United States, a 

system that they are developing here. I should probably get in 

touch with them about paying us royalties or something for 

developing this system in Saskatchewan. But they’ve given us a 

lot of free services and the procedures that were taken . . . there 

was consultation with field staff. I’ve told you about the client 

index files that were done first as was recommended, was fuel 

tested on pilot-project basis – we have Estevan; Weyburn is a 

pilot project; it is ready to go; Regina city is now ready to go. 

And then we have to standardize and simplify the system so that 

it’s easy to run through the computer. 

 

And as I recently announced, we are reducing the welfare 

application form from 16 to 6 pages, so that gives you an 

indication. I’m not going to give it to you in writing; you can 

read it in Hansard. That is the explanation. 

 

As for the staff and the people in the department that were 

responsible, very few of them are still with our  

department, and there is good reason for that. And therefore, I 

said I inherited an army, and we’re going to make it march, and 

we’ve got a few new generals that are getting the training and 

the marching down to a science, and we expect progress from 

this computer in the very new future. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, will the minister confirm that 

the cost of this computer will run his department somewhere in 

the neighbourhood of 150,000 to $200,000 per month to 

operate? When you calculate that over a year, you’re talking in 

terms of $2 million a year, which is roughly equivalent to the 

cuts in services and benefits that you’ve imposed under the 

Saskatchewan assistance plan, so that the most needy of the 

poor in Saskatchewan are seeing their benefits in this province 

reduced in the order of $2 million a year. And your department 

is spending something like $2 million a year more in 

administrative costs associated with the computer project that 

has been a complete foul-up from day one within the 

department presided over by yourself and your predecessor – 

both cabinet ministers in a Conservative government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, I certainly deny 

presiding over any foul-up. I said that I was going to make the 

army march, and it’s starting to march. And I said that we 

would get that computer rolling, and we’re going to get it 

rolling. And the cost of the continuous operation of the 

computer is going to be approximately $1 million per year, 

which is one-half of 1 per cent of the total money paid out in 

the welfare system in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have to get into the modern age with this; we cannot have 

people with quill pens and ink keeping track of a modern 

system. We anticipate that that $1 million cost will be saved in 

errors; that it will be saved in efficiency. 

 

And there are other benefits that we hope to implement in the 

not too distant future that will be of particular benefit to people 

on welfare. And if we can get the system running more 

efficiently, then maybe it won’t be necessary for people – or 

desirable for people – to go to cheque discounters and take 15 

per cent off their welfare cheque and pay it to a cheque 

discounter so that they can get paid three days earlier. 

 

We may eventually be able to get to a direct deposit system 

where the deposit could be made by the computer to their bank 

account on a very, very regular basis – even daily, if we wished. 

So that, in itself, would save some people the 15 per cent they 

are paying to the cheque cashers and discounters right now, the 

biblical money-changers of the world. And there will be future 

benefits to everyone. So don’t get so down on technology, it’s 

with us to stay and we might as well get on and use it. And I’m 

pleased that Saskatchewan has tried to be one of the first places 

in North America to get it down to a science. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d just like to make 

a brief final statement before moving to vote on item 1, Mr. 

Chairman. As we’ve gone through the review of the services of 

the Department of Social Services, Mr. Chairman, we have 

obviously seen a department in stress, I think reflecting the 

stress that is facing  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2535 

 

Saskatchewan people, and that’s very clear to understand, given 

the mandate of this particular department. 

 

As we’ve gone through the review, Mr. Chairman, some 

questions have been raised that have had less than total and 

satisfactory answers. We see that when we compare apples to 

apples, the planned expenditures for last year – and eliminating 

the smoke and mirrors related to the property management 

corporation and so on – that as a matter of fact, the planned 

expenditures for Social Services for this year represent a 

reduction of $16 million – a reduction of 4.4 per cent. And also 

I am still convinced after we’ve reviewed these estimates 

something very, very close to $4 million of the total 

expenditures being earmarked for severance payments for the 

like that have to do with the reduction of 73 staff positions from 

the Department of Social Services. 

 

But the challenges for the department, Mr. Chairman, are 

immense. These are tough times; that’s been repeated in this 

Assembly many, many times. And most importantly, they’re 

tough times for people. And it is the obligation of the 

Department of Social Services to address tough times for people 

and to do that with a sense of responsibility, with a . . . always 

keep in mind that the two most important commodities any 

Saskatchewan citizens have are hope and dignity. 

 

The challenges, Mr. Chairman, are far-ranging within the 

department. Within the community living division, the 

challenge to facilitate normalization in community living for 

handicapped citizens in Saskatchewan, and to do it in such a 

way that we don’t make little, or slight, of the right that 

Saskatchewan handicapped citizens have to respect in being 

dealt with by their government and its agencies. 

 

Legal aid is certainly an issue that appears to be unresolved in 

the review, as the access to the right to representation by 

counsel in court for Saskatchewan’s poor has been jeopardized. 

 

Transition houses are still more necessary than they’re available 

in Saskatchewan. The protection for women and children who 

are living in battered situations is certainly not being met 

anywhere near the degree that I believe the government has a 

responsibility to respond. 

 

In the area of day care, we still don’t have a sufficient number 

of spaces available; the funding for a subsidy for people who 

are using day care who are low income is still a problem that 

has to be addressed, and there lies another challenge for the 

Department of Social Services. 

 

In the area of income security, we’re finding that it’s getting 

tougher and tougher to live on social assistance for those people 

who have been forced to depend on public assistance in order to 

meet their daily needs. That is a matter of fact, as we’ve talked 

about in this House today, the benefits available, the amounts 

available to families to function have gone down. 

 

We’ve also, as we’ve been here, reviewed the reason for that, 

and it’s my view that the primary reason for our problems in 

social assistance are the abject failure of the  

government to deal with the employment issues of the day. We 

see over the past five years that there are 14,000 more people 

living on social assistance and that, as a matter of fact, is 

exactly the same as the 14,000 more people over the past five 

years who are unemployed and looking for work. I think that’s 

more than just pure coincidence. And unfortunately the $200 

million, which is a doubling of the budget being spend on social 

assistance, doesn’t reflect improved benefits; it simply reflects a 

failure of the government to deal with employment. 

 

We’ve also reviewed some issues related to non-governmental 

organizations, community-based organizations, to provide 

social services to men, women, and children in communities 

and delivered by communities – their need for security that is 

long from being addressed; many of them, as a matter of fact, 

having either been experiencing reduced budgets, or zero per 

cent increase, which in light of inflation is a reduction as well. 

 

The area of child protection – the minister assures us that he’ll 

bring forward sometime in approximately a year a revised a 

Child and Family Services Act. I suggest that’s long overdue 

and look forward to the opportunity to address that. And I also 

encourage the minister to review the social workers who are 

available to deal with those kinds of issues. It’s been reported to 

me over and over again that families in crisis, children in crisis, 

simply do not have access to the sufficient amount of help that 

they need from social workers and that they’ve come to expect 

in the past. 

 

The services to northern Saskatchewan are sadly lacking. Those 

of us here in the southern part of province oftentimes think that 

times are tough, but compared to northern Saskatchewan, in 

many ways this looks like heaven. And I think the department 

has to address those particular problems related to poverty in 

the North, and problems that really go across the . . . sweep 

across the whole range of services that are delivered through the 

Department of Social Services. 

 

The department also has the challenge of involving native 

people more in the delivery of services to native people, and 

also the challenge of responding to the needs in rural 

Saskatchewan, many of which are just becoming more clear to 

people than they’ve ever been before. 

 

And so we have to ask in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, who is 

responsible . . . who is responsible to address these very, very 

important issues, these people issues, these issues that require 

human sensitivity; they require human priorities on the part of 

the government. 

 

(2215) 

 

And let me respond to that, Mr. Chairman, first of all, by saying 

who I believe is not responsible. And I’d just like to read two 

very brief paragraphs from a brief presented to the Government 

of Saskatchewan in May by leaders of the Anglican church, the 

Evangelical Lutheran church, Presbyterian church, Roman 

Catholic church, Ukrainian Catholic church, and the United 

Church of Canada. 

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2536 

 

And what do they say about social services in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Chairman? What they say is this, and I quote: 

 

We have real concerns at suggestions in the part of some 

that gaps in social services created by the cut-backs can be 

filled by the churches and other voluntary organizations. 

 

And let me underline and repeat that, because that’s a 

suggestion that’s been made in this Assembly, that it’s a 

responsibility of the church and social organizations to pick up 

where the government has fallen back in the delivery of social 

services. 

 

And let me repeat then: 

 

We have real concerns at suggestions in the part of some 

that gaps in social services created by the cut-backs can be 

filled by the churches and other voluntary organizations. 

 

And that’s the churches speaking, Mr. Chairman. 

 

We see this as a dangerous assumption. The 

non-governmental organizations simply don’t have the 

skills, time, or money to replace trained professionals or to 

supply enough material aid. 

 

And they go on to say: 

 

The cut-backs and grants of the non-governmental agencies 

themselves, ranging from transition houses, John Howard 

Society, native court worker program, and Voice of the 

Handicapped, to name only a few, will have a devastating 

impact on those people who depend on their services. Clearly 

these people are in no position to fend for themselves. 

 

We have some concern when we try to determine in dollars 

and cents where these cuts really affect a significant 

reduction in the deficit. For us, financially speaking, these 

operations tend to be minimal ones. As well, fewer donations 

from the private sector could be anticipated as the 

economical downturn continues. The question that remains 

is: who, once again, will have to pick up the pieces? 

 

And I would suggest, Mr. Chairman, that it is very clearly the 

responsibility of the Government of Saskatchewan, under the 

direction of the Premier of Saskatchewan, to make sure that it is 

the Department of Social Services that picks up the pieces. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, we’ve covered many, many items as 

we’ve reviewed item no. 1, and I think that will facilitate – with 

some few minor exceptions – going through the votes rather 

rapidly. And having made those comments, Mr. Chairman, I am 

prepared to vote now on item no. 1 and proceed through the 

budget of the Department of Social Services. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 8 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, some time ago, specifically 

on July 27, I sent you a letter raising certain questions abut the 

property management corporation and the amount of space 

that’s allocated to the department from the property 

management corporation; and secondly, requesting a number of 

answers for questions about consultants used by the department 

in the year under review and comparisons from the previous 

year. 

 

And I wonder if the minister has the information in that form 

which I requested, and if he does, I would be prepared to accept 

it in written form and expedite the passage of this vote. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, it’s probably simpler 

if, when we get to the estimates of the minister responsible for 

the property management corporation, that you get all of this 

information at once and get it over with. So that would be the 

simplest. We have some of it, but it’s not all totally compiled 

here, and property management is not part of our department’s 

mandate. So you should probably ask that question to the 

minister responsible; he could give you everything at once. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I have a letter dated August 10 from the 

Minister of Social Services: 

 

Thank you for your letter of July 27, 1987, concerning two 

matters you will be raising during estimates for the 

Department of Social Services. I am having the 

department review the relevant information in order that I 

can respond during estimates. 

 

This is August 10; the minister received the letter from me July 

27. Other ministers have provided the information which I’ve 

requested, and I thank those ministers for that. I see no reason 

why the Minister of Social Services can’t undertake to supply 

the information that other ministers have supplied for which 

he’s had ample warning that the question was coming; it’s the 

space that is provided to his department from the property 

management corporation. 

 

Mr. Chairman, if the minister, when he suggests that I get this 

information from the minister of property, or the minister in 

charge of the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, 

is undertaking on behalf of the entire Executive Council to 

make sure that I receive that information from that minister, I 

will. 

 

That deals with space, but that doesn’t deal with the second 

question that I asked the minister with regard to all consultant 

studies. I’m sure that will not be provided by the minister in 

charge of the property and management corporation. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why is it, Mr. Minister, every time I get 

up you get up? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I have the light, Mr. Minister. If the 

minister will assure me that the information I requested in  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2537 

 

the request of July 27 will be forthcoming in a reasonable 

length of time, that will be sufficient for me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, if the page will come 

over, I’ve got a sheet of personal service contracts. As I 

indicated, I took over this department part way during the year; 

I’ve only heard of two of these people before, but we’ll send it 

over. 

 

I believe that the consultant expenditures I read into the record. 

I have no problem with sending that information over; I think 

it’s already in Hansard. I’d ask the page to send that over. 

 

I have locations here of offices and the square metres involved 

for all of our offices throughout Saskatchewan. I can send that 

material over and then you can study it, five legal length pages. 

That’s all the information I’ve got. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I am unsure as to whether 

all the information I requested in my letter of July 27, to which 

the minister responded, is contained in the three pieces of paper 

that the minister sent over. And if the minister would give me 

his assurances that if any of this information is not supplied, 

that I could come back to him and receive it in due course, I 

would be prepared to move on. I don’t want to hold up the 

estimates, and I know the minister doesn’t want them held up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairperson, I believe we’ve 

provided the information we’ve got. If there’s anything else that 

we can provide that seems fair, we will try to do it. 

 

Item 8 agreed to.  

 

Item 9 agreed to.  

 

Item 10  

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Item 10 is grants in 

day care, and my question, Mr. Minister, in light of your 

announced increase of 225 spaces for day care, can you explain 

to me why the budget allocation for this year is identical to that 

of last year?  

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The new money is in subvote 15.  

 

Item 10 agreed to.  

 

Items 11 to 15 inclusive agreed to.  

 

Item 16  

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, back in 

March or April – I think it was in March – there was a situation 

occurred which involved placing of foster children in Saskatoon 

in motels, and my understanding was that that was due to a 

shortage of foster placements being available in the province.  

 

My questions about that, Mr. Minister, are these: can you tell 

my why; just what caused this decision to be reached to place 

foster children in motels and provide care for them there – what 

the cause of that was. Can you also advise the Assembly as to 

whether that problem has been  

resolved? Can you also tell me how much that cost in total, and 

how much it cost per child per day? If you can, give me a way 

of calculating that.  

 

And also, Mr. Minister, would you please advise me as to how 

many children were placed in these motel rooms and whether 

they are properly placed. Now that’s a whole series of 

questions, and I give them to you together so that you can 

respond to them together.  

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, most of those 

questions were answered in Hansard about one hour and twenty 

minutes ago from the member from Saskatoon University. I 

think those questions have been answered. It was the Colonial 

Motel; none have been placed there in the last five months. We 

don’t have the details of the exact cost. You can sort of check 

through Hansard and you’ll get that information tomorrow.  

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, when will you provide the details 

about exact cost, and will you please tell me how many children 

were placed in that situation, and are they now placed in foster 

homes, or is there still care being provided for foster children in 

hotels or motels?  

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, the answer’s in 

Hansard. That was five months ago in a short-term emergency 

situation. It’s quite common that that happens in some 

provinces. It happens in Manitoba; I read articles about it. It 

happens in Saskatchewan from time to time.  

 

There is a temporary facility there, Carmel House, which 

handles 10 people. I answered that we were looking at a more 

permanent facility; I answered that we were planning on having 

super foster homes for intake. We felt that a family situation 

was better than an institution. If we could not get the family 

situation concept that I felt was superior into place, then we 

would go to the institution. It’s all in Hansard.  

 

Item 16 agreed to.  

 

Item 17 agreed to.  

 

Item 18  

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — With regard to item 18, income security. 

The question that I have for the minister, Mr. Chairman, has to 

do with enforcement of maintenance orders. Now I realize that 

that comes under a different department, the Justice department; 

however, the consequential effect of poor or good enforcement 

of maintenance orders may mean in the neighbourhood of 3 to 

$4 million more or less to the Department of Social Services.  

 

(2230)  

 

I’m wondering whether the minister is satisfied with the manner 

in which this is operating; that it is taking some of the load off 

of the Department of Social Services and putting it where it 

rightly belongs, on the maintenance enforcement.  

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, finally from the NDP 

a somewhat conservative idea that fathers should  

  



 

September 14, 1987 

 

2538 

 

pay for the maintenance of their children. I agree with you. 

We’re satisfied with the start that has been made, but we think 

much more can be done. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I think that much more 

could be done as well because I’m not satisfied with the 

performance by the Minister of Justice at this point, and I cite a 

case where a constituent of mine is several thousand dollars in 

arrears on payments that should have been received. 

 

And part of this is due, in fact, to the reciprocal agreement with 

other provinces, in this particular aspect the province of 

Alberta. I suspect there are many cases around the province of 

Saskatchewan, internal to the province, and others external to 

the province, where reciprocal agreements should be effect, and 

should be operating, that are not operating smoothly. And the 

consequence of this is that there’s an additional cost to 

Saskatchewan welfare; and if, in fact, the minister is not 

satisfied, he’s pressuring the Minister of Justice to improve the 

system, I wonder what . . . if he could state what steps he’s 

taken to attempt to improve the system within the Government 

of Saskatchewan so that it operates more efficiently. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson, I said to the Minister 

of Justice: get after those men who aren’t supporting their 

children, and you can take the balance up with the Minister of 

Justice. 

 

Item 18 agreed to. 

 

Items 19 and 20 agreed to. 

 

Vote 36 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditures – Vote 36 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? Carried. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditures – Vote 36 

 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 36 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Employment Development Agency 

Employment Development Fund – Vote 65 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairperson, I, in particular, 

would like to thank the members of my department, those in the 

chamber and those out in the field. All of those hundreds that 

work in our department  

have been very helpful to me and to the Government of 

Saskatchewan. In those months that I have taken over as 

minister, we have made some changes. We’re constantly 

making changes, and, as indicated earlier, a change is 

sometimes difficult. 

 

These officials have had great patience and have worked long 

hours, not only tonight but other nights. I want to thank them, 

and I ask for their continued co-operation. I’m sure that they 

will continue to implement the changes we have made in the 

department for years to come, and the people of Saskatchewan 

will benefit from it. So I thank them, and I thank the members 

of the Assembly for the patience they’ve had in going through 

the details of this complicated department. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, I want to join with the minister in 

thanking the officials who have participated in this Estimates 

review. As we’ve gone through, obviously both this side of the 

House and that side of the House have found some differences 

in philosophy and policy, suggestion and so on, but . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I certainly hope so. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, the Deputy Premier says most of them, 

and that may, as a matter of fact, be statistically accurate. Mr. 

Chairman, I would like to recognize the officials who have sat 

in this Assembly for many hours over a number of days and 

participated in a meaningful and democratic review of the 

operations of the Department of Social Services. 

 

I would also like to recognize, Mr. Chairman, that within the 

department there are 1,888 very dedicated and professional civil 

servants who carry out the delivery of social services to the 

most important commodity that we have in Saskatchewan, and 

that’s the people of this province, and addressing their very real 

and very human needs. 

 

I want to compliment the officials for their participation in this 

Assembly, and in particular, as well, the field employees around 

the province who deliver those very important services to 

Saskatchewan people. And I would ask all members of this 

Assembly in expressing appreciation with a round of applause. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:39 p.m. 

 


