













































August 27, 1987 Debates


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

August 27, 1987 

 

 

2091 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  — I hereby lay on the Table a petition which was 

presented to the Table yesterday, and under rule 11(7) I report 

that I have examined the petition and now read and receive the 

petition: 

 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan praying 

that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to urge the 

Government of Saskatchewan to retain the school-based 

dental plan. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Duties on Saskatchewan Potash Industry 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Who didn’t clap? 

That’s what I want to know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Economic 

Development and Trade, the member from Kindersley. 

Yesterday the Minister of Trade, the member from Kindersley, 

was widely reported as saying, in respect of the potash situation 

in the United States, that his government had taken some steps 

to try to stir up the very important and powerful farm lobby 

with respect to the opposition, or possible opposition there, to 

what the United States is planning in terms of Saskatchewan 

potash. 

 

Yet this morning an executive member of the United States 

National Farmers’ union replied in a radio interview in 

Saskatchewan that he had not heard of this development, except 

short of being notified by the radio journalist. 

 

My question, therefore, to the Minister of Trade is as follows: 

what has the government done, with specifics, to date to 

communicate to this important American farm lobby that this 

action by the American government itself is going to cost them 

a lot of money, and that we can make common cause here, 

Canadians and Americans, to try to stop this regressive step by 

the United States? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I certainly welcome the return of 

the member from Riversdale, the father of the potash 

corporation and various other things, and I welcome him into 

this debate. 

 

Now you ask the question as to what we have done with regards 

to the lobby in United States. I indicated to your hon. seat mate 

yesterday that what we have done for the most part with the 

lobby effort, bearing in mind that it’s a  

legal dimension of it between company and company, has been 

to deal with the lobbyists, if you like, to deal with some of the 

players in the Department of Commerce, to deal with some of 

the players at the administration level as to how, in fact, the 

potash ruling could impact upon us and, in turn, impact upon 

the U.S. farmer – by our calculation as much as $15 an acre 

costs of fertilizer increase just with this particular anti-dumping 

action. 

 

Now the reality is that we have dealt with the lobbyists in the 

United States. We have found that the U.S. Congressmen, 

particularly the Democrats, do not want truck or trade with 

anything that says anything but: build higher walls, build higher 

walls around United States to protect United States’ interests. 

 

I think that when the Americans . . . sometimes they need a 

crack on the side of the head to wake them up. Perhaps this is 

going to start to do that. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the 

Minister of Trade and Economic Development. I think we’re all 

aware of some of the protectionist sentiments that are about in 

the United States. So I do think, with the greatest of respect to 

the minister, he need not repeat that and its importance to us. 

 

My question to you, sir, is this: in view of the fact that you and 

your Premier and the government were aware, knew of, the 

United States action on potash for months before the actual 

determination – this was not a secret – in view of the fact that 

some several days have now gone by, why cannot the minister, 

why cannot this government, communicate to the people of 

Saskatchewan something more than the fact that they’ve been 

caught flat-footed and unawares and unprepared to deal with 

this? Why can you not tell the legislature and the people of 

Saskatchewan and the thousands of potash workers, a specific 

game plan? Will you give us that specific gam plan? Will you 

give us that specific game plan now; what have you done? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I will not give you the specific game 

plan now, but I will say . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I think if 

we just stop the interruptions now before we get very far into 

question period, we’ll have a more fruitful question period. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What I indicated to the hon. member is 

that you will not have to hold your breath very much longer 

until you will see unfolding the game plan of this government 

as to how we intend to, one, deal with what we see as a very 

unfair decision and attitude by the U.S. government and the 

U.S. producers and the U.S. quasi-judicial process. That’s 

number one; and how we will deal as well with what we think 

was a billion dollar mistake orchestrated by you, architectured 

by you, in buying the potash corporation with the people’s 

money, I think that is the billion dollar boondoggle, and we’ll 

be talking about that for some time as well. 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2092 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, further supplementary. I think 

our side would welcome the discussion about the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan and the fact, Mr. Speaker, that for 

six to seven years the potash corporation made a profit and 

never was once attacked by the United States Commerce 

department, but, in the five years of this government, has been 

attacked by the United States Department of Commerce and 

can’t make any money. We’ll talk about that. 

 

But my question is this, to the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. Perhaps we’re getting into a situation where there 

is a little bit of debate beginning on both sides of the House 

here. So let’s keep our preambles down, and let’s keep our 

answer at reasonable length. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to direct 

specifically the question to the Minister of Economic Trade and 

Development. 

 

Today, according to news reports, your Premier is now talking 

about an embargo to the United States on potash, which seems 

to be yet a new strategy unfolding on the go, depending on 

whose microphone is put in front of the Premier or the 

government of the day. Is this in fact the position of the 

Saskatchewan government that an embargo is a possible 

retaliatory action by the Saskatchewan government which is 

being seriously considered, and if so, how can you justify that 

kind of an action which can only but help penalize 3,000 or 

more Saskatchewan family workers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can assure the hon. member that we 

have a great interest in the 3,600 – 3,800 employees involved in 

the potash industry, and we’re going to do what we can do to 

deal with that particular question. The hon. member somehow 

now . . . yesterday his boss was telling us: you guys better stand 

up and take a strong stand against the Americans. Our Premier 

stands up and tells the Americans how it is. And what do we 

hear from the new leader? You shouldn’t do that. Now either 

you take it one way or the other. 

 

Our view is this: is the only thing the Americans are listening to 

today, and these days, is hard talk. And if it’s going to be hard 

talk that all that they will listen to, then that’s exactly what 

they’re going to get – hard talk and hard action. And you will 

see in the days to come some very hard action that we will take 

against the Americans. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary, if I 

may, to the Minister of Economic Trade and Development. I’m 

sure that President Reagan must be quaking in his shoes as a 

result of the announcement that the Premier of our province is 

now going to get real tough with him. But let’s be realistic 

about it, Minister of Economic Trade and Development. 

 

Why don’t you simply fess up to the people of Saskatchewan 

that you’ve been caught flat-footed by this  

action, that your government has been negligent in its 

responsibilities not only to PCS (Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) but to the potash workers of Saskatchewan, and 

that you really have no game plan in mind. And what you’re 

trying to do now is struggle in a fact-after situation to come up 

with something to try to save the potash industry and save your 

political hides. Why don’t you tell us the truth? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — If the hon. member from Riversdale will 

show up in this House, and promise to show up in this House 

more than but once every week, show up for the next couple of 

days in this House, show up for the next couple . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. I 

think that all members should heed that call and allow the 

Minister of Justice to continue. It’s difficult to hear him. I am 

sure there are other members who wish to hear his answer, but 

we can’t hear the answer if there’s noise in the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, let me assure the hon. 

member. If he shows up in his place tomorrow or Monday . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. And I would ask the member from Quill Lakes to please 

keep his comments to himself from this Chair. And I will 

decide if the answer he’s giving is on the topic or not. I rule that 

at this point it’s on the topic. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where’s the Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The members opposite ask where the 

Premier is. The Premier is at the premiers’ conference like 

every other premier across this country – all 10 of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure the hon. member from Riversdale that 

this government will be acting very soon. We have been 

looking at this problem for some period of time. That will be 

clear when we announce what we will announce very shortly, 

very shortly in this House. 

 

Sunday Shopping 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the Minister of Urban Affairs, and it deals with yet another 

example of your government’s flat feet. I’m talking about your 

government’s inability to show any leadership whatsoever on 

the question of Sunday shopping. In light of the ruling by the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, which brings into question that 

section of The Urban Municipality Act which prohibits Sunday 

shopping, what action do you plan to take so as to ensure that 

no stores will be opening for business in Saskatchewan this 

Sunday? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, with all the urbanites in the 

opposition benches, I’m really pleased to finally receive a 

question on the 64th day of this session. 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2093 

 

In any event, we are dealing with a very complex situation, Mr. 

Speaker. We are still studying and analysing the decision. It’s 

not a clear black and white decision, and there are several 

options that we can consider, and we are looking at all of those 

options. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary to the Minister of Urban 

Affairs, Mr. Speaker. When are you going to get your act 

together? You’ve known since Monday what the ruling was. 

You’ve known that this ruling, or that that section, has been 

under attack for a number of months, but you say that you’re 

still studying your options. The question is: are you saying that 

your department had no contingency plans whatsoever on this 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I suppose it’s fair to say that 

we had all kinds of contingency plans ready to go, if we assume 

that our legislation was going to be looked at by the courts. It’s 

not a unique situation. In each jurisdiction in Canada, the matter 

of legislation is challenged in the courts, and as a result you 

don’t deal with that until the particular situation arises. It’s 

ludicrous to think that you’d have legislation and alternates 

available to it. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like the minister to provide very clearly on his government’s 

very clear position on this issue. Do you oppose, or do you not 

oppose, Sunday shopping in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, at this time we’re looking 

into all the oppositions to restore the legislation to its status 

quo. And with the co-operation of the opposition, when the time 

is right to do that – and obviously those options are still not yet 

complete because there are so many – it will be done. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, you’re quoted as saying that the law still stands and 

that prosecution will continue. You know that these 

prosecutions are now being paid for by urban municipalities to 

enforce a law that is now questionable. The question is: will 

you do as the city of Moose Jaw has been suggesting, and that 

is to enforce directly – either that or pay the cost for 

municipalities to enforce the law? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, the member has misquoted 

me. I didn’t say that at all. That’s number one. And number 

two, although the effect of the ruling renders that portion 

inoperative at the present time, the obligation to live within the 

law is still there because one of the options clearly is to appeal. 

And if the appeal is won, then prosecutions would occur. So I 

caution all the business community to be very careful with the 

decisions that they make in the next while, while we’re dealing 

with it. 

 

Funding to PAMI 

 

Mr. Upshall: — In the absence of the Minister of Agriculture, I 

would direct my question to the acting  

minister. My question deals with the Prairie Agricultural 

Machinery Institute of Humboldt. As you know, you’ve 

reduced funding this year and are planning to totally eliminate 

funding next year. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is a world-class institution. It provides 

important services to farmers in research and development. We 

have delegations coming every week from other parts of the 

world to help Saskatchewan machinery implement 

manufacturers. 

 

Have you reviewed this decision, Mr. Minister? Have you 

reviewed this decision, and will you show some leadership from 

your government today and tell Saskatchewan farmers that the 

Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute will be there next year, 

and for many years to come, with funding from your 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative to PAMI (Prairie 

Agricultural Machinery Institute), Mr. Speaker, as I recall that 

involves three provinces, Saskatchewan, Alberta and Manitoba, 

and I’m led to believe that there are negotiations under way 

across the three provinces, and including the research council. 

 

I can’t give any more details than that, except to say that our 

Premier and our government very much recognize the 

importance of research in agriculture. Did we not recognize it, 

we wouldn’t have increased the funding through the ag 

(agriculture) development fund like we have to research across 

the board. 

 

So I think the hon. member ought not be concerned that 

somehow research funding is drying up, or we’re not committed 

to it, because in fact we are. And as I recall from this past 

budget that was brought down, the commitment to the ag 

development fund went up, not down. And as well you will 

know that after 25 long years our Premier has given the green 

light to building the new agriculture college at the University of 

Saskatchewan – very important to our farmers when it comes to 

research, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, this institute 

provides a very important function to farmers who have limited 

dollars when they’re making purchase decisions. You can talk 

about all of the money that you’re putting into research, but 

you’ve cut funding to PAMI this year, and you’re going to 

eliminate funding to PAMI next year, you say. How is that 

supporting it? 

 

There are small-business manufacturers in this province who 

need that to promote their business and their equipment. The 

farmers need it. You’re cutting the funding. Will you show 

some leadership to the farmers of this community? Reinstate 

that funding, perhaps taking some of the money from your $20 

million advertising campaign self-serving the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker . . . as I 

understand it, relative to that institute, there are some 

negotiations under way. I have no more particular  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2094 

 

information than that. And as I said earlier, our commitment to 

research is loud and clear, and it shows in our budget numbers 

this year again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Provincial Agreement with Gainers 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Economic Development and Trade. It’s been 

nearly two years since your government announced that 

Saskatchewan taxpayers would be providing some $21 million 

in loans, 10 million of which was forgivable, to Alberta 

millionaire, Peter Pocklington and his company, Gainers. 

 

Now what we would like to know, Mr. Speaker, from the 

minister, is that to date not one of these agreements has been 

tabled in the provincial legislature. And I would like to know 

from the minister when, exactly, you are going to let us know 

the terms and conditions of the agreement between the province 

of Saskatchewan and Peter Pocklington and Gainers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — This might come as a surprise to you, 

but this is not the first time this question’s been asked in the 

House and has been at some time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. I would 

like to ask the co-operation of all members in the House to 

allow the question period to proceed, not to interrupt the 

questioner, and not to interrupt the minister who is giving the 

answer. I’d ask for your co-operation in that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say this. I 

think what the hon. member is referring to is: was there a loan 

between Sedco (Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation) and Pocklington or Gainers? And there was, in 

fact, a loan between Gainers and Sedco. And there’s been loans 

between Sedco and a variety of companies and a variety of 

individuals across this province over a long period of time. 

 

The governments of today and of yesterday and of before that, 

when Sedco was first born, have taken position, as do all 

chartered banks, that that type of information should remain 

confidential; that the government should not be required to list 

out every person that has borrowed money from Sedco and how 

much those loans are. 

 

Now that’s been a time-honoured tradition that you did not 

provide that information public, just as you would not expect a 

credit union to do it, just as you would not expect a bank to do 

it. And we have taken that position for some period of time. 

And that position has been taken by governments before us and, 

I think, for just reason. And I think that we will stay on that 

particular course. 

 

Mr. Anguish: Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m quite well 

aware that this question’s been asked many times before in this 

legislature and you’ve never given us an answer . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Anguish: — . . . never, never given us an answer. I’m not 

asking for your confidential information on Sedco. What we 

want to know is: when are you going to release the agreements, 

the terms and conditions under which Gainers are operating in 

the province of Saskatchewan? At first, on December 11 in a 

press release from your government, they said they were going 

to build a $3 million bacon processing plant and a $20 million 

hog slaughtering plant, another $3 million pork processing 

plant, and there was all kinds of talk about increasing the 

production of hogs in the province of Saskatchewan. None of 

that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I realize the member 

wants to make a point, but he’s taking too much time in making 

it, so please put your question again and you’ll get your answer. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister is 

that we don’t want the information about Sedco and what 

they’ve loaned and what they’re going to forgive, whether it’s 

$10 million or not. We want the agreements. You’ve done it for 

Weyerhaeuser. When will you table the agreements between 

Gainers and the province of Saskatchewan in this legislature so 

the people in the province know what’s going on in this big 

scam? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me put this to you very clearly. 

What happened with Weyerhaeuser is we made what I think is a 

brilliant deal in selling a losing pulp mill, a pulp mill that 

members opposite again tried to buy up. They lost millions on it 

— $91,000 a day . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. Now we’re not going to get answers, and we’re not 

going to get questions which are acceptable to the House if 

these interruptions continue. And sometimes we don’t 

particularly like the question and we don’t like the answer, but 

that’s part of question period. So I’d just like to ask the 

members to allow question period to go forth in a reasonable 

manner. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me go back and say that we have 

turned an operation that was losing $91,000 a day into one that 

is (a) making a great deal of money today, and is building a new 

paper plant. 

 

Now I have a hard time understanding the member from The 

Battlefords. He comes in to this House; he complains about a 

project where 100 new jobs are created by Gainers. He 

complains about a project where 100 new employees are 

created by Hunter’s. He complains about another project with 

High R Doors. He is against any economic development going 

into the city of North Battleford. I will pitch the chamber of 

commerce. I wonder why he – not like everybody else in this 

province . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Next 

question. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker. You make me on the verge of 

being ill. December 11 . . . New question, Mr. Speaker. 

December 11 you acknowledged, in the press release, $3  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2095 

 

million for the bacon processing plant. 

 

Why is it that maybe you’re a little bit nervous about this whole 

situation? Could it be that Sedco has a mortgage filed against 

the title of the property for Gainers in the city of North 

Battleford, and along with the money that the city of North 

Battleford gave to Gainers, they have been given more money 

than the $3 million that you acknowledged that the plant would 

cost to built? In fact, about $6 million that we can trace that 

went to Gainers for a $3 million bacon plant. What we 

complain about on this side of the House, and the people of 

North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that it’s bad 

economics for them. 

 

What I want to ask the minister to confirm is whether or not 

there is a subsidy being paid to Gainers for every pork belly 

they have to bring into the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Again, Mr. Speaker, let me talk to the 

hon. member from The Battlefords. Again he sits now, and not 

only does he criticize us for economic development in the city 

of North Battleford, now he’s attacking the city council. It’s not 

enough to attack the chamber of commerce; now he’s attacking 

city council of doing a bad deal as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the deal that was done in North Battleford with 

Gainers and with the cities to create jobs in North Battleford 

was a good deal, Mr. Speaker. It’s created a lot of jobs. They 

don’t like, they don’t like Gainers; they’ve made that clear. It’s 

a good job, and it’s created a lot of activity in the city of North 

Battleford. 

 

Now I’m sure you’ll come to the next point of your statement in 

the media to the effect that: you people had better listen to me 

in the city of North Battleford because I am going to be a 

powerful cabinet minister some day . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Time has elapsed. Time has 

elapsed. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I think hon. members should 

try to remember that when the Speaker is on his feet, there 

shouldn’t be constant talk going back and forth across the 

House. I would like to state that members from both sides of the 

House are guilty, and I would ask their co-operation in the 

future on this. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 20 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’m 

pleased to enter into this review of the Department of Human 

Resources, Labour and Employment. And I have a series of 

questions I would like to direct to the minister regarding 

services to seniors, and including specifically  

the Seniors’ Bureau, which has now been shifted, as we all 

know, from the Department of Social Services into this 

Department of Human Resources, Labour and Employment. 

 

It may be somewhat indicative of the priority placed on services 

to seniors that the Seniors’ Bureau was now found in the same 

department as what was formerly the department of Labour, the 

employment development agency, the women’s secretariat, the 

native secretariat. And kind of obscurely attached to that, it 

seems, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, is the Seniors’ Bureau. 

 

Now I think, as we review the actions of this government over 

the past couple of months, and the impact that the changes that 

have been brought about through the budget and otherwise, we 

see, Mr. Chairman, that there are two groups in society in 

Saskatchewan today who have been most directly impacted by 

those changes. And I speak, specifically impacted in a negative 

kind of way. Those two groups, obviously, Mr. Chairman, are 

the poor in our society in Saskatchewan as well as the second 

group, large group, nearly 128,000 people who are directly 

affected, and I refer to those who are seniors here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, all too often those two groups 

overlap, and many of our seniors in Saskatchewan also fall into 

the category of being Saskatchewan’s poor. And I would like to 

just quickly do a cursory review of the cuts that have been made 

that have impacted on seniors. 

 

In the last three or four months, or less, Mr. Chairman, we’ve 

seen home care rates for seniors, who are still living on their 

own but need some assistance in order to live independently, 

we’ve seen home care rates rise by up to 67 per cent. We’ve 

seen nursing home rates increase now by some $80 a month. 

We’ve seen seniors who . . . many of whom have lost their 

property improvement grants, some of whom admittedly have 

had those replaced by heritage grants, but not all. 

 

We’ve seen the part of our population which is most directly 

affected by the prescription drug plan changes being the seniors 

of our province. And I’ve talked to several pharmacists and 

doctors who’ve expressed their abhorrence at the move that has 

been made by the government, and particularly their concern for 

the impact on the senior citizens of Saskatchewan, particularly 

the low-income seniors, many of whom they’ve expressed 

concerns for the fact that instead of taking prescriptions that 

they should be taking, because of lack of finances many of them 

will be showing up to increase our ever-lengthening hospital 

waiting lists. 

 

And that’s the next point as well, Mr. Chairman. Every one of 

us, as MLAs sitting in this Legislative Assembly, have had an 

increasing number of approaches by many people, but 

specifically again seniors, who are affected by the long and 

lengthening waiting lists in the hospitals here in Saskatchewan. 

Seniors have been affected by the whole raft of tax increases 

directly or indirectly imposed by this government. By the 

cutting back in funding to municipalities, we’ve seen seniors, 

along with the rest of the population, whose property taxes will 

be rising as a direct effect of that. That’s certainly true in my 

home city  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2096 

 

of Moose Jaw, as well as other municipalities around the 

province. 

 

Seniors have been hit by the reintroduction of the gas tax again. 

Seniors have been impacted by the hold on nursing home 

expansion, and a particular scam – I think is probably not too 

harsh a word to use – being the withdrawal of support for the 

St. Anthony’s Home in Moose Jaw to provide facilities for 

seniors who are needing level 3 and level 4 care. 

 

Well that’s just a partial list, Mr. Chairman, but I think it spells 

out the context of what’s happening for senior citizens in 

Saskatchewan today, and most significantly for seniors who are 

on the low end of the income scale. 

 

I was a bit surprised – appalled is probably not an inaccurate 

word, Mr. Chairman – yesterday when the minister stood on his 

feet and somehow, which is not yet clear to me – it wasn’t 

yesterday, and it certainly hasn’t been as I’ve reread Hansard – 

in response to my colleague from Cumberland’s statements 

about systemic racism, stood up quite contrary to what my 

colleague was saying, demonstrated that he didn’t understand 

the issue that was being put to him and somehow made some – 

irrelevant to the discussion – but made some comment to the 

effect that he’s not a racist and that’s proven by the fact that he 

paid $41,000 a year in income tax last year and that his family, 

as a matter of fact, paid $50,000 in income tax. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you may pay $50,000 a year in income tax 

– I’m not talking income, I’m going by your words that you pay 

$50,000 a year in income tax — Mr. Minister, it’ll be, I hope 

not a surprise, but maybe it is a surprise to you that there are 

many seniors in the province of Saskatchewan who pay no 

income tax at all. And that’s not because they’re taking 

advantage of all the tax breaks and loopholes, it’s because their 

incomes are not sufficiently high in order to qualify to pay 

income tax. 

 

And so I think it’s in that context, Mr. Speaker, that you’ve 

spelled out through your government’s actions – I don’t think 

we can attribute all of these things directly to you, they’re 

obviously endorsed by your Premier. I don’t think you’re doing 

anything in this department or elsewhere that your Premier does 

not endorse; obviously he does. You’ve spelled out through 

your changes that seniors are a reducing priority, particularly 

the seniors who are the poorest of that 128,000 seniors who live 

in the province of Saskatchewan today. 

 

As you’re aware, Mr. Speaker, the Seniors’ Bureau has offered 

a number of services in the past which are intended to help 

seniors shuffle through the red tape and bureaucracy of 

programs that are intended to be of assistance to them. And one 

of those programs has been the Seniors’ Outreach Service, 

commonly known as SOS to many people who’ve made use of 

this telephone service, a toll-free number which was well 

publicized around activity centres and senior apartment blocks, 

and provided information to seniors to assist them in dealing 

with life’s problems and crises as they were confronted by 

them. 

 

My first question to you today, Mr. Minister, is, in the  

years of 1986-86 and ‘86-87, can you . . . not can you, because I 

know you can, will you please tell me the number of calls that 

were received by the Seniors’ Outreach Services, or the SOS 

line to assist seniors in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I 

understand yesterday my microphone wasn’t working, so if 

that’s a problem again, possibly the clerk could advise me and 

we’ll switch desks again. 

 

What we’re looking at here is a misconception in the mind of 

the members opposite that somehow there has been government 

cuts to senior citizens. Overall, senior citizens have fared well 

under this government – exceptionally well. Senior citizens live 

with me and around me, and are part of the community I live in. 

And as a matter of fact, in my constituency senior citizens are 

one-third of the adult population. And so senior citizens are 

very much a part of my community, and our community, in this 

province. 

 

We have a different perception of senior citizens and how they 

live than the members opposite, and senior citizens have a 

different perception of themselves. They consider themselves 

very much a part of the community in Saskatchewan, certainly 

not, as a group, affluent, but on the other hand then you are 

looking at people in retirement, and you’re not, for the most 

part, looking at people who are earning incomes or any large 

kind of incomes. 

 

But the public should know – and I think senior citizens, if they 

sit down and do this calculation – that there is very much a 

minimum income standard for senior citizens in Saskatchewan. 

And these may not even be the total figures because of some 

other federal tax changes that have been made recently. But at 

present if you’re a single senior citizen in Saskatchewan and if 

you have no other income, you’re entitled to old age security of 

$300.34. This is effective June 30, 1987. The old age pension, 

$300.34; guaranteed income supplement of $356.94, and 

Saskatchewan income plan of $65 – for an income of $722.28 

per month. A guaranteed income to a single senior in 

Saskatchewan of $9,447.36, plus a single senior receives $500 

from the Saskatchewan heritage program, which would bring 

that single senior citizen’s income to a guaranteed income in the 

$10,000 range. In addition, many senior citizens live in 

subsidized housing where their rent is no more than 25 per cent 

of their income. 

 

In the case of a married couple who are senior citizens, the old 

age pension is $600.68. The guaranteed income supplement is 

$532.81. The Saskatchewan income plan is $105, and the 

members opposite will recall that there’s a substantial increase 

under our government. Whereas you paid single seniors $25, 

and couples 45, we have more than doubled that to 65 and 

$105. The income of that couple then would be $1,238.49 per 

month – a yearly income of $16,121.88 – plus $700 under the 

heritage payment, which would give that single seniors couple 

an income of $16,821.88, plus some benefits under the federal 

tax changes that were made this spring under tax reform. 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2097 

 

So while that is not a large sum of money for a single senior or 

a couple to live on, it is certainly the largest sum of money 

compared to the cost of living. And calculated in any manner 

you wish, it is the largest sum of money that senior citizens in 

this province have ever had to live on. And while I don’t 

indicate that senior citizens can live high on that sum of money, 

I would submit that senior citizens who were used to a lot less 

money when you were government, and when the Liberals were 

government, and when this province had no money at all to pay 

anyone anything, those senior citizens appreciate the sums they 

are now receiving from the federal and provincial government. 

And those senior citizens have indicated to me on many, many 

occasions that they can get by, and that they appreciate what the 

province, and the federal government, and the younger 

generation is doing to help them. 

 

You indicated that there was a question on Outreach. We’ve 

noted that the number of calls to the senior citizens’ line was 

down considerably, which would suggest that senior citizens 

were having fewer problems and fewer questions. And we 

found that with a number of calls, a general telephone line was 

adequate and it is working adequately. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, you go on an interesting 

discourse, I guess it would be. Obviously the facts you bring 

forward are not totally accurate because not all seniors families 

have two seniors and so on. Although I recognize it’s not within 

the confines of this department that’s before us today, it’s 

within the confines of a department that’s also under your 

responsibility, the Department of Social Services, whereby you 

require the poorest of the poor of those who are not yet 

technically seniors – they’re not 65 years old but over 60 years 

old – to take early Canada Pension Plan benefits if they’re 

eligible for social assistance and, as a result of that, save some 

money to the Department of Social Services and also condemn 

them to reduced Canada Pension Plan incomes for the rest of 

their entire lives. 

 

(1445) 

 

That does not sound to me – although it’s not in this 

department, it’s in the department under your responsibility, 

Mr. Minister – as though that’s the act of a sensitive and 

conscientious kind of leadership that you purpose to be 

providing. 

 

I note, Mr. Minister . . . And perhaps both of us can stick closer 

to the point, and we’ll make some rapid progress through 

questions that I would like to have answered, and I repeat my 

first question because you didn’t answer it. The SOS line, in 

‘85-86, how many calls did it receive? In ‘86-87, how many 

calls did it receive? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — We don’t have statistical information on 

how many calls came in. As you know, it was an 800 number 

which doesn’t keep track of the number of calls. The number of 

calls coming in did not seem to warrant the cost of an 800 

number. As you may be aware, and have alluded to, we are 

combining many services to senior citizens in the new branch of 

my department. Senior citizens had come to me, eve before  

I was elected, and indicated that they, first of all, would like to 

have their own department, and at the very least would like to 

have a department outside of the Department of Social Services 

since they felt that they were on pensions and were not clients 

of Social Services. 

 

We have been able to go far enough to have seniors included in 

the Department of Human Resources. In the down-sizing of 

government and a smaller cabinet, which your colleagues had 

asked for quite some length of time, it does not warrant having 

many more government departments. So the senior citizens 

have been included in this new Department of Human 

Resources, Labour and Employment. Senior citizens are a 

human resource. We consider them to be a human resource. 

 

There are 128,000 senior citizens in Saskatchewan out of, I 

believe, 640,000 or 641,000 adults. So you can see we’re 

looking at about one-fifth of our population, and very much our 

human resource, and should not be in the Department of Social 

Services. 

 

In addition, we are consolidating more and more things with 

regards to senior citizens, and all of these things will be 

consolidated into our department so senior citizens will have 

what you might call, in modern terminology, “one-stop 

shopping.” 

 

With respect to your question on the 800 line, it just wasn’t 

justified on the number of calls that were doming through. We 

don’t have the exact figure of how many thousand it was. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, as a matter of fact, you know and I 

know that statistics were kept on the number of calls reached, 

the numbers of calls made by seniors to the Seniors Outreach 

Service telephone line. I know that, as a matter of fact. I am 

asking you what the number of calls received was in 1985-86, 

and the number in ‘86-87? We both know that statistics were 

kept on that fact, and will you please report them to the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I don’t have the information right now. 

The head of the branch has been summoned to join us today and 

has not yet arrived. When Dr. Skoll arrives, we’ll see if he has 

that information. So we’ll make a note of it, and if we can give 

you the exact figures, we will. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, that’s slightly different from your 

first response in which you said you didn’t have those figures. 

Is this to be expected as we go through the review of your 

department and services to seniors that this will be the nature of 

the exchange, that you don’t have the answers available until 

you’re pressed two or three times to provide them? I hope not. 

 

We will pursue that later, Mr. Minister. And I would ask you to 

explain to me why it was then that the civil servant who was 

manning that telephone – I’m advised a civil servant who was 

well-informed as to seniors’ services within the Government of 

Saskatchewan was encouraged to take early retirement and did. 

And as a result of that, after having had in place in this province 

a toll-free number that seniors could call to get advice about 

government services for them – a very popular service I might 

add – that effective this budget year, that  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2098 

 

toll-free number, I believe, has been eliminated. And I ask you, 

Mr. Minister, am I correct in that understanding? Is there still a 

toll-free number available to seniors to get advice as to seniors’ 

services within the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well if you really want to play silly 

games, I suppose we can play silly games. I told you earlier that 

I didn’t have the figures. My staff advised me that they could 

get the figures, and if we can get them and if I do have them, I 

will give you the figures. 

 

I do recall Ruth Dafoe, though. I think we all know her from her 

days when I was with the party – your party, that is. And I think 

I recall her taking early retirement with much fanfare, and I 

expect that you probably have the figures. So why don’t you 

just tell me, rather than us wait? 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, if you want to play silly games, I 

guess we can play silly games. It’s my assumption we come 

into this legislature to review the operations of your department, 

to do that seriously in the interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It is your responsibility to answer questions; it is my 

responsibility to ask those questions to hold your department 

accountable. If you want to play games with that, then maybe 

we’ll have to play games. I hope that we won’t have to. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you the same questions, and it seems to be 

taking . . . we’re going through a painstaking process here to 

start what should be a very simple exercise. You’ve told me that 

you’ll try and get me these numbers. I ask you – let me put two 

questions in one and try and get an answer from you. When will 

you give me those numbers; and secondly, is there in 

Saskatchewan today a toll-free number that seniors can call to 

get advice about services to seniors in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we have the 

arrival of Dr. Louis Skoll, who’s in charge of the seniors’ 

branch of our department, and he advises me that I was in error, 

I was ill-informed, that we still do have a toll-free number, 

which is better than I had announced earlier here. He also 

advises me that we receive, on average, about 300 calls per 

month, approximately 3,600 calls per year, and that the calls are 

being taken by the general staff of the department. So the only 

real change is that Ruth Dafoe is no longer with us, and other 

than that, it’s business as normal. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, are you saying then that the 

number is the same and that the usage of that line is the same? 

Is that what you’re telling me? I’m trying to phrase the 

questions as simply and clearly as I can; I would appreciate it if 

you would put the same effort into the answers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Dr. Skoll advises me that the usage is 

down. We don’t have the exact figures on what it is down; 

that’s what it was running at when we last checked. He advised 

that the usage is down on that toll-free line and seems to be 

continuing to decrease, which would suggest that senior citizens 

either have all  

the information they need, or understand what this government 

is doing, or probably, as I suspect, they’re quite satisfied with 

what this government is doing. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I quite for the life of me 

cannot understand why you would refuse to respond directly to 

my questions. These are not complicated questions. I asked you, 

is it the same line as is? And will you also tell me, is it 

continuing to be advertised? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the answer is 

that the number, the telephone number that you call is the same 

and that it will be continued to be made public as much as 

possible. We are revising the seniors’ directory, and it will be in 

the new directory which we hope to have out in the not too 

distant future. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — While we’re on the topic, then, of the directory, 

Mr. Minister, will you tell me what the target date is to have 

that new directory out, and will you also advise as to why, at the 

Seniors’ Bureau in Regina today, that there are no longer many, 

if any, pamphlets available that used to be available to seniors 

to advise them of services available to them? So both of those 

questions, same time: why are the number of pamphlets down? 

What is the target date for the new directory? That’s the 

directory of all services in the province of Saskatchewan that 

can be made available to seniors so that they can find help for 

themselves. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The best information I have is that the 

pamphlet stock is running down; that they’re planning to 

revamp the pamphlets and have a new printing of the 

pamphlets. The target date for the new seniors’ directory is 

January 1988, this coming January. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And can we go back 

to one other question you failed to answer before that I asked: 

when will you provide me the statistics on the usage of the SOS 

line? You can answer that at the same time as you answer the 

next question. I think it’s probably just an oversight on your 

part. 

 

Mr. Minister, there has been funding by the province of 

Saskatchewan to seniors’ activity centres. And it is my 

understanding, Mr. Minister, that the funding formula has not 

been revised for some time. First of all, can you tell me what 

was the last date that the funding formula was revised upwardly 

for seniors’ activity centres? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the answer to the first part of your 

question, that the best information we have on the statistics of 

the number of telephone calls coming in on the seniors’ inquiry 

line was approximately $3,600 per year . . . 3,600 calls rather 

than dollars, when Ruth Dafoe was doing the answering and 

running that part of it. We don’t have statistics on what they are 

running at now. We would have to go back and monitor the 

calls for the next month to see how many come in in the next 

month, so we don’t have an exact figure of what they’re coming 

in at the current rate. The traditional rate was 3,600 per year, 

and it is down somewhat now. That’s the best information I can 

give you on that. 

 

The formula funding for seniors’ centres in the province . . .  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2099 

 

We are planning a revision of the formula for next year’s 

budget – next year’s budget year. We don’t have the exact 

information available right now as to when it was last revised. It 

was a few years ago. In any event, that is sort of history. We’re 

planning a revision for the next budget year. I don’t expect 

there will be any major changes in the formula or major 

changes in the funding. So I wouldn’t want senior citizens to be 

apprehensive in next year’s budget, and I wouldn’t you to go 

about the country scaring the senior citizens suggesting that 

somehow there’s going to be a massive change. 

 

What I should really say is that the formula will be re-examined 

and I don’t expect it to be changed in any major way, but I 

expect it, possibly, to be fine turned to be brought in line with 

the needs of the various seniors’ groups and modern reality, and 

get a better balance between some of the groups as to what 

they’re receiving money for, and how much they’re receiving. 

 

(1500) 

 

There are a few groups in Saskatchewan that are receiving, per 

capita, a sum of money that is substantially out of line with 

what the great majority of senior centres are receiving. And we 

would be looking at a balance there so that the formula would 

be spread fairly evenly across all the senior citizens’ groups. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I’m pleased to hear that there will 

be a revision, and I would hope that you’re implying that would 

be an upward revision of the funding formerly for activity 

centres, although when I hear this government talking about 

revisions to formulas it isn’t always the case. You may want to 

confirm that. 

 

Given that you have said, Mr. Minister, that you don’t want to 

be scaring seniors, and it’s a little difficult as they listen to the 

news and what your government announces month by month 

and week by week, and day by day, for them not to be 

frightened at times, Mr. Minister. Many seniors, unfortunately, 

become frightened about the security for their future because 

they see that being jeopardized by your government. 

 

Let me repeat my question again because you like to use the 

words – the words are: that the services to seniors are a priority 

for you, but you haven’t bothered to . . . it hasn’t been a high 

enough priority to bother revising the funding formula for a few 

years, you say. Mr. Minister, will you please be more specific. 

How many years ago was it that the funding formula for senior 

activity centres was revised upwardly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The overall formula remains intact and 

has not changed since 1983-84 . . . ‘82-83 . . . ‘82-83 is the base 

year, and there has been no major change, up or down, since ’82 

or ’83, in the funding. 

 

Traditionally there was, back in 1978-79, a formula, 40 per cent 

of approved operating costs, and also our department has put 

money into start-up costs for senior citizens’ centres. Of course, 

they are quite prevalent throughout the province right now, and 

there’s not much demand for start-up costs. Also, the seniors, 

for the most part, having been self-sufficient for 65 years before 

they  

retired, are quite self-sufficient in the operations of their 

centres, and there hasn’t been a great deal of demand or need 

for large increases in the grants for the operating of their centres 

– it has not risen as an issue in my constituency, and I have one 

in virtually every town. 

 

So the funding level has remained more or less constant from 

1982-83 budget year. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I find it a bit odd or 

contradictory. Maybe I’m unique. Maybe there are others who 

share the opinion that I have that . . . it strikes me as a bit 

strange that a service that is considered to be a priority service 

hasn’t had an increase in funding from your government since it 

came into office five year ago. That’s an odd way to treat a 

priority, and I guess I would say heaven forbid those who aren’t 

a priority. 

 

Mr. Minister, let me ask you a question, and this will be of 

concern to those who are charged with the responsibilities of 

operating senior citizens’ activity centre. There has been some 

concern expressed, related to words coming out of the federal 

Progressive Conservative government, that the federal PC 

government is talking about pulling their cost sharing of activity 

centres out of the funding. And I would ask, Mr. Speaker, if it is 

your view that as a matter of fact that’s going to happen? What 

is your reading about whether the Progressive Conservative 

federal government of Canada is going to pull its funding out of 

senior citizen activity centres? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — With respect to federal funding, there 

are some discussions, Mr. Deputy Chairman, between my 

officials and federal officials, and these discussions are not 

quite at a negotiation stage because we wouldn’t negotiate with 

the federal government for something that we feel is partly their 

responsibility. We consider it highly unlikely that the federal 

government of Brian Mulroney would reduce funding to senior 

citizens in this country. I would say that anybody that is saying 

that there will be federal reductions to senior citizens would 

either be speculating, politicking or fear mongering. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Are you referring to the same Brian Mulroney, 

Mr. Minister, who attempted to de-index senior citizen 

pensions? Are we talking about the same Brian Mulroney that, 

do you suspect, may not attempt to reduce federal funding to 

senior activity centres? Because if this is the same PC Brian 

Mulroney, Mr. Minister, there seems to be a somewhat different 

impression that you have from the rest of the Canadian nation, 

both seniors and otherwise, who I recall striking up a strong 

resistance to Brian Mulroney’s attempt to de-index senior 

citizens’ pensions. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you give assurance and a guarantee to senior 

citizen activity centres in Saskatchewan that, should Brian 

Mulroney and the PC federal government decide to pull out 

some or all of their funding to activity centres, that the province 

will ensure that your intention to raise the funding formula next 

year will still hold true in terms of the bottom line, and that’s 

the money that they have to operate with. Will you give them 

that assurance today, Mr. Minister? 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2100 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we certainly 

wouldn’t pick up what we consider off-loading of federal 

expenses on to the province of Saskatchewan. There are a few 

instances where the federal government is not continuing 

special funding to some senior citizens groups. 

 

One example would be the Extra Years of Zest society in 

Moose Jaw, which may be in your constituency of Moose Jaw 

North. I have recently written them a letter dated July 29 

advising them that this year’s funding will be continued to them 

in the sum of $74,452, and I’ve also added, “However, this will 

be the last year this level of funding will be maintained.” And 

that’s why I indicated that there will be a re-examination of the 

formula. I have indicated to them also that the federal 

government has terminated cost sharing for their society. 

 

Now this particular society has a special arrangement not 

common to other senior citizens groups in Saskatchewan, and 

have a payroll with employees on staff, and I’m sure the 

member from Moose Jaw North will have an idea of how many 

employees are on staff by this society. And there is a 

considerable sum of money going to this particular group in 

Moose Jaw, $74,452, and in this year’s budgetary process I 

didn’t notice that there was a inequity here. And because I 

couldn’t give them any notice, I advised them that the amount 

will be continued for this year, but I’ve advised the Extra Years 

of Zest society in Moose Jaw that they cannot expect another 

$74,000 next year because the money that the province has for 

senior citizens has to be spread more equitably. 

 

And it doesn’t cost that much money, $74,000, to run a senior 

citizens’ centre. In Goodeve, Saskatchewan, in my 

constituency, I admit somewhat smaller than Moose Jaw, they 

receive $1,552. This is the home of the former member for 

Melville for 16 years, John Kowalchuk, and I know that he 

adequately took care of the people in his home village. He was 

the mayor there, and that amount has been fairly consistent for 

the Goodeve group. 

 

There’s a consistent pattern. At Grayson in my constituency, 

they receive $1,552. This was 1985-86. They’re eligible for the 

same amount, but we don’t have the final amount that they’ve 

qualified for, for this year. But there’s a fairly consistent 

pattern: in Grenfell, Saskatchewan, it’s $2,075; in Hafford, it’s 

$1,665; in Glenavon, it’s $2,000 exactly. You can see the 

consistent pattern of the amount that senior citizens’ groups are 

getting throughout most of Saskatchewan. 

 

And if there’s an adjustment in the formula, the adjustment, as 

I’ve indicated to the Moose Jaw group, would have to be to 

equalize and spread around this. And I acknowledge that Moose 

Jaw is a larger city and requires more money, but the 

discrepancy between a senior citizens’ group in Moose Jaw 

receiving $74,000 and a senior citizens’ group in other parts of 

Saskatchewan – and I have almost every town in Saskatchewan 

here, they tend to run in the 1,200 to $2,300-$2,500 range: 

Craik, for example, is $3,000 . . . yes, Craik is $3,000; and 

Coronach is $2,483. And there’s a consistent pattern there. 

And so I’ve given the Moose Jaw group advance notice of 

about six months that they could not expect $74,452 next year. 

And the federal government had put special money into some of 

those groups, that being one of the examples. That’s where we 

will not pick up any reduction in federal money, because the 

federal government under all political parties – I suppose it’s 

never been under your political party, so I can’t accuse your 

politicians of doing this, but I’m sure you have many people of 

your persuasion in the federal bureaucracy. 

 

So all three political parties are represented in the way the 

federal government operates. And the federal government has 

always had a habit of putting up a block of money for 

somebody to start something, and then waiting for two or three 

or four years and then saying, well, we gave you the start-up 

money and now you’re on your own. And then these groups 

come to the province and say, well, now we don’t have any 

money; the federal government isn’t giving us the money they 

. . . And in most cases, it’s money they shouldn’t have given 

them in the first place. 

 

So the province will not accept off-loading. We will continue to 

maintain services and support senior citizens’ groups 

throughout the province on an equitable and fair basis, and 

therefore, the formula will be reconsidered to make 

adjustments, to distribute the money in a fair manner. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, that was a long and 

rambling non-answer to my question. Just in response to one of 

your red herrings, though, I would add the observation that in 

my constituency and around the province of Saskatchewan, I 

am getting senior after senior after senior who are telling me 

that they wait for the day when a New Democratic Party 

government will take place in Ottawa and bring good 

government, finally, to the country of Canada. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, it’s a little difficult to put your answers 

together here. I hesitate to say this, but at times they sound a bit 

like mush. And let me ask you again for clarity, and I would ask 

a simple question; I’d ask you to provide a simple answer. 

 

It seems to me, then, that what you’ve said here this afternoon 

is that you’re reviewing the funding to senior activity centres; 

they will not necessarily provide increases in funding for 

activity centres; and that you anticipate the possibility of federal 

funding reductions, and if that happens, do you provide no 

assurance to activity centres that they will be compensated for 

the loss in federal funding? A simple yes or no would be 

sufficient, Mr. Minister, for purposes of clarity. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, from what we 

can gather, the federal government will continue regular 

funding to senior citizen centres. And special funding is special 

funding, and that’s up to the federal government whether 

special funding is necessary or prudent. 

 

(1515) 

 

We will not replace special funding. We will continue  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2101 

 

with regular funding. In the past, we have on occasion replaced 

special funding, as I indicated in the Moose Jaw group, and we 

will not continue to replace special funding. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, will you explain why there has 

been no funding allocated to the seniors’ provincial council, and 

who is performing the function formally carried out by the 

seniors’ provincial council? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we recognize the 

Saskatchewan seniors’ provincial council as the legitimate 

spokesgroup for senior citizens in this province. They continue 

to receive full funding – same amount of money. The difference 

is that their administration has been absorbed into our 

department staff, and we pay the staff, rather than giving the 

money to them, and they pay the staff. 

 

They are meeting regularly. We are in a process of replacing 

three people whose term has expired. We are not replacing 

these people as fast as we would have liked to, but I am 

operating on a principle that there should be some rotation from 

time to time, and other senior citizens should be given an 

opportunity to serve. So rather than immediately renew people 

whose term has expired, we are examining giving a rotation 

system. So out of the 128,000 senior citizens, they would get a 

fairer chance of rotating on the council and seeking this 

experience which they find is very rewarding. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I understand that in 1983 and 1985 

– please correct me if I’m mistaken; I’m sure you will with 

great glee – that there were seniors’ forums held that provided 

the opportunity for seniors to dialogue with cabinet ministers in 

the province of Saskatchewan. It’s my understanding that these 

seniors’ forums were conducted through the Senior Citizens’ 

Provincial Council, and will you please confirm whether the 

last two were in 1983 and 1985, and what your plans are for 

1987 for the seniors’ forums so the senior citizens of 

Saskatchewan can dialogue face to face with cabinet ministers 

of this government, and if there’s ever a year that it’s critical to 

do that, it’s in 1987. Are you planning to do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’m pleased to 

indicate that these forums were, as far as I recall, organized in 

1983 and 1983 by my predecessor ministers in this government, 

and that we will carry on with that tradition and there will be a 

forum in Regina, October 26 through October 28 of 1987, 

which is not too far from now. And we expect that this will be a 

very useful forum, as the ones in the past have been 

exceptionally good. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well I appreciate and am pleased to hear that, 

Mr. Minister, and I would sincerely hope that the cabinet 

minister is going to that dialogue and that seniors in 

Saskatchewan will go with their ears open. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you please advise me what the advice given 

to your government from the seniors’ council has been 

regarding the implementation of the prescription drug plan 

which requires senior citizens to be saving countless receipts in 

order to be eligible for the reimbursement after they have paid 

their first 50 or $75 of  

their deductible, and then have to submit receipts in order to get 

80 per cent reimbursement of their actual prescription drug 

costs? 

 

This is, I know – you and I both know; well I know – I assume 

that you get the occasional call from your constituent that you 

listen to, and we both know that this has been a particular 

problem for seniors to be collecting these receipts. And I’m 

simply asking: what has been the advice to your government 

from the seniors’ council regarding this particular policy 

implemented by your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I haven’t had any complaints from 

seniors throughout the province or in my constituency about 

having to save their receipts and send them in for 

reimbursement. This year, because it’s a half year, it’s a $25 

deductible so some of them are already sending their receipts in. 

 

As you may be aware, and I’m sure you are, that there is a crisis 

in potash and agriculture in this province, revenue is not being 

generated to any great extent, and we, as a government and as 

taxpayers, don’t really have a lot of money to hire extra people 

to go through a large bureaucracy, and we appreciate very much 

that senior citizens are prepared to take time, with all other 

citizens, and gather their receipts and send them in, which 

reduces the amount of government bureaucracy we need. And 

the people are doing some of their own work and saving 

themselves taxes at the same time. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, further on to the seniors’ 

advisory council, I would ask when was the last time you met 

with the council, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, as far as I recall, it was February 

that I last met with them directly. My deputy minister and my 

assistant deputy minister have been able to attend almost every 

meeting. I don’t know; I’d have to check with them to see if 

they’ve missed a meeting or not, but they’ve been attending 

regularly, and from time to time I’ve met with their president 

personally, and we have a good working relationship. 

 

They are . . . when I met with them in February, were working 

on some projects, are now getting to the completion stage in 

these projects. And I intend to meet with them to discuss the 

projects that they were working on and see what the findings 

were. One of them, in particular, was with native senior citizens 

and the special problems related to their situation. And I look 

forward to meeting with the council in the not too distant future. 

 

Of course the seniors’ forum is coming up within a month or so, 

two months, and all in all they are doing good advisory work. 

But more than advisory work, they are doing research and they 

are formulating policies which they pass on to us and which 

we’ve listened to closely, and many of the suggestions they 

have made have been implemented, and in particular, the 

transfer of the branch from Social Services to Human 

Resources. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I would like to know . . . 

you alluded to earlier the three vacancies on the board. If you 

would, could you explain to us today the make-up of  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2102 

 

the board, the number of members on the board as it exists now, 

and when you might be inclined to fill those three vacancies? 

And as well, where those vacancies are from? 

 

Mr. Saxinger: — I would ask leave to introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Saxinger: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce you to Pastor Ulmer, Howard Ulmer, and his 

wife Glorie from Southey. They are sitting in the Speaker’s 

gallery, and their guest is Oliver Guske from Germany. Oliver 

is here for a youth exchange. He is taking in grade 12 at the 

Southey School. I am very proud to have young people coming 

to Canada on youth exchange. And I would welcome him to 

Saskatchewan, and I’d like to say a few words in German, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in German.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, would you want to help me welcome the guests to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 20 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the members of 

the Senior Citizens’ Provincial Council are Ted Azevedo, 

chairperson, Nipawin, Saskatchewan; Mary Findlay, Swift 

Current, Saskatchewan; Moira Gautron, North Battleford; June 

Clark, Saskatoon; Ernest Crowe, Craven. I’m not certain, but I 

think if I recall correctly, that’s Chief Roland Crowe’s father. I 

recall meeting him, and now that I read it on a list I’m quite 

sure it is Chief Roland Crowe’s father, and he’s a very fine 

gentleman. I was very impressed when I did meet him. Sam 

Haggerty, Regina; Frances Petit, Saskatoon; Len Heming; 

Regina; John Herne, Hudson Bay. 

 

The other three positions, we have a target area of filling them 

with someone from western Saskatchewan, someone from 

northern Saskatchewan, and someone from the general area of 

Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, if I might, I too would 

like to welcome our guests in the gallery. And I’m especially 

pleased to welcome the young gentleman from Germany; 

having come from a German background, I certainly appreciate 

the fact that he’s joining us here today. 

 

Mr. Minister, it appears to me that you have terminated three 

people from the council. My understanding is that the people 

who are no longer on that council came from Melville, Unity, 

and from my home town, Prince Albert. 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, you indicated in a letter dated 

March 13 to me that you were currently reviewing the mandate, 

and in light of the budget review you weren’t sure what was 

going to happen. I would like to say, Mr. Minister, it’s been 

almost a year that those three areas of this province have had no 

representation. And I would urge you to fill those vacancies as 

soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Minister, possibly . . . You indicated earlier that you have 

had no interaction with seniors or no complaints in terms of the 

changes your government has made to the drug prescription 

plan. I would want to say to you that possibly one of the reasons 

that you have had no input from the seniors is twofold. 

 

You possibly haven’t got representation on the seniors’ 

advisory council, and I find it strange that you haven’t met 

before the budget. I would ask you, Mr. Minister, have you had 

any contact with the council, and has there been any discussion, 

any dialogue, regarding your government’s decision to increase 

the fees for nursing homes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: I indicated to you earlier that in replacing 

people on the council we would give consideration to some new 

people getting an opportunity to serve. Mr. Tom Hardy of 

Melville, I know personally, I used to see him when I had time 

to play golf. I used to see him on the golf course quite often, 

and we used to talk. 

 

(1530) 

 

He’s an excellent individual, but he acknowledges that someone 

else should have a chance to serve on the committee, and him 

and I discussed that matter. And it doesn’t seem unreasonable 

that other people should have a chance to serve when there’s 

128,000 senior citizens in Saskatchewan. It’s not that we don’t 

meet with seniors and consult with them. The Minister of 

Health personally met with the provincial council in, I believe it 

was, North Battleford, and discussed changes there. 

 

When you come to the topic of nursing homes and the fees of 

nursing homes, you’ve touched a sore point with me, and I am 

somewhat of an expert in that area. My great-grandfather lived 

in a nursing home, St. Paul’s Lutheran Home in Melville, and 

died there – he lived out his life there – at the age of 87, as a 

matter of fact; he was well taken care of. Didn’t live there long, 

but he was there. And my grandfather, the same, a man that 

taught me a great deal; lived at St. Paul’s Lutheran Home in 

Melville and died there at the age of 82. So I was quite familiar 

with the history of nursing homes in this province. 

 

And I also recall that my grandfather and both my 

great-grandfather, under your jurisdiction as government, had to 

pay their life savings in order to live in that nursing home. And 

my grandfather paid it. You know, after Tommy Douglas had 

resigned, and my grandfather, while he had respect for Tommy 

Douglas, lost faith in your party because you took his life 

savings. And many other of my constituents had to sell their 

houses, had to give their property away and hope that they 

wouldn’t have to go to a nursing home for five years. And 

under your  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2103 

 

government there was real fear among senior citizens with 

respect to nursing home rates and how the charges were made. 

 

And I recall just before the 1981 election – after I lobbied very 

hard, not so much as a politician but as a lawyer and a friend of 

senior citizens in my constituency – just before the 1981 

election, or the ’82 election in 1981, your government then 

changed the nursing home formula and no longer made it 

necessary for senior citizens to give up their entire life savings. 

And my grandfather did spend his life savings on your nursing 

home fees and left me an inheritance, as modest as he could, 

and I’m very proud of it. He left me a very nice desk lamp. 

That’s all that you left him with to give to his grandchildren 

was a desk lamp. And the other grandchildren received very 

small items because you, the caring government, the wonderful, 

democratic socialists of Saskatchewan, took the life savings of 

senior citizens like my grandfather, like other people’s 

grandparents. And now you have the audacity to come to us and 

say that we have done something very nasty with nursing home 

rates. 

 

You know very well that the old-age pension and the 

guaranteed income supplement received by senior citizens will 

cover their bills at the nursing home and that they will continue 

to be covered. And you know very well that the amount of 

money that senior citizens who are living in a nursing home are 

entitled to keep for their very own use has increased under our 

government. And it was just before the 1982 election that 

somehow your government felt they had a heart for senior 

citizens and stopped taking all of their savings, including their 

houses. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, your family background, 

and hearing about your desk lamp from your grandfather, is all 

very interesting. And the fact that you paid $41,000 in income 

tax last year was also interesting, as you shared with this House 

the other day. And that’s all fine and dandy, Mr. Minister, but I 

would like you to answer the question. 

 

Are you telling this House that the seniors, whose rates you 

have increased $73, if I have the figure correct . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Over 80 now. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: —Over $80 now, my colleague tells me. Are 

you telling me that the seniors of this province have not been 

complaining to your department? Could you answer that? We 

don’t need a 20-minute speech or your family background or 

your history. Just please answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: Mr. Chairman, what the member opposite 

is really saying is he doesn’t really want to hear how the NDP 

treated senior citizens in nursing homes. And I think that people 

in this province have a memory, and they recall how senior 

citizens were treated in nursing homes. 

 

I recall that just before the 1982 election, a 99-year-old lady, 

was about to have her 100 birthday, was being sued – 

threatened to be sued – because there was no place in a nursing 

home and she was in a hospital. And there was nowhere for her 

to go, and they were  

threatening to sue her for I don’t recall how many . . . it was in 

the range of $100 a day, or in excess of $100 a day, because 

there was no nursing home for her to go in – a 99-year-old lady. 

 

And I recall writing your minister at the time and giving this 

information to your minister. And I recall that just before the 

election you changed the policy again; all of a sudden you 

found a heart for a 99-year-old lady, just before the 1982 

election. I’ve a copy of the letter. I could go back to Melville 

and get it for you. 

 

You also know, and the citizens of Saskatchewan know, that 

nursing home rates charged by our government have not 

increased as fast as the increases in the old-age pension, and 

that senior citizens have more disposable income now – 

whether they live in a nursing home or whether they live in 

their own homes or in subsidized government housing – than 

they ever had under your government or any other government 

that has governed this province since the day God created it. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, surely you understand what 

these estimates are about, and if you don’t, let me refresh your 

memory. These estimates are to scrutinize the spending that 

your government has done. These estimates are to scrutinize the 

decisions your government has made – your government – not 

Tommy Douglas’s government, not Bennett’s government. And 

if you want to go back to all of that, before you and I were ever 

in this legislature, we can do that. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Minister, that the kind of a display you’re 

putting on in these estimates directly parallels the kind of 

display your colleagues put on in question period today when 

they wouldn’t answer a single question from the 25 minutes of 

questioning they got from the members on this side of the 

House. And the show that you’re displaying in front of some 

possible million people in this province is shameful. 

 

I have asked questions. My colleague has asked questions for 

the last three-quarters of an hour, and not an answer from you. 

What do you think the people out there are thinking about your 

department and the kind of answers you’re giving? 

 

I’ll tell you. You’re never going to find out from the senior 

citizens in Prince Albert until you appoint someone to the 

seniors’ advisory council, which you have failed to do since you 

removed the person that was acting on that council. And 

nobody was suggesting to you that you removed the wrong 

person. We were only asking you when you’re going to put 

someone on that council, Mr. Minister. And something as 

simple as a question like that you couldn’t even answer to this 

House and to the people of this province. 

 

I only say that I’m frustrated. I see absolutely no sense standing 

before you asking you any more questions because you haven’t 

given a single answer. And what I’m telling you now is I’m 

going to turn it over to my colleague, the member for Moose 

Jaw North, because perhaps he can get some answers out of 

you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I’m very pleased  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2104 

 

that the member is not going to ask any more questions because 

he accuses me of not answering questions. He’s asking 

questions about the Department of Health. He hasn’t asked 

questions as to how much this government spends on nursing 

homes. The Minister of Health is here. I’m sure he will confirm 

that this government spends $183 million a year on nursing 

homes. I just happen to know the answers to questions in the 

Health estimates because I am concerned as to how much we 

spend, and I am pleased that we do spend $183 million on 

nursing homes. But I can’t understand how the member 

opposite asks me a Health question and expects the minister of 

seniors to answer a Health question. 

 

What are the nursing home rates? The nursing home rates are 

part of the Department of Health. And you will have your 

opportunity to find out that this government spends $183 

million a year on nursing homes; that this government has built 

a record number of nursing homes. 

 

And I answered the question of the member opposite. He said 

when are you going to put three more people on the council. I 

said we’re planning on doing it now; we’re going to do it soon. 

Soon is a simple, four-lettered word – s-o-o-n, soon. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, the questions, I thought, 

were very specific, and they weren’t questions that should have 

been addressed to the Department of Health. The question was: 

have you had any interaction with the seniors’ advisory council, 

and did they indicate that they felt the rate increases of some 

$80 were unfair? That’s what the question was, and that, Mr. 

Minister, is what we were asking you to tell the people of this 

province. 

 

But it’s clear that you don’t want to talk about that. And it’s 

clear you want to do these estimates in a fair fashion, and for 

that reason, Mr. Minister, I throw my hands up in the air and 

I’m turning it over to the member from Moose Jaw North. 

Perhaps he has more patience with you than do I, but I tell you, 

after this budget was delivered and the kinds of statements that 

people are making about you, it’s no wonder that I’m believing, 

and that the people of this province are believing, that you’re 

not going to be sitting in cabinet very long. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — You indicated you were of German 

background, and I’m not the resident expert German any more 

in this caucus, but . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. I don’t think that we 

can have these extraneous conversations going on. I would 

suggest we do it behind the rail, or somewhere, so that we can 

hear the minister give his answer please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you. I don’t really know what the 

question was that the member opposite asked. It was some kind 

of dissertation about how he wouldn’t ask questions any more, 

and that’s okay with me. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, the question is very simply: when 

are you going to fill the vacancies on the council? That was a 

simple question. Do you have a simple answer? 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, soon. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Just for the record, I’m not sure I heard clearly 

what you said. Could you please answer that question for me 

again please, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, soon. Soon we will fill 

the positions. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — I find it hard to comment on that. I think my 

colleague has said all there is necessary to say in terms of the 

quality of your answers. 

 

Mr. Minister, under the previous government in November of 

1980, Geriatric Assessment Unit and Day Hospital was 

officially opened at the University Hospital in Saskatoon, and 

the purpose of this was to . . . of the unit and day hospital was to 

assess, treat and rehabilitate elderly persons whose ability to 

continue living in the community is threatened. My question, 

Mr. Minister, is whether this is still being funded, and are there 

any other units like it in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the unit the 

member refers to is funded by Health and under the jurisdiction 

of Health. As far as we know, it continues, but we wouldn’t 

know any details. As pointed out by a colleague to the member 

opposite, we are in the senior citizens’ estimates and the 

Minister of Health will answer those questions when we get to 

Health. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, about 110 seconds ago you told 

my colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake that the Minister 

of Health was here in this House and that he would be prepared 

to provide information if it was related to Health and seniors. 

What has changed in the last 125 seconds to affect your 

attitudes that you are not able to simply say: does that unit still 

exist; is it still being funded; are there others like it in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’ve just 

conversed with the Minister of Health, and he says this is within 

his jurisdiction and he will answer those questions when his 

estimates come up. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding that Dr. 

Skoll has proposed changes in service delivery for seniors in the 

areas of recreation programming, senior’s transportation, 

senior’s housing. It’s also my understanding, Mr. Minister, that 

you have had, and let go, an employee who was gathering 

information on elder abuse, a topic of increasing concern not 

only in Saskatchewan, an employee who was looking at other 

jurisdictions to deal with family violence involving seniors. 

 

I ask you simply to tell me, Mr. Minister, in these four areas; I 

know you’re had proposals put forth to you regarding recreation 

programming for seniors, transportation, senior’s housing, elder 

abuse. Can you tell me what your department is doing about 

those, please, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, there is an  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2105 

 

interdepartmental committee that is meeting weekly, or 

bi-weekly, on this particular project and this topic, and we are 

dealing with the problem of elder abuse. We really don’t know 

to what extent it may be a problem. I would certainly hope that 

it would be very, very limited. 

 

There is a problem that I recognized when I practised law, in 

that there are all kinds of people who will try to take advantage 

of senior citizens if they don’t understand contracts or the sale 

that’s being made. There are a few citizens that will take 

advantage of senior citizens with respect to their pension 

cheques and the assistance with their pension cheque. We 

would do everything to stamp that out, and the 

interdepartmental committee is working on it. 

 

I believe the employee you’re referring to would have been one 

Ralph Smith, a temporary employee with the Department of 

Social Services. There are two Ralph Smiths. I’m not sure if 

he’s the Ralph Smith that worked at the NDP caucus office. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, he certainly is not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Somebody says he certainly is not, so 

he must be the other Ralph Smith. So that’s all I know; his 

name is Ralph Smith. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — I’m not sure you’ve answered my question, Mr. 

Minister. Let me give you a chance to take another crack at it if 

you would. Will you tell me a little more specifically, other that 

than there are some occasional meetings going on, what your 

department is doing to review and deal with elder abuse; what 

your department is doing to review and deal with recreation 

programming for seniors; what your department is doing to 

review and deal with the issue of seniors’ transportation; and 

what your department is reviewing and will do by way of 

providing for seniors’ housing? 

 

Will you tell me something a little more specific other than that 

there are occasional interdepartmental meetings going on, or is 

that the extent of the plans of the Department of Human 

Resources, Labour and Employment in terms of dealing with 

the 128,000 senior citizens in Saskatchewan and their needs in 

these four very important areas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, in the last four 

or five years this government has gone a long way towards the 

building of senior subsidized housing which has spread 

throughout the province in the form of high-rises in Regina and 

Saskatoon, enriched housing projects across almost every part 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we’re reviewing what more can be done. We are reviewing 

what policies can be changed and programs implemented. 

When we have decided, we will make an announcement; and up 

until then, the members of the opposition will have to either 

speculate or rely on leaks to get their information. But we will 

announce the policy when we’ve decided what it will be, and 

what changes will be made. 

 

Mr. Hagel: Well, Mr. Minister, that gobbledegook sounds to 

me as though there’s not a whole lot happening  

right now. And there are a lot of people, not just the 128,000 

seniors in Saskatchewan, who are looking for some progressive 

steps from your department in dealing with these four very 

important issues, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I look at the Estimates book, and cast my 

glance to item no. 21, I note that the item referred to as “Grants 

for Senior Citizens’ Services” has been reduced from 1986-87, 

a total figure of $1,581,440 to this year, $1,141,000 – a 

reduction, Mr. Minister, of $440,000 this year, as reduction of 

25 per cent. I would welcome an explanation to this House, Mr. 

Minister, as to the rationale for reducing grants for senior 

citizens’ services by $440,000, by 25 per cent this year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I am advised by my officials to 

keep track of money, Mr. Assistant Deputy Chairman, that the 

amount budgeted this year is identical to the amount of 

expenditure last year, and that the full amount budgeted last 

year was not spent in that area. I’m not certain at present why 

the full amount was not spent, probably because it was not 

necessary to spend it. And we do not spend money just because 

a certain sum has been budgeted. So this is one of those 

instances where we came in within budget, and slightly under 

budget. And we have budgeted for the same amount as last 

year. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — So what you’re saying, Mr. Minister, is that last 

year you had money available for services to seniors that . . . 

Are you telling me it wasn’t asked for? Or are you telling me 

that it was refused to be granted, and therefore you’re keeping it 

to the same line this year. Is that the message that you’re trying 

to deliver to people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — What we do with a seniors’ grants is, 

we budget a certain sum that a group might be eligible for, and 

then we see how much senior citizens apply for. And senior 

citizens, in some cases, don’t apply for the full amount – this is 

senior citizens’ groups, for their centres and things – they don’t 

apply for the full amount, from time to time. 

 

For example, my records indicate that the Fort Qu’Appelle 

senior citizens’ club, under their amount of entitlement it 

shows: foregone, which would suggest to me on that 

information that they raised their own money and didn’t ask the 

government for the amount that had been budgeted for them. So 

because some of the senior citizens’ clubs are self-sufficient, 

some are very frugal, the amount expended last year was less 

than the amount budgeted. And I think we should all 

congratulate senior citizens’ groups for coming in under budget, 

overall, and not asking for money that they didn’t have any use 

for. So I would like to personally congratulate these senior 

citizen centres that were frugal and that became more 

self-sufficient last year. 

 

As far as we can ascertain, all the requests that came in, that 

were within the formula, were honoured last year. And so 

therefore we weren’t being stingy with the senior citizens 

groups. Those that asked for money and were entitled to money 

were awarded money. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, in the time that we’ve spent 

this afternoon talking about services to seniors, for  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2106 

 

seniors, and things that can and should be done to help seniors 

in Saskatchewan to increase their security and their quality of 

life, we’ve reviewed a number of areas, Mr. Minister. You and I 

have both recognized that there are 128,000 seniors in the 

province of Saskatchewan. You and I have both recognized that 

you paid $50,000 a year in income tax last year, and that many 

of the seniors in Saskatchewan pay no income tax at all, and 

that not everyone is, in this province, unfortunately, able to 

enjoy the amenities of life as you are – being an individual who 

pays over $50,000 a year in income tax. 

 

We’ve recognized that there are concerns about home care and 

nursing home rates; access to nursing homes; loss of grants to 

improve their homes and living situations; the hardships that 

have come through the prescription drug plan that your 

government has introduced; the long waiting lists in hospitals; 

tax increases because of the cut-backs to municipalities that 

your government has imposed. 

 

We’ve recognized that there’s need to make progress in the area 

of recreational opportunities for seniors. We’ve recognized here 

this afternoon that we’ve got a ways to go by way of providing 

for transportation resources for seniors, that seniors’ housing is 

not sufficient, and that the issue of elder abuse is coming to the 

attention of the public – an issue that many seniors have known 

for some time. 

 

In light of all of these things, Mr. Minister, it is my view that 

the priority of services given to senior citizens in Saskatchewan, 

many of whom have been the pioneers of our province, who 

have dedicated their efforts and their labours for generations, as 

a matter of fact, to contribute to the quality of life that you and I 

and our children enjoy in this province . . . that when we look at 

the responsibility of the province of Saskatchewan to the 

seniors of Saskatchewan, I think you and I both have to admit 

very clearly that there is a lot that needs to be done. 

 

And so in light of all of that, Mr. Minister, I come back to a 

point that you raised very early in this discussion, and that has 

to do with the suggestion that you said many seniors have given 

to you: that a time has come to introduce into the Government 

of Saskatchewan a department for seniors, a department which 

will co-ordinate and give proper priority, proper priority, to the 

needs for senior citizens in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I ask, Mr. Minister, if you will give consideration in 

making recommendation within your own cabinet to your 

Premier to increase the priority of services to seniors, and to 

bring about, in the structure of your government, the 

introduction of a department for seniors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we have a 

dilemma here. When this government had 25 cabinet ministers, 

there was a large hue and cry – and I admit it didn’t come from 

the member opposite. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You are a super minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — It didn’t come from the member 

opposite, because he wasn’t here, but it came from his party – a 

hue and cry that the cabinet is too large.  

Personally, I would like to see a department of senior citizens, 

or something similar to that. The member opposite shouts from 

his seat, I am a super minister. I don’t know if I am a super 

minister, but I have a large load to carry, and senior citizens are 

part of that responsibility. And I carry the senior citizens’ 

responsibility very happily. 

 

And if the members opposite could designate or agree that we 

should have 25 cabinet ministers, or 27, then we could have a 

different department for just about every group of citizens. But 

in the meantime, I will have to carry on with this super 

department. And I take that responsibility very seriously, and 

I’m very pleased that senior citizens are part of my department. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to ask 

the minister a question about youth employment programs and 

the very significant cut-back in youth employment programs 

that the PC government has chosen to implement in the current 

fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Minister, as you know, your department, at your initiative, 

chose to eliminate the access youth employment program in 

fiscal year 1987-88, essentially doing away with a three and 

one-quarter million dollar program for unemployed young 

people between the ages of 18 and 24. And your government 

also, Mr. Minister, chose this year to cut the Opportunities ’87 

program from $10.5 million last year to only $4 million this 

year – a program cut, Mr. Minister, which resulted in 6,100 

fewer jobs being created in the summer of 1987 for students, in 

comparison with the summer of 1986. 

 

You also, Mr. Minister, chose to make volunteer organizations 

in Saskatchewan, which were an important part of a summer 

employment program every year in this province since the 

program was originally initiated by the NDP – you chose to 

make them ineligible for funds under Opportunities ’87. And, 

Mr. Minister, as a result of doing that, you have caused a great 

deal of hardship to students in my constituency of Saskatoon 

University and to students pursuing post-secondary education 

throughout this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to bring to your attention the fact 

that in May of 1987 there were 98,000 young people employed 

in this province. In May of 1986 there were 104,000 young 

people employed in this province. There were 6,000 fewer 

young people working, Mr. Minister, in May of 1987 than there 

were in May of 1986. And I suggest to you, sir, that that 

directly corresponds with the 6,100 jobs that you chose to 

eliminate from the Opportunities ’87 program as compared with 

the summer of 1986, Opportunities ’86 program. 

 

And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: how can you justify 

this very unfair cut-back which has resulted in 6,000 fewer 

post-secondary education students being able to work this 

summer? How can you justify that? Because you have denied 

them an opportunity for work experience; you have denied them 

an opportunity to earn money this summer. They will therefore 

be either forced to take larger student loans or, in some cases, 

be unable to  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2107 

 

return to university or technical school at all. 

 

So my first question to you, Mr. Minister, is: how do you justify 

those cuts? And my second question is to you, sir: next year in 

1988, will you give this legislature your assurance that the $6 

million that you cut from summer employment for students in 

1987 will be reinstated in 1988, and that volunteer 

organizations who were made ineligible for summer student 

employment funds by your government will be eligible for 

summer employment funds in 1988. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the member for 

Saskatoon University is not new to this Assembly, served as a 

back-bencher in the NDP government, and would have some 

idea of the financial structure of government in this province. 

The government, of course, in this province, as all other 

provinces, has only certain ways of raising revenue – taxes, 

federal payments. Our federal payments are not very high; 

we’re quite self-sufficient. Other provinces like Quebec and 

Manitoba have very, very high federal payments. 

 

The first question that would really arise is: where should this 

government get another $6 million to put into extra hiring 

programs. And I suppose the member opposite would give the 

standard NDP answer: get it from the rich; get it from the oil 

companies; I suppose, get it from the potash companies; get it 

from the rich farmers. That would be the standard answers they 

would give you. But, you know, if you talk to a farmer he’ll tell 

you a cow only gives so much milk and there is no cash cow 

hovering over this province. So that has to be kept in mind. 

 

The situation with the students being hired this year, I 

understand, the reports I have from Canada Manpower, through 

my officials, are that students who wanted to get jobs could get 

jobs. Now that’s a generalization, and I’m sure you could 

produce a student here or a student there who could say that 

they did not get a job and they wanted a job. But student 

employment was very good this summer. 

 

There was a news report on Yorkton television covering the 

eastern part of Saskatchewan, the 

Yorkton-Melville-Canora-Kamsack area that indicated that 600 

more students had been employed in the Yorkton manpower 

office area this summer than last summer. And the member 

opposite would want us to spend more money that the taxpayers 

don’t have, subsidizing more jobs, when 600 more jobs were 

created in that area – through the private sector, I might tell 

you, and not through government, and not through the taxes that 

we all pay. 

 

So you have to take into account some changes and adjustments 

that were made. This year we did not subsidize jobs for grade 9, 

10, and 11 students. We did not subsidize jobs for students who 

would be in high school next year. And I submit that as 

reasonable and logical. The government should not be using tax 

money to subsidize jobs for grade 9’s, 10’s, and 11’s, when tax 

money needs to be spent for higher education, for health, and 

social services. 

 

And what about the highways? Your critic of Highways  

here, Mr. Potholes, is no longer with us, and we hear nothing 

more about highways. Money has to be spent on all of these 

things. And so you have to take those things into account. 

 

With respect to volunteer organizations, they are very, very 

beneficial to Saskatchewan. I am a member of the Lions Club in 

Melville, for example. We are a service club, and we, as a 

service club, do not ask the provincial government to subsidize 

the Melville Lions Club. We are there to serve, not to receive. 

And so I know that volunteer organizations could use a little 

extra help. But certainly, as volunteer organizations, the first 

priority should be service, and they should not be looking to 

government for subsidies for volunteer organizations. 

 

Jobs were created – the jobs were created in agriculture and in 

business, and that is the mainstay of this province; that’s where 

the bulk of our revenue comes from in this province. And it just 

happens that through agriculture and business, that’s how we 

earn our keep in this province, and that’s where all of our 

resources are generated from, every revenue that we receive in 

this province. 

 

So the overall employment situation seemed to be quite good, 

considering the crisis in potash, the crisis in agriculture. And 

not to say that that crisis could be cured. But your government, 

when in power, had a substantial part in creating the crisis in 

both potash and agriculture, and the students of this province, 

and everyone in this province, is now paying the price. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: Mr. Chairman, we’ve just gone through a train of 

thought, or a supposed train of thought, being put forward by 

the Minister for Human Resources and whatever else. The only 

problem with that is I think that his train has left the track a 

long time ago. 

 

Sir, when you talk about resource development in this province 

– and you’ve just said that agriculture and business are the two 

resources which keep the province going, which is the way we 

find our keep – I want to remind you, sir, that the greatest 

resource Saskatchewan has is not to be found in the uranium 

mine, or not to be found in the potash industry, or not to be 

found in the field of wheat, but is to be found in the hearts and 

the hands and the minds of the people of Saskatchewan. 

Saskatchewan’s people are its greatest resource. And you, sir, 

you and your government, are doing irreparable harm to the 

future of what is the greatest resource for Saskatchewan, and 

that is its people. 

 

And as the member from Saskatoon University, has pointed out 

to you, when you cut back and slash and hack away at programs 

which affect young people and the future of young people in 

this province, you are harming not only the people here today 

but also the future of people that will come tomorrow. 

 

And it seems to be a concept, one that our party has grasped, 

but it seems to be a concept which has escaped  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2108 

 

your somewhat, I would say, limited experience in dealing with 

things out there in the real world. Because if you don’t have 

Saskatchewan people working, whether it’s young people or 

whether it’s old people, you are hurting the greatest resource 

that this province has. You are cutting off the future of 

Saskatchewan, and you are, as the statistics in this country 

pointing out, putting Saskatchewan further and further behind 

the economic and social eight ball. 

 

I want to relate to you, sir, a phone call that I had this morning. 

In fact, I’ll relate to you two phone calls, one that I had 

yesterday, and one that I had this morning. The phone call that I 

had yesterday was a constituent who lives in my constituency of 

Regina Rosemont. The person who phoned was a mother, from 

a two-income family, who has a daughter who will not be able 

to attend university this year. She will not be able to attend 

university this year because of the kind of educational policies 

in terms of student loans and student bursaries that your 

government put in place. 

 

This girl has found a temporary job out there in the market. It is 

not the kind of job which will allow her to save up to attend 

university next year. Her future, the future of this young girl, 

excuse me, young woman who is 19 years of age, has been 

limited, has been limited by the actions of your government. It 

was limited by the fact that there is not the kind of job 

development out there in Saskatchewan which your government 

promised over and over and over again, from 1982 onward. 

 

And it’s been limited by the kind of economic development 

policies that your government has presently in place, and which 

are soon to be revealed to all the people of Saskatchewan as you 

engage in a massive sell-off of Saskatchewan’ resources, 

whether it’s the potash industry, whether it’s Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance, whether it’s Saskatchewan Computers 

Utility Corporation, to all the Crown corporations which were 

put into place to provide jobs and to provide job security and to 

provide economic security for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And while there may be some short-term gain at least in the 

balance books of the corporation, or you will attempt to try to 

show some short-term gain, you will see the same kind of thing 

that has happened with Saskatchewan oil, in which a partial 

privatization took place when you put out shares of Saskoil to 

individual investors at undervalued prices, shares which were 

picked up by about 23,000 people in Saskatchewan. And in 

doing so, one of the first acts of that privatization was the loss 

of jobs for Saskatchewan residents in Saskoil. 

 

Your government cut out jobs in a provincially owned, or what 

had been a provincially owned, oil corporation which controls 

Saskatchewan resources for the benefit of Saskatchewan people 

to employ Saskatchewan people. And when you privatized it, 

when you privatized it, you and your government, as an 

economic development strategy, decided to cut back jobs in 

Saskatchewan, and at the same time, and at the time, those who 

became the managers of Saskoil decided to undergo exploration 

in Alberta and create jobs in Alberta. We cut jobs in 

Saskatchewan; we’ll create jobs in Alberta. 

And I predict that the same thing will happen in terms of jobs 

when you begin that long and slippery road of privatization, of 

privatization of the oil industry, of privatization of the potash 

industry, or privatization of all the major Crown corporations in 

this province, because that’s what’s on the horizon for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

(1615) 

 

And we’ve heard a lot of numbers and figures bandied about by 

members of the provincial government in terms of the potash 

corporation. And we’ve seen a whole number of things happen 

in terms of the potash corporation, and privatization. And how 

it relates to you, Mr. Minister, is very simply this: it’s part of a 

long-range privatization strategy which your government has 

entered into, your government intends to impose upon the 

people of Saskatchewan, and will cost the people of 

Saskatchewan tens of thousands of jobs, because when you turn 

over the resource corporations to private interests – and that’s 

on your agenda – when you do that, you and your government 

will have embarked on a course that will mean the end of the 

core and the heart of the Saskatchewan economy outside the 

agricultural area. 

 

And when you do that, that means that there is going to be a 

major job loss for Saskatchewan people, as there has been in the 

potash industry since you people took over, as there has been 

where you have turned hundreds and hundreds of potash miners 

in Saskatchewan into part-time workers. It used to be before, 

that if you were a potash miner in Saskatchewan, you worked 

pretty well the year round, you worked pretty well the year 

round. But since you and your economic mismanagers in the 

potash corporation have taken over – you have taken over – you 

have seen the kind of steady, stable economic jobs in 

Saskatchewan turned into part-time employment. 

 

So when I get a phone call in my constituency from the kind of 

young lady who is worried about her future and about going to 

university, she’s worried not only about that, she’s also worried 

about the kinds of jobs that will be here in Saskatchewan. And 

given your government’s record, and given your own record, 

and given your own mind set – that future is not too bright. Let 

me tell you, it’s not too bright. 

 

Now you, sir, have made a great deal, a great deal of noise 

about not wanting to spend public moneys on public projects to 

provide jobs for Saskatchewan citizens; that it’s somehow a sin 

to take public moneys to spend to put Saskatchewan people to 

work. I submit that, as part of your overall process of putting 

private greed ahead of public need, that we will see more and 

more and more, more and more of this kind of economic policy 

put in place. 

 

I want to talk to you for a minute about the other phone call, 

because it somehow relates to what I said earlier in regards to 

the young lady whose future has been cut off. As the member 

from Moose Jaw North was talking about, senior citizens in this 

province have not been well served by you and your 

government, have not been well served,  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2109 

 

particularly in the last eight to 10 months. I want to say that, 

particularly in the last eight to 10 months. 

 

I had a phone call this morning from a constituent whose 

mother is in the nursing home in Grenfell, Saskatchewan. She’s 

in the nursing home. Her monthly pension is somewhere, 

including the old age supplement of the province of 

Saskatchewan, somewhere in the vicinity of $691 or $698 a 

month, minus – when you take away – minus her costs of 

nursing home; she is left with something around $100 a month. 

 

Her daughter phoned me this morning, Mr. Minister, to tell me 

that in Grenfell, in the nursing home in Grenfell, they are 

planning to introduce user fees for something which was not 

before charged. They plan to introduce charges for the use of 

appliances for people, for senior citizens who are incontinent. 

The charges to this woman who is in the Grenfell nursing home 

will result in a $98 bill for something that before was freely 

available to her. She will have something a little less than $5 a 

month after her pension, and after her nursing home, and after 

the new charges have been placed on her. She is going to have 

to live, according to her daughter, on $3.11. 

 

And I think that says a lot about the kind of real care that you 

have for senior citizens in this province. But there’s a direct 

relationship, on the one hand, to the cuts in education; on the 

other hand, in the cuts in health care to senior citizens, and the 

loss of jobs and the loss and cut in the labour force in this 

province. And you, sir, you and your government, now have to 

bear the brunt and have to bear the load of a number of 

economic things which are beginning to converge and to form a 

confluence. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have seen, over the last several years, 

Saskatchewan’s economy shrink in terms of productivity and 

growth. We have seen Saskatchewan’s labour force shrink from 

what it was even three and four years ago. We have seen the 

number of jobs for ordinary Saskatchewan people disappear. 

This despite, this despite your government’s repeated claim to 

the people of Saskatchewan, up until the summer of 1986 or 

thereabouts, that jobs were going to be the first priority for 

Saskatchewan citizens. It is obvious to everybody in 

Saskatchewan that that has just been so much hot air and so 

much rhetoric from your government; that your government’s 

commitment to jobs, as it is to education, as it is to health care, 

and as it soon will be shown to be in regarding the safe keeping 

and shepherding of Saskatchewan’s resources and 

Saskatchewan’s businesses, that in fact it is just so such 

political rhetoric – just so much political rhetoric which the 

people of Saskatchewan have been so tired of hearing coming 

from you and from your government. From a government . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Worn-out government. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — From a government . . . The members here say 

from a worn-out government. Well I don’t think that the 

government is worn out. I don’t think that the government’s 

worn out, but I think it is the government which is living on the 

leading edge of the 17th century. We have a government who is 

advised by people like Dr. Madsen Pirie, Dr. Madsen Pirie from 

Great Britain. 

And the minister there, the Minister of Social Services, the 

minister claps his hands with glee at the mention of Dr. Madsen 

Pirie, and so does the member from Weyburn. Dr. Madsen Pirie 

– and I want to say this to the people of Saskatchewan – is the 

head of the Adam Smith Institute, located in Britain. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — The members opposite clap. The Adam Smith 

Institute was the major adviser to Margaret Thatcher after her 

election victory and maintains its position as major . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman, I would ask you to ask the members opposite to 

restrain themselves. I realize they have great enthusiasm for 

Mrs. Thatcher. That enthusiasm is not changed on this side. I 

wonder if you could ask them to please keep their comments 

down so other members of the House who are interested can 

hear. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Okay, let’s have order and continue please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I would like to remind the hon. member that 

the chair calls for order, not the members. I recognize the 

minister, please. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m trying to 

somehow correlate that dissertation to the estimates of the 

Department of Human Resources, Labour and Employment. 

And I ask my officials here: does anyone here have any 

expertise on the potash corporation or on Saskoil? And since 

none of them deal with this on a day-to-day basis, I would ask 

the minister opposite, or the member opposite – minister, I 

mean that might be his wishful thinking and my slip of the 

tongue, but the reality will never happen – but I ask the member 

opposite to try to deal with the estimates of my department 

here. I’ve been all over today. I’ve answered questions on 

health, and I’ve answered questions on everything you can 

imagine, and I will try to answer questions, but I have not been 

able to ascertain what really the question was that was asked. 

 

If he is referring to his two telephone calls, if he would . . . And 

I don’t ask people to make their information and their lives 

public. You know, yesterday I indicated personally what I am 

paid and what kind of taxes I pay, and the members opposite 

wouldn’t tell us if they pay taxes or what kind of taxes they pay. 

But I don’t ask the public to make public their personal 

information. 

 

If those people in those two telephone calls, if the member 

could privately give me the information, we would look into it 

and see what the income is of the two-income family he refers 

to. We would check to see, to verify the facts of the income of 

the senior citizen living in a nursing home in Grenfell. Grenfell 

is only 38 miles from where I live in Saskatchewan, and I have 

never seen any hardship in Grenfell among the senior citizens. 

The MLA for Grenfell is present here, and he didn’t receive any 

particular complaint. 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2110 

 

So if this information is accurate, I ask the members opposite to 

send us privately that information and we’ll check into it and 

see if, first of all, the facts that they suggest exist are accurate, 

because we have habitually had facts thrown out on the floor of 

this legislature by the members opposite that turn out not to be 

facts. And we would not accept these allegations made by the 

members opposite; we would want some degree of proof. 

 

And my colleagues suggested there was a question or an issue 

of Dr. Madsen Pirie of Great Britain, a very famous and wise 

man. And I understand he’s coming to Regina, and I would 

encourage the members opposite to complete their education, to 

have a balanced . . . to balance from what they receive and go 

and listen to Dr. Madsen Pirie, at their own expense, of course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, the 

member from Melville will have ample opportunity to deal with 

the case I’ve referred to. 

 

As I mentioned, the daughter of the woman who is in the 

nursing home lives in my constituency. She contacted your 

department today to ask how her mother, who lives in the 

Grenfell nursing home, can receive social assistance so that she 

can live and have some kind of decent existence after putting in 

80-plus years helping to build this province. You will have 

ample opportunity, sir, to deal with this problem. Or you or 

your officials will, since you have not shown one ounce of 

compassion for the people of this province. 

 

For you to say that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

doesn’t have anything to do . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. Allow the member to 

state his case. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — For you to say that the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan does not have anything to do with jobs, for you 

to say that the Crown corporations throughout this province do 

not have anything to do with jobs, shows precisely the kind of 

unreal, fantasy, weird land that you inhabit. 

 

How can you tell the potash miners in Saskatchewan that their 

jobs – those who work for the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan – and the future of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan . . . that the future of their jobs are not somehow 

related. Particularly after you and your government have spent 

the last five years firing hundreds and hundreds of workers out 

of the precisely, those public owned corporations. You try to 

tell that, you go and try to tell that to workers that you and your 

government have fired – people who’ve given their life’s work 

for corporations like SaskTel, and Sask Power, and PCS (Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) and the other corporations, as 

well as those who work in the civil service. You tell them how, 

in fact, employment and the fact that they’ve been fired by you 

and your government doesn’t somehow relate to them. 

 

(1630) 

You, sir, are the Minister of Employment. The public sector in 

this province is the biggest employer in this province. And it 

seems to be a fact, it seems to be a fact that somehow has 

escaped, has somehow escaped you and your government. 

 

Oh, I know there’s other members opposite who it hasn’t 

escaped. I know that they, in fact, know that the public sector in 

this province is the biggest employer in this province, and as 

you dismantle the public sector – as you were in the process of 

dismantling the public sector, so goes the jobs that go in the 

public sector. And you just have to ask the highway workers in 

Saskatchewan what their future is going to be as the freight 

train of privatization, with Dr. Madsen Pirie, Margaret 

Thatcher, and Grant . . . excuse me, the member from Melville, 

at the controls – what kind of future that they’re going to have 

in this province, and what kind of employment record that 

we’re going to see in this province as you embark on this 

absolute lunatic, lunatic social experiment organized by the 

likes of Dr. Madsen Pirie. 

 

As I was saying, Dr. Madsen Pirie represents the Adam Smith 

Institute. Adam Smith was the great economist of the rise of 

capitalism in 1700s, and that’s precisely the kind of economic 

theory that you and your government intend to institute in this 

province. You talk about the future. Let me tell you: you and 

your economic theorists are on the cutting edge of the 17
th
 

century, and the people of Saskatchewan have already been cut, 

and are bleeding enough with that kind of edge. 

 

And we have only, Mr. Minister, the statistics . . . the statistics 

of employment in this province to deal with that, to prove the 

point of how you and the ilk over, that you sit beside, do not 

care about employment; do not care to put people first when it 

comes to creating jobs; do not, because of your own narrow 

ideological reasons and concerns, will not lead the way. You 

and your government will not lead the way in job creation. 

 

Let’s just take a look at some of the facts. Total jobs in 

Saskatchewan, the employment record between 1971 and 1986: 

in 1971 there were 334,000 jobs in Saskatchewan, and these are 

all from Statistics Canada’s labour force survey which your 

officials will be familiar with. In 1981, 10 years later, there 

were 425,000 jobs in Saskatchewan. Now that represents, on 

average, 9,100 new jobs a year created between 1971 and 1982, 

created by a government which said: we’re going to lead the 

way in job creation because that’s one of our priorities. 

 

And since, because private capital will not invest in this 

province and will not create jobs, and are concerned only with 

their bottom line and only with sucking up as much profit out of 

this province as possible, this government said, there is another 

way. And that way, in terms of job creation and creating 

opportunities for Saskatchewan young people, is to have the 

government lead the way in job creation, as it was between 

1944 to 1964 and as it was from 1971 to 1982. So we have the 

record, the past record, of 9,100 new jobs created each and 

every year – full-time, permanent jobs for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Then we come to your miserable record. We look between 1986 

. . . between 1981 and 1986. We see the  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2111 

 

labour force increasing from 425,000 to 457,000, for an average 

of 6,400 new jobs per year on average. That, sir, when you 

compare our approach to job creation, which is having the 

government lead the way in job creation, to your approach to 

rely on the outside interests like the Peter Pocklingtons and the 

Weyerhaeuser, stacks up to as only two-thirds as good. 

Two-thirds the record. Two-thirds the record of the socialists. 

Two-thirds the record, two-thirds the record in job creation 

because we believe that the Government of Saskatchewan is 

elected – and one of the reasons that it’s elected is to create jobs 

and opportunities for Saskatchewan’s young people so that they 

have the kind of economic activity in this province which will 

carry the province forward. 

 

Tell me, sir, given the record that is plain for all to see, how is it 

that you, as the Minister of Human Resources and of 

employment development, can stand here and defend that 

record? Why, sir, are you only two-thirds as good as the New 

Democratic Party? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I don’t 

intend to defend our record. As a matter of fact, if the members 

opposite will allow me, and if the members . . . I intend to boast 

about our record. There is nothing to defend there. If bragging 

is allowed, then I will brag about the record of this government. 

 

I’ve just done a calculation – the member opposite boasts about 

creating 9,000 jobs per year from 1971 to 1981. And I ask 

everyone with a memory: what was the price of wheat during 

those years; what was the price of potash; what was the price of 

oil? And everyone knows it was excellent. Record highs in all 

of those three commodities. And he brags about creating 9,000 

jobs per year during that period of time. 

 

The statistics that I have, which I believe should be accurate – if 

they’re not, someone will have to pay the price, but they’ve 

always been accurate before. From April of 1982 – we 

remember April of 1982 – that was the massacre of the forces 

of socialism in this province, and the people were fed up with 

socialists in this province. Not only were they fed up with 

socialists, they were terrorized. 

 

People in my constituency were afraid to stand up and say, 

we’re against socialism because we work for the socialists. 

They pay us, they pay us with our own money, and they may 

not pay us any more. The people were afraid to stand up and 

express democratic rights. I recall phoning people and they 

would say: oh, I’m sorry, I can’t buy a membership in the PC 

party; I work for the government. That was the fear that was in 

the hearts of the people. 

 

So there was a revolution in this province in 1982, and at that 

time the figures show the work-force in this province was 

448,000 people. In July of 1987 – that’s not very long ago, 

that’s fairly recent, it’s about a month ago – the statistics show 

the work-force at 514,000 people – an increase of 66,000. When 

you take into account that we have been government for five 

and half years, that works out to 12,000 jobs per year. 

 

Why would I want to defend our record? I’m proud of it. I  

would like to boast about it, that under economic circumstances 

that we are familiar with, this government allowing the people 

to work for themselves, has been able to create 12,000 jobs per 

year as compared to the socialists with our own money, for us, 

in the best of economic times, creating 9,000 jobs per year. 

Why would I want to defend our record? I’m glad to point out 

the comparison. I’m pleased. It speaks for itself. What more can 

be said? But much more should be said. 

 

The member opposite raises a question of potash and jobs. This 

is a very, very interesting point, and we will hear much more 

about it in this legislature in the months to come. I was a 

member of that party, and I stood up – and the member opposite 

says I was kicked out; I quit. I was not kicked out of that party; 

I quit. I would have considered it an honour to be kicked out of 

that party, but I quit. 

 

The reason I quit was because . . . and why doesn’t anyone want 

to lead that party now? Why is there only one person in the 

leadership race? Why is the member for Riversdale the only one 

who wants to lead that party? None of them have the nerve to 

want to lead a party through the crisis that they have created in 

potash. 

 

And the job losses – how does this tie into my estimates? The 

member opposite suggests that jobs tie into potash, potash is 

part of my estimates, and so I am going to tell him about jobs in 

potash. I told the member from Riversdale, face to face at their 

convention, don’t buy holes in the ground. People were working 

in those potash mines; the government bought those potash 

mines; the same people were working in those potash mines, 

except from there on in, the people of this province had to pay 

the debt. 

 

And I told the member from Riversdale – he was the member 

from Riversdale then; he was retired, and he has revamped to 

come and lead. But the leadership that he gave us in 1976 – if 

we should ever have a repeat of that, then everyone in this 

province will be bankrupt. The member from Riversdale stood 

up and argued with me that this was necessary to create 

expansion, that this was necessary for the people to own their 

resources. I said, we own the water, why do we want to buy the 

well? We don’t need to own the hole in the ground. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Now there’s so many X number of 

people, family men and women of this province, working in 

those mines, and after the government bought them, the same 

number of people were working in those mines. 

 

And what did we get for our money? For our money, we got 

competition – something that the member from Riversdale did 

not believe in, nor did he want. And I told him you would get 

competition, because he gave – well maybe, he bought – but he 

took of the taxpayers’ money in excess of $600 million, and he 

turned it over to the corporations that he hated, the big business 

corporations, and they did exactly what I told him they would 

do. They took their money, and with that money they dug 

themselves a new hole in the ground in a Conservative 

province, in New Brunswick. And so what we did was,  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2112 

 

we bought ourselves competition and unemployment. 

 

And that’s the legacy that the member from Riversdale has left 

to the people of Saskatchewan, and now he wants to come back 

and punish us further. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what is interesting – this 

will indeed be an interesting debate over the future of the potash 

corporation in this province if the kind of stories, which are 

made up of whole cloth by the member from Melville, is used 

to try to camouflage the debate, and used by other members of 

the opposition. 

 

Not one word of truth. Not one word of truth. Why didn’t the 

member from Melville – why doesn’t the member from 

Melville talk about the jobs that were created in the potash 

industry? Because resources, the profits, that used to go down 

to New Mexico or to Texas or to New York or to Chicago, were 

kept in Saskatchewan to create expansions at places like 

Lanigan. Why doesn’t the member talk about that? What about 

the head office jobs that were brought from outside this 

province and put into Saskatoon; isn’t that part of the expansion 

of the potash industry? Wasn’t that the kind of expansion where 

we created Saskatchewan jobs for Saskatchewan people? 

 

Now anybody in this province who would believe that the 

minister opposite has either the wit or the verbal acuity to tell 

the member from Riversdale: why buy the well when we own 

the water? If anybody in this province believes that, I think that 

they might want to call the member from Riversdale and check 

it out themselves, because I know the member from Riversdale 

has a good memory. And if you, sir, standing here and are 

recounting a face-to-face conversation with him that may or 

may not be true, I think you will want to consider maybe, 

sometime in the future, that you may have to withdraw those 

words if that conversation didn’t exactly take place as you 

described it. 

 

In other words, you made a direct quote of a conversation that 

you had with the member, and we’ll discuss that with the 

member to see, in fact, whether or not you’ve stuck your foot in 

it again. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Minister, the fact of the matter is this, is that government 

has created a few jobs. I will grant you that. You’ve created a 

job for George Hill, the president of Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, former president of the Tory party in this province, 

someone with absolutely no knowledge or background in the 

question of power. You have created that position for him, and 

we’re told that somewhere in the range of 200 to $210,000 a 

year through certain contractual arrangements, which will be 

very interesting for this House to examine when we get that 

opportunity. 

 

You’ve created a job for one Paul Schoenhals, and you’ve 

created that job. There didn’t used to be the full-time job that 

Mr. Schoenhals now occupies as chairperson of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. But Mr. Schoenhals has a job 

now. 

An Hon. Member: — Who’s he? 

 

Mr. Lyons: — And who’s Mr. Schoenhals but a former cabinet 

minister. A former cabinet minister who was defeated, who was 

thrown out of office by the good people of Saskatoon, by those 

good people who benefit there in Saskatoon from having the 

headquarters of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

headquartered in their fair city to provide jobs for themselves 

and for their children. And do they think that Paul Schoenhals 

was doing a real good job for them? No, because that door in 

the democratic period when they had the opportunity to express 

their wishes, they threw Mr. Schoenhals out of a job. You 

people put him back in at taxpayers’ expense. 

 

And you want to talk about pouring money down a black hole – 

giving Paul Schoenhals the kind of money you’re paying him 

for the president of PCS is nothing more than crating money 

into a black and empty hole indeed – I’ll tell you that. 

 

And then we have another job that you and your government 

created. We have the job that you created for Mr. Paul 

Rousseau. And who, may you ask, is Mr. Paul Rousseau? Well 

I think the people of Saskatchewan, the people of Regina, know 

who Paul Rousseau was. Another member of the Conservative 

Party. Another former member of the Legislative Assembly, 

and someone who now occupies the job of Agent General in 

London. And yes, you did create a job for Paul Rousseau, and I 

will grant you that. 

 

And then I see that you created a job for one Keith Parker. Now 

who’s Keith Parker, the people of the province may ask. Not a 

well-known name. Not a name someone that occupied the front 

benches of the legislature, but a former MLA from Moose Jaw. 

And the member from Moose Jaw South tells me he was the 

former member from Moose Jaw . . . 

 

An Hon Member: — North. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — North. He was the former Conservative member 

from Moose Jaw North and now he’s got a job. Where’s he got 

the job? Well he’s got a high-paying job with the Liquor Board 

of Saskatchewan. And so I will grant you that you got Mr. 

Parker a job at $50,000 a year. 

 

And then I see you created another job. It’s a consulting job this 

time, and I think the consulting fees are somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of a quarter of million dollars or thereabouts. 

And who occupies that job? Why, Tim Embury, Mr. Chairman, 

Mr. Tim Embury. And who is Mr. Tim Embury? A former 

member of the Legislative Assembly, a former Conservative 

member of the Legislative Assembly, a former member of your 

front bench . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I’m going to have to ask the 

member to start . . . I know what you’re doing. You’re relating 

it to one job at a time, but we are in the estimates of Human 

Resources, Labour and Employment, and I am ruling now that 

you confine your remarks to more specific issues in terms of 

what this minister is responsible for. 

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2113 

 

And having ruled that, I would ask you to be a little bit more 

specific. We’re having a very, very wide ranging debate here in 

terms of the questions, and also in terms of the answers that are 

being given. So I’m just going to ask you to please be a little bit 

more specific, a little bit more on topic. To talk about one single 

job as job creation, I think, is stretching it a little bit. That is my 

ruling, sir. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I intend to deal with the jobs that 

the members in the government opposite have created. The 

Minister of Employment raised the question of how good their 

job creation record was. I don’t think I can be any more specific 

than when I get down to one individual job at a time. Your 

ruling is nothing more than a biased attempt to cut me off. I tell 

you that right now. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Okay, Mr. Member, I cannot let that go. 

You are challenging the Chair, and so I would ask the Speaker 

to be called in. On the advice of the Clerk, I will give you one 

opportunity here to withdraw that remark. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I will not withdraw that remark. 

 

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, during consideration of the 

estimates of the Department of Human Resources, Labour and 

Employment, the member from Regina Rosemont used certain 

unparliamentary remarks which, after having been given the 

opportunity, he refused to withdraw. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member for Rosthern has 

indicated that an unparliamentary remark was made. I will not 

allow a point of order on this. Please be seated. Please be 

seated. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I have a different question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, I am afraid that you won’t have an 

opportunity to address it. I’m going to give the member 

certainly sufficient opportunities to address it. 

 

The member from Rosthern has indicated that unparliamentary 

language has been used a few minutes ago. And on that basis, I 

would certainly like to give the member from Regina Rosemont 

an opportunity to withdraw the remark. And on that basis now, I 

would like to give the member from Regina Rosemont that 

opportunity. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not certain of 

which remark I should withdraw. If you’re saying that I should 

withdraw the challenge that I put forward to the Chairman, I’m 

not going to intend to do that, because that is not what the 

Chairman presented to you as the case. 

 

I rose and challenged a ruling that he made in regards to a 

certain line of questioning, a certain line of questioning I was 

pursuing during estimates. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No mention was made of parliamentary 

language. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — No mention was made of unparliamentary 

language at all. I went forward and challenged his right. He 

made a ruling in regards to the line of questioning, and he said 

that it was too broad, or it was . . . he gave certain indications. 

My position is that that was an incorrect ruling. 

 

He now stands before you and gives an entirely different story, 

and one not supported by the facts. So I’m not certain what it is 

that the member wants me to withdraw – to withdraw 

challenging his ruling? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I don’t believe that the issue 

here is a challenge to the Chair, so much as the fact that the 

member apparently stated to the Deputy Chairman that he had 

made a biased ruling. I think that’s the issue. 

 

And therefore I realize that at times during estimates and during 

debates, because I have sat there, I realize that emotions get 

strong and members do say things. And I kind of think that 

perhaps the member didn’t really mean what he said, but 

nevertheless, he did say that the Chairman was biased. And he 

did say that. So he had made a biased ruling. So I’m going to 

give the member from Rosemont, once again, an opportunity to 

withdraw that remark, and I’m sure that on some reflection he 

may want to do that. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, sir, if in fact I 

did say an unparliamentary remark along that line, then I shall 

withdraw it. 

 

But I would ask, sir, that you give us the courtesy of pursuing 

the Hansard report because I think that upon reading Hansard, 

that Hansard will in fact back the allegation that I was 

challenging the nature of the ruling of the chairperson and not, 

in fact, the character of the chairperson itself – himself. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I will read Hansard, you can be sure of that, 

because I look at Hansard daily. However, the issue actually is 

what I stated earlier, that unfortunately you stated in some way, 

and I don’t know the exact wording, but you did state in some 

way that the member had made . . . or the chairman had made a 

unbiased – a biased ruling rather, a biased ruling. You have 

risen and you have said that if you’ve made that type of a 

remark that you withdraw that remark, and I thank you for 

doing that. I accept your withdrawal, and we will continue with 

estimates. 

 

Order. Order. Order, please. Order. 

 

We can go back into committee. We can listen to a point of 

order. But I’ll certainly listen to everybody’s points of order. I 

don’t know if it’s really in the best interests of the House to get 

into that, but if members wish to raise points of order, well 

okay, I’ll listen to it. But everybody will have the opportunity. 

 

And I recognize first the member for Regina Centre who has 

been trying to get in prior to the ruling, but now that the ruling 

is over, I will listen. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, it’s . . . I suppose the  

  



 

August 27, 1987 

2114 

 

point is past. The difficulty the member from Regina Rosemont 

had, though, is that the remark, when he was asked to withdraw 

it, the remark was not repeated back to him, and he did not 

know what he was being asked to withdraw. And that was my 

point of order, and I’d ask for a ruling on that. It seems what 

happened was the member from Rosthern indicated that his 

ruling was being challenged. That, I think, was the issue upon 

which you were brought back. 

 

Suddenly, when you’re back here, it’s an unparliamentary 

comment. He was asked to withdraw it, without being spelled 

out with clarity what he was being asked to withdraw. And just 

for future reference, Mr. Speaker – if not for this case, because 

this case has been happily closed – but for future reference I’d 

like a ruling on whether or not a member who’s asked to 

withdraw a remark should have the remark specified with 

clarity before he withdraws it. Obviously he has to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I respond to the hon. member 

from the opposition’s point that the matter is closed. 

Unfortunately on the issue such as this, there is precedent in this 

Assembly, and the procedure being that upon Hansard . . . 

 

We can recall, Mr. Speaker, the government against the member 

from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden a few years back and the situation, 

unfortunately, does not go away that easily. And that once the 

record of Hansard is perused, we know the obligations of the 

House Leader. And that if allegations are made, then the 

appropriate privilege motion is made when the record of 

Hansard is fully before the members of the Assembly. 

 

I think there is, pending the Hansard record though, there is 

another matter before the floor of the Assembly, and that is the 

second question, and that is the question of challenging the 

ruling of the Chair. And I think that to expedite that, we should 

vote on that, Mr. Speaker, and then get that particular matter 

cleared off. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I heard the hon. member from Rosthern 

indicating that the issue he was raising was that the member for 

Regina Rosemont had made an unparliamentary remark. We 

have dealt with the issue raised by the member from Regina 

Rosemont . . . I mean, I’m sorry, for the member from 

Rosthern. I think that we have dealt with that issue in a 

satisfactory way. I think that that issue is closed. And I believe, 

in the best interests of the House, we show go back to 

committee. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Mr. Chairman: — It being 5 o’clock, I leave the Chair till 7. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


