













































September 29, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 29, 1987 

 

2927 

 

The Assembly met at 1 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Tusa: — I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce 

to the Assembly a group of Girl Guides and Pathfinders who are 

in the Speaker’s gallery. The Girl Guide leaders are Mrs. Nina 

Smith, and Mrs. Lucy Millette. There are several Girl Guide 

members: Jill Straker, Kathia Millette, Nicole Ruud, Aime 

Cheung, Christy Grassli, Paula Anderson, and Chrystal 

Thomas; one of the mothers, Mrs. Pam Ruud is also present; the 

Pathfinder leader, Mrs. Gladys Ollinger is present; and 

Pathfinder members, Laura Byer and Katherine Schultz are 

present. 

 

These people are from the Punnichy area. They are working 

towards a citizenship badge, and I’m told that one of the 

activities they will be carrying out a citizenship court in 

Punnichy in November. 

 

I ask all members to please welcome them to the Assembly, and 

I look forward to meeting with them later. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Suggestion of Share Offering in SGI 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question was to be 

to the minister responsible for SGI, but in her continuing 

absence I direct my question to the Premier. 

 

Can the Premier confirm that the SGI Board of Directors 

recommended to the cabinet that shares be offered in SGI 

before the end of this year, and can he confirm that the SGI 

board recommends the provincial government hold only 

one-third of those shares, with a full two-thirds being offered to 

other corporations and individual investors, including 

out-of-province investors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will make any 

announcements with respect to SGI when I’m ready to make 

them, and the opposition can speculate all they like, and if they 

want to condemn public participation in SGI, fair ball. I endorse 

public participation; they don’t happen to. They didn’t with 

respect to Power bonds, they didn’t with respect to Saskoil, and 

they won’t with respect to SGI, and they can holler and scream 

all they like about sell-off, and they will find out that it will be 

very, very popular when it comes to pass. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we make an announcement, they will 

know all the details, and they can raise them today, and raise 

them tomorrow, as they did with Saskoil and as they did with 

Power bonds, Mr. Speaker. So no announcement has been 

made, Mr. Speaker, and if they way to say, well . . . they can 

rush out. I think it was the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, who said if  

only he could buy Saskoil shares it would be a really good deal, 

and at the same time he went around the constituency saying 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the Premier not 

aware that the president of SGI, Mr. Wilde, is holding meetings 

with the SGI’s head office staff this very day, today, to 

announce to them exactly what I’ve outlined here today, and 

that is that before December 31 shares will be offered in SGI 

and that two-thirds of those shares will be sold to other 

corporations and individual investors, including out-of-province 

investors. Is the Premier not aware of what your own 

corporation president is announcing to all SGI staff? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s true that 

when you form a national company, as we did with respect to 

Saskoil, that indeed you have Canadians participating in it. I 

think that’s true. And maybe it’s a surprise to the NDP that 

Canada means that it’s from coast to coast. But when you have 

a national company with its head office in Saskatchewan, 

indeed, Mr. Speaker, Canadians invest in it. 

 

Now if you wanted a national company with its head office 

here, not just confined to Saskatchewan but to deal nationally 

and internationally, you would have to say, well for Heaven’s 

sakes we are Canadian, let’s trade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s interesting, not only do the members 

opposite don’t want to trade with United States, they don’t even 

want to trade with Manitoba and Alberta; they don’t even want 

to trade with other Canadians. They’d box us all in and say, 

well, we’ll confine SGI to the Davidson market, or confine it to 

Moose Jaw. Well we think that we’re quite capable of trading 

with people nation-wide and indeed world-wide, Mr. Speaker, 

and if we can do that and have the head office here in 

Saskatchewan, you just watch it happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier, SGI employees 

have been instructed today to spare absolutely no expense in 

overtime to clear up all the outstanding business transactions as 

soon as possible after September 30. In case you need a 

calendar, that’s just tomorrow. Can the Premier confirm that 

this cut-off date is important because it involves the final 

approval of a prospectus by the Saskatchewan Securities 

Commission with respect to an SGI share offering. Can you 

confirm that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Clearly the opposition has figured out 

that September 30 is tomorrow, and I’ll give them full credit for 

that. I will only say, Mr. Speaker, that in the  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2928 

 

province of Saskatchewan we are examining the possibilities 

for expanding national firms with their head offices right here, 

and that includes SGI, Mr. Speaker. It includes . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And the opposition will say, well, you’re going 

to sell shares to other Canadians. Imagine Saskatchewan people 

having other Canadians invest here in the province. I mean, if 

they want this to be their next political campaign . . . That’s 

why the member from Regina North East didn’t even seek the 

leadership, Mr. Speaker; he knows that this is right. And the 

new leader to be hasn’t even denied it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, your 

plan means that the control of SGI will very soon be in the 

hands of non-Saskatchewan corporations and investors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — That is exactly what happened with Saskoil — 

75 per cent of those shares sold a year ago are already in the 

hands of non-Saskatchewan residents. And it’ll likely mean lost 

jobs in Saskatchewan and expansion in other provinces like 

Alberta, again the exact pattern of Saskoil. 

 

Mr. Premier, how can you say that lost ownership, lost jobs, and 

higher insurance rates are good for Saskatchewan people? And 

if you really believe that it is good for Saskatchewan people, 

why won’t you agree to take your proposal to province-wide 

public hearings before you sell off this important utility? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we find it interesting that 

the new Labour Prime Minister from Australia, Mr. Bob 

Hawke, has been re-elected on an entirely Conservative 

platform, where he is going to have public participation and 

privatization. We’re finding out, Mr. Speaker, that in the 

country of Great Britain that there will soon be more 

shareholders than there are union members, Mr. Speaker. We 

see in the country of France more and more people are moving 

towards privatization, public participation. It’s happening 

world-wide. It’s happening in China; it’s happening in the 

Soviet Union, Mr. Speaker, and here we have the opposition 

saying, I wonder if we should form a national firm with its head 

office here in Saskatchewan, really allow other Canadians to 

invest in Saskatchewan; wouldn’t that ever weaken this 

province to have money coming in here to build a national firm. 

Mr. Speaker, they haven’t figured it out yet, and the whole 

world is ahead of them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I know, and the rest of the province 

knows, that they’re so far back in time that they’d say the only 

way we can survive is to nationalize a company and nationalize 

another one and take it over. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many ways to grow. I’ll put it this  

way: nationalization is not one of them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, we’re 

not in Australia; we’re not in New Zealand; we’re not in the 

Soviet Union; we’re in Saskatchewan, and I’d suggest you pay 

attention to what’s going on here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — If you, Mr. Premier, and your government really 

believe that the sell-off and give-away of SGI is good for 

Saskatchewan, then hold these public hearings. Give the people 

of Saskatchewan the right to say what they think should happen 

to their corporation, the corporation that you and your 

government have no mandate to give away or sell or privatize 

or whatever other word you want. Call public hearings! 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — As a result of this question period and the 

NDP’s revelations that we know that this is Saskatchewan and 

tomorrow is September 30, and we appreciate that. I will say 

that this province, as well as others across Canada and other 

jurisdictions world-wide, Mr. Speaker, are recognizing the 

power and the strength associated with building large national 

and international companies with their head offices here, not 

just confined to Regina, not just confined within the jurisdiction 

of Saskatchewan with 1 million people, but to have access 

world-wide to the opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But they can’t see that. They put their blinders on and say, no, 

we should just make sure that it’s in Saskatchewan and no place 

else. Well they are so far behind, they are so far out, Mr. 

Speaker, that the rest of the world is saying, well wake up 

Saskatchewan, don’t you want to trade? No, the NDP doesn’t. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. I would just like to mention before I sit 

down that it seems that we’re entering into debate here, not 

questions and answers, and I would like to ask hon. members to 

get back to the intent of question period, which are good 

questions and good answers, and debate perhaps can come later. 

 

Issuing of Special Gas Tax Receipts 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the best known cheer-leader in the province, the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Premier, my question deals with the PC 

gas tax. The PC gas tax will take more than $100 million out of 

the Saskatchewan economy this year at a time when the 

economy . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The hon. 

member is being interrupted, and I ask for the co-operation of 

members that he ask his question. Order. 

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2929 

 

Mr. Solomon: — My question is, again, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Premier, and it deals with the PC gas tax. This gas tax of yours, 

Premier, will take more than $100 million out of the 

Saskatchewan economy at a time when the economy needs a 

shot in the arm, not another tax increase. Premier, this gas tax is 

not only taking millions of dollars out of the economy, it has 

created a red tape nightmare for the 650,000 licensed vehicle 

operators and hundreds of gas station operators in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Can the Premier confirm that complaints about the gas tax have 

become so strong and so numerous that you have promised to 

introduce special government receipts for the collection of this 

unfair tax? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I find it really interesting 

that the opposition would criticize this administration or any 

others for having a deficit, and at the same time they will 

criticize either trimming expenditures, cuts, or tax increases. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you can’t have it both ways . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And the hon. member from Regina North East 

says patronage, and he adds it up. Well you’re maybe 5 million 

or 10 million or 20 million, and he plays with those numbers, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’re talking about hundreds of millions, and indeed, 

billions of dollars in terms of lost revenue as a result of wheat 

prices and potash prices and oil prices. And at the same time 

they stand in here and say, but don’t you raise a tax, and don’t 

you cut any other expenditures, Mr. Speaker. It’s pretty easy for 

the opposition to stand back here and say, don’t build national 

firms; don’t allow others to invest here. 

 

They don’t want anybody to invest. Right, Mr. Speaker? They 

want to nationalize the firms. They don’t want to trim any 

expenditures. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Supplementary to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

People in this province are laughing at you and your 

incompetent handling of this gas tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — You and your government have constantly 

bragged about cutting bureaucratic red tape, but what you’ve 

done is you’ve transferred bureaucratic red tape . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. I think I must ask 

the hon. member to get to his question. It looks like he’s into a 

little speech, so I’m going to cut it off before it gets out of hand. 

 

Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier  

and his government have transferred the bureaucratic red tape 

and expanded it to 650,000 licensed vehicle operators in this 

province as well as to hundreds of gas station operators. Are 

you now going to tell this House and the people of this province 

that you are going to clean this up and repeal the gas tax? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we looked at cutting 

expenditures, for example, with the property improvement 

grant, and people had to apply for that. And the opposition were 

on our case something terrible because no longer would the 

property improvement grant apply, and in fact people would 

have to have application forms. And they said, well that’s fine. 

Even senior citizens, according to the opposition, the could 

apply for the property improvement grant. 

 

Well it shows how hypocritical they really are, Mr. Speaker. On 

one day they’re for a project on one side and say, well the 

rebate’s fine. Property improvement grant, you just apply. The 

next day when we’re saying we’ll be the only province in the 

country that will not have a gas tax for its consumers, they say, 

oh, but the application forms would be prohibitive. Mr. 

Speaker, they don’t know whether they’re coming or going, and 

it’s typical. Half the time they don’t know whether they want to 

increase government involvement, or the other half where they 

want to reduce government involvement. One day rebates are 

great . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new question to 

the Premier. Does the Premier understand that this tax is unfair 

to Saskatchewan people and has been so poorly designed and 

administered that it’s wide open to abuse. Service station 

operators are talking openly about the gas tax these days, and 

they’re talking about people purchasing cigarettes by the litre. 

When the system is so open to abuse, you encourage people to 

take advantage of it. 

 

Premier, why not do the reasonable thing and repeal this unfair, 

ridiculous tax and replace the revenue with adequate taxes on 

the oil companies and the chartered banks? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, not only do the opposition 

pick on business people, and they picked on former heads of the 

Crown Management Board and others, but now they’re saying 

that businesses and people are dishonest. That’s what they’re 

saying. And they’re saying that they’re going to be buying 

cigarettes by the litre, and they’re gong to be doing all these 

things. I mean, that’s the same old line. Only they are 

self-righteous. Only the NDP would never do anything like this. 

And they say, but the rest of the folks are all guilty; they’re 

dishonest; they’re going to get . . . and business particularly, 

Mr. Speaker, would be dishonest, and they’d let that happen. 

 

Just look at them. I mean, they never did a thing for small  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2930 

 

business in their life, Mr. Speaker. They’re against business. I 

mean, I could read you the Regina Manifesto; they’re going to 

nationalize everything in the country, including all the 

businesses. And they stand up here and say, well then, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re dishonest on top of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, that’s the bunch that’s dishonest. 

They don’t come clean with the public. They’re on one side one 

day and one side the next. Well . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. 

 

Increase in School Transportation Costs 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a new 

question to the Premier, and it deals with taxation as well. Mr. 

Premier, everybody is laughing at you, and you’ve given reason 

today why with your performance here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — If you and your government hadn’t 

squandered the taxpayers’ money for the last five years, and if 

you’d applied any measure of management to your government, 

you wouldn’t be in the predicament you’re in today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now my question to you, sir, is about the 

gas tax. It’s not only hurting Saskatchewan people and driving 

up the cost of living, but it’s an example of your massive shift 

of taxation on to the property tax owners of this province, and a 

good example — in light of this, I want to ask you the question 

— and a good example is that the Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association have said that your gas tax is going to cost 

school boards $1.5 million in additional costs for their 

operations. 

 

Now I ask you: in view of the fact that the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) has had to correct 

your Minister of Finance in his assertion that that gasoline tax 

cost is covered over by increase in transportation costs, will you 

explain to this House why your Minister of Finance was not 

correct in that argument and misled the House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I think you’ll realize that 

the hon. member raised the whole question of the deficit and 

management. Let me just point out that if the NDP had not 

nationalized the potash industry in this province, there’d be no 

deficit today. And that’s the fact, and he knows very well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if they hadn’t have 

borrowed the money from Americans and borrowed the money 

from others then to buy back what was already  

here, if they hadn’t have done that — even if they had taken that 

amount of money and built something new, there wouldn’t be a 

deficit here today in the province, and he knows that. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, they went on and they bought pulp 

companies, and they bought packing plants and a whole range 

of other things that cost us over $91,000 a day. And that 

contributed to the deficit, Mr. Speaker. But thank goodness, 

we’re getting it fixed up — finally. With respect to . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. 

Order, please. Order. I would ask the Premier to wrap up his 

remarks in a few statements. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 

Just a few moments, if the Premier wouldn’t mind wrapping up 

his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I mean, he 

mentions management; I can mention management. To be fair, 

that’s fair. All right? We’re in a debating mode here. Right? 

The school tax, Mr. Speaker, the school tax. The minister has 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I think . . . Order, order. The 

member from Battlefords, I would like to ask his co-operation. 

 

I think that members on both sides, and certainly we’ve seen 

long answers here, and certainly we’ve seen the odd long 

question — we just saw one there — but I don’t think there is 

any point in members accusing one side of long questions and 

the other one of long answers. That doesn’t serve anything to 

this House. I think members know how they’re supposed to 

conduct themselves, and I ask for their co-operation. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, let me ask a short question 

so that the Premier does not get confused. Mr. Premier, in view 

of the massive tax increases that you have imposed on 

Saskatchewan people in the flat tax increase and the 40 per cent 

increase in the sales tax and the increase in every conceivable 

fee in charge of the government charges, how do you justify an 

addition $1.5 million increase in the property taxes that 

Saskatchewan people have to pay in order to sustain their 

educational system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member pointed 

out, in view of all their mismanagement, in view of the fact that 

they nationalized the potash industry, in view of the fact that 

they didn’t get it all together when they were in power, Mr. 

Speaker, we have to deal with the situation as we find it today. 

As we find it today with respect to rural transportation, we have 

modified the formula so an increased grant will go out for those 

people in municipalities that deal with school buses. And in 

fact, the minister has commented on it already in several  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2931 

 

times, that in fact it is balanced, Mr. Speaker, and there is no 

additional cost to the school bus divisions, and the hon. member 

knows that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Compensation by Alberta to Investors in Principal Trust 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Premier with respect to the Principal Trust matter. And, Mr. 

Premier, I would like to quote one sentence out of a letter that I 

received today from your Minister of Consumer and 

Commercial Affairs describing this whole affair dealing with 

Principal Trust. The sentence is this: 

 

I am sure you noticed in the media that Premier Don Getty 

of Alberta said that if his government is proven negligent 

in this matter and is ordered by the court to pay, that he 

will not resist that in any way. 

 

And that letter was dated September 25. 

 

Mr. Premier, that language used by your minister is very broad, 

and I wonder if you could indicate whether that offer to pay on 

the part of the Government of Alberta now includes people 

outside the province of Alberta who have been victimized in 

this affair? Or is the Government of Alberta still taking their 

narrow approach, that they would pay Alberta residents only? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to the 

hon. member, the advice that I have is that the province of 

Alberta is maintaining its position vis-à-vis the statement as to 

negligence. 

 

We have made the request to the province of Alberta that in our 

view the same consideration should apply to the people of 

Saskatchewan as applied to the people of Alberta during the 

Pioneer Trust case, and we’ve made that request to the province 

of Alberta. We’ve not had a response as to any commitment by 

the province of Alberta. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. If the 

Government of Saskatchewan is right in saying that they were 

entitled to rely upon the Government of Alberta in making a 

decision in Saskatchewan about licensing these companies in 

Saskatchewan; if the government is right in that assertion, and if 

Alberta is found to be negligent in the terms that Premier Getty 

has referred to, will the Saskatchewan government enlist the 

support of the Government of Canada and every other province 

in this country to demand that the Government of Alberta do the 

right thing, and that is compensate all victims of the Principal 

Trust affair and not just those who happen to be resident in the 

province of Alberta. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I won’t discuss the rules as to 

hypothetical questions, but one of the reasons, of course, that 

we have legal counsel for the inquiry in Alberta is so that we 

can determine Saskatchewan’s position after the inquiry is over. 

 

Opening of New Trade Office in New York City 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — My question is to the Minister of 

Economic Development and Trade, Mr. Speaker, and it deals 

with his government’s spending priorities. Last evening, during 

your department’s estimates, it was revealed that your 

government plans to open a new trade office in New York city. 

Can the minister tell taxpayers when the New York city trade 

office will open, and what is the approved budget for this trade 

office? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the question posed by the 

member from P.A.-Duck Lake was asked last night by the 

member from Regina North East. At that time I indicated to him 

that we thought very soon that we would be taking the decision 

as to when the office would be open, and that it was through a 

process of start-up that we would have a difficult time 

determining exact budget, but we would bring that back to him 

as soon as possible. 

 

The thing I would like to say though to the member from Prince 

Albert-Duck Lake is that you complain about no process . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 

 

At 2:31 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Government entered 

the Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal 

Assent to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No 21 — An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 

1983 

Bill No. 45 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 

of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year ending on 

March 31, 1988 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:33 p.m. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of An Act to amend The Provincial 

Auditor Act. The audit function is central to the process of 

financial accountability and is an inherent part of the 

parliamentary system of government. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, strengthens the audit process and 

maintains accountability of all Crown agencies by providing for 

the audit of Crown corporations and certain Crown agencies by 

private sector auditors while preserving the role of the 

Provincial Auditor as the overall auditor of public moneys. 

 

But in 1983 we passed Saskatchewan’s first Provincial Auditor 

Act, which more clearly defined the Provincial Auditor’s audit 

scope and mandate, and strengthened his independence. This 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, preserves those  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2932 

 

principles and is an enhancement of the Act we passed four 

years ago. 

 

Over the last few years the audit function has become more 

complex as technology and industry have become more 

sophisticated. Private sector auditors have been able to keep up 

with the rapid changes because of their diversification and 

specialization. Using private sector auditors more extensively to 

audit Crown corporations provides the opportunities to benefit 

from their expertise in various industries, and ultimately will 

improve the effectiveness and quality of audits in the Crown 

corporation sector. It will also allow the Provincial Auditor to 

make more effective use of his time and resources. 

 

At the same time, the overriding objective of full accountability 

of the Crown corporation sector must be maintained. This Bill 

accomplishes that objective by now charging the private sector 

auditors with the same examination and reporting mandate as 

the Provincial Auditor. This ensures that all Crown agencies 

will be subject to the same level of auditing and reporting, 

regardless of whether the audits are conducted by private sector 

auditors or the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Prior to this Bill, the Provincial Auditor was required to review 

in detail the audit plans and audit work conducted by private 

sector auditors. This was a very time-consuming and 

cumbersome process. With the passing of this Bill the 

Provincial Auditor now will be able to remove himself from the 

details of the audits conducted by private sector auditors, and 

instead will have the opportunity to concentrate more intensely 

on his audit examination and reporting matters. 

 

Nevertheless, the Provincial Auditor must continue to retain 

overall responsibility for the audit of public moneys, for he is 

the auditor hired by the Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill accomplishes that objective by requiring the private sector 

auditors to submit their reports to the Provincial Auditor and 

allowing the Provincial Auditor to rely on the reports of private 

sector auditors if he is satisfied that they have properly 

discharged their responsibilities. If he is not satisfied, this Bill 

allows the Provincial Auditor to perform additional audit work 

and report accordingly to the Legislative Assembly. The 

Provincial Auditor continues to have free access to all 

information relating to public money. 

 

This Bill will enhance, Mr. Speaker, the overall audit process. 

As before, the Provincial Auditor will continue to table before 

the Legislative Assembly his annual long-form report, which 

will now also include the reports of the private sector auditors; 

thus, full accountability will be maintained of all accounts of 

public money, including the Crown corporation sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe, as well, that the Bill responds 

completely to the questions raised by the Leader of the 

Opposition during a debate on an appropriations Bill earlier this 

session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Provincial Auditor Act. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to say a 

few words on this Bill which is a very important Bill, not 

because of the good that it’s going to do, Mr. Speaker, but its 

importance is because of the damage that this Bill will do to 

accountability in this province. 

 

I say at the outset, without any reservation, that I and my 

colleagues on this side of the House strongly are concerned 

about what this Bill proposes to do, and we’ll oppose it at every 

stage of the way. 

 

What the Minister of Finance is asking this House to approve is 

unheard of anywhere in Canada, and I’m not sure about the 

British parliamentary system and throughout the world. The 

ministers says — and he deals here in half-truths — in his few 

remarks on a Bill that is as major as this one, he says that the 

Bill will preserve the role of the Provincial Auditor as the 

overall auditor. That is not true, and I will point out in my 

remarks later on today how that is not correct, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister also says that this Bill will preserve the principles 

of independence. It is clear by the actions of this government 

over the past several months, and with what is intended by this 

legislation, that the independence of the Provincial Auditor, 

with respect to the auditing of the books of the Crown 

corporations, is going to be in some question with this 

legislation. 

 

The minister also said in his remarks that the same examination 

and requirements will be asked of the private sector auditors as 

has been required under the Provincial Auditor. And I ask the 

minister in his concluding remarks, if he’s going to make any, 

who will set those requirements when, as far as I am able to 

understand in this legislation, the Provincial Auditor no longer 

will? And I want to point that out in the remarks I make today 

as well when I get into more of the principle of the Bill. 

 

I say to this House, Mr. Speaker, and to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan, that the central issue here in this proposed 

legislation and the debate is the lack of accountability. That is 

the central issue. The question that has to be asked is: who 

reports to whom? 

 

The minister proposes a situation where the boards of the 

Crown corporations, appointed by that minister or by that 

Premier or some members of the Executive Council, that board 

is going to appoint the auditor of their Crown corporation, so in 

essence the auditor will be an employee, although by contract, 

of the board. The auditor, in turn, that is appointed, is going to 

report to the board. 

 

The question that is not addressed here, and the minister really 

did not explain it, is who reports to this legislature? Who 

reports to this legislature and, therefore, to the people of 

Saskatchewan when it comes to an explanation of how their 

money in their Crown corporation is being managed, and it is 

being spent? I submit to you, sir, that in this amendment no one 

will effectively report to the legislature, and that is reason for 

grave concern. 

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2933 

 

This Bill is an attack on this legislature itself, this legislature 

which represents the public. It’s an attack on this Assembly. It’s 

an attack on the right of the people to know how their money is 

being spent, and it’s an attack on the requirement of 

government to be accountable for its actions. On all those three 

counts it’s an attack. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has tried to turn it around into an 

issue of whether to use private sector auditors or whether to use 

the Provincial Auditor. That’s not the issue here. The issue is 

one of accountability and how will this legislature be able to 

determine whether there is something wrong in the operation of 

the various Crown corporations in the expenditure of their 

money. 

 

I want to say to you what the other real issue here is, besides 

accountability and besides the attack that is taking place on it. 

The other issue here is the attempt by the government, as it gets 

deeper into the mire of its mismanagement and its corruption, to 

institute by law the kind of restrictions, so that it will not have 

to be able to disclose many of those things that have occurred in 

this government since 1982. 

 

The Minister of Finance who proposes this legislation is the 

very same minister who solemnly declared in his first budget in 

1986 what the budget would be, and then a year later went 

before the Saskatchewan public after an election has passed, 

and said, whoops, I’m sorry, but I miscalculated the deficit by 

$800 million. 

 

(1445) 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, there is no conceivable way, in the 

size of the budget that the province like Saskatchewan has, that 

any Minister of Finance could legitimately make that kind of an 

error — not possible! It could only happen if it was a deliberate 

deception of the public whose funds that minister is responsible 

for. 

 

Those are the kinds of things that the minister couldn’t hide and 

that the government couldn’t hide. They had to come forward 

with another budget this year, and they had to disclose all of 

this information. The legislation we see before us today is an 

attempt, at least on the part of the Crown corporation side, for 

the government to make it possible not to disclose those kind of 

mismanagement things that will happen and have been 

happening in the Crown corporations. That’s why we are 

strongly opposed to this Bill and, I submit to you, so is the 

public of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I say to you, sir, that nobody will be more concerned about 

this than the business community because they know what it’s 

like to run a business adequately, and how you have to account 

for the coming in of revenues and the expenditure of those 

revenues in order to make your business function. There is not a 

business in Saskatchewan that could operate with the kind of 

mismanagement that this government has and survive longer 

than a year. There isn’t a business in Saskatchewan that has 

shareholders that if the board of directors of that business did 

not report to their shareholders in the way this government has 

refused to report to the people of Saskatchewan, those board of 

directors wouldn’t survive  

an annual meeting. 

 

But yet this government goes along its merry way, even to the 

point where it unashamedly and blatantly will propose a Bill 

that will even restrict the providing of information more than 

already exists this administration. 

 

Now what does the Bill do, Mr. Speaker? Well in the legislation 

that presently exists, the Provincial Auditor is empowered to 

examine the accounts of the province in as great a detail as he 

deems necessary. In fact, I’ll even quote you a clause out of 

there, a section of a clause in which it says: 

 

. . . or cause to be examined, in any manner that he 

considers necessary to enable him to report as required in 

the Act . . . 

 

Do you know what this Bill does? It proposes to do away with 

that clause in the legislation. In effect, what this Bill will do is it 

will restrict the power of the auditor to exercise discretion when 

examining the government’s accounts. 

 

Now the existing legislation has something else which is of 

interest, and it should be there, and the government opposite 

should know it because in 1983 they put this legislation in this 

House. The existing legislation gave the Provincial Auditor the 

right to instruct another auditor to do the following: the right to 

include any procedures that the Provincial Auditor deems 

necessary to allow the Provincial Auditor to fulfil his 

responsibility under the Act. 

 

Now as a result of this new section which the minister . . . or 

this new Bill which the minister proposes, the Provincial 

Auditor loses the right; he loses the right to instruct an 

appointed auditor to provide information to the Provincial 

Auditor up and above what is strictly necessary. And the 

minister stands up in this House and tries to argue that nothing 

changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the existing legislation also indicates that the 

Provincial Auditor may, upon receipt of a private auditor’s 

report, report that to the House. And he then may, in fact, 

request further information. It’s not a question of just getting 

the annual reports handed to him as is proposed in this new 

legislation. He may go back under the existing legislation and 

request further information. 

 

What the minister is asking the House to approve here is a total 

emasculation of the ability of the Provincial Auditor to look 

into the affairs of the government beyond what the government 

is willing to allow him to see. It will now be up to the 

government to decide what information the government 

provides to the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Now that’s already happening. Since January, under the 

instruction of the board of directors of the Crown management 

corporation, the officers of the Crown Management Board have 

been restricted from providing information which the Provincial 

Auditor has requested. The Premier has said to the president of 

the Crown  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2934 

 

Management Board: you shall not provide this information. All 

that this government is doing, knowing that they are, in fact, 

breaking the law, is trying to write into the law the ability to do 

that what they exactly are doing now. 

 

I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, that what I see here, that there will be 

no means for the Provincial Auditor any longer to verify the 

information that is provided to him. And I say that because 

appointed auditors will not need to supply the Provincial 

Auditor with the documents that they use to produce their 

audited reports. He will have to take that at their word, and so 

the Provincial Auditor has no way of verifying the validity of 

the appointed auditors’ reports. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me just go back to how this has all 

evolved, and that should be of some concern to all members of 

this House, as I’m sure that it will be to the public. On January 

7 of this year, the Minister of Finance made a public 

announcement. The Public Accounts Committee was not 

involved; this legislature was not involved; the Provincial 

Auditor was not involved. But the Minister of Finance 

announced that there was a change in government policy which 

would allow the board of directors of the Crown corporations to 

accept proposals from accounting firms which might be 

interested in doing audit work, and I read this out of the report 

of the Provincial Auditor. 

 

The minister also indicated at that time that his officials would 

meet with the Provincial Auditor at his convenience. He tried 

for many, many weeks to try to get such a meeting, and it was 

not provided for. And when it finally came about there was a 

meeting with the acting deputy minister of Finance on April 3, 

in which all that the acting deputy minister of Finance would 

say would be that what the minister had said was going to 

happen — no request for the Provincial Auditor to provide any 

kind of input into these amendments, and he did not get to see 

them until that Bill was tabled in this House. That has never 

happened before. 

 

In 1983 when The Provincial Auditor’s Act was introduced in 

this legislature, the Provincial Auditor, together with the 

Department of Finance officials, wrote the Act. It was 

introduced into this House. It was referred to the committee of 

public accounts where it was studied clause by clause. 

 

I will bring to your attention some commitments made by the 

former minister of Finance about the need for independence and 

the need for accountability and the need to get information. 

Somehow that’s all gone by the wayside. 

 

Now this attack, Mr. Speaker, on the ability of the Provincial 

Auditor to do his work does not start with this proposed 

legislation. It starts, Mr. Speaker, with the way the staff has 

been treated in the Provincial Auditor’s office. The auditor has 

said — and I think that this is worthy of note: 

 

If public servants who are to be audited are in the process 

of determining legislation which will govern how they are 

to be audited, and I am not involved as I have been in the 

past, who is looking  

after the interests of the Legislative Assembly. which is 

the body that requires the audit? 

 

And I think that’s a very telling comment. It is clear why the 

auditor was not involved, because somehow the interests of the 

public and this Assembly are of no concern to this government. 

 

Now they’ve made it even more difficult for the Provincial 

Auditor to do his job because of the way they have changed the 

staff. In 1982 the Provincial Auditor had 72 members on staff; 

in 1984 there were 69; in 1986 there were 63; and in this budget 

that we’re deliberating on in this session, there are now only 49. 

Clearly, when you take away the staff that is necessary to get a 

job down, Mr. Speaker, then you and in this case this 

government is interfering with the ability of the Provincial 

Auditor to do that job and is restricting his ability to do it the 

way it needs to be done. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was amazed the other day when in a 

question in this House on this issue of withholding information 

on the appointment of private auditors in the government 

proposals, the minister said the following. He said: “Let me 

indicate what the Provincial Auditor asked for.” Because the 

Provincial Auditor wrote a series of letters to the Crown 

Management Board asking for information which he had 

always asked in the past, and it had always been provided. The 

minister said that: 

 

He has asked for the proposals submitted by the private 

sector auditor companies to be able to do the audits of the 

Crown corporations. 

 

And then the minister stopped at that point. Once again, he only 

told one-third of the truth. And I find that very troublesome. 

 

I want to raise with you, Mr. Speaker, what in fact the 

Provincial Auditor had requested. He states — and I quote from 

the Hansard of the Public Accounts Committee the following — 

he states: 

 

I requested from Crown Management Board copies of 

their communication to private sector auditors . . . 

 

And then he said: 

 

. . . I want to know the content of those communications to 

private sector auditors to make sure that the private sector 

auditor has been told that he will be doing the same thing 

(as I am doing). 

 

The minister forgot to mention that in answer to the question in 

this House and in his response to questioning by the press. And 

why shouldn’t the Provincial Auditor know whether the private 

auditors are doing what he has been doing, since by law it is he 

who is required to audit the books of those Crown corporations 

today. A perfectly legitimate question which the Crown 

Management Board and this government refuse to respond to. 

 

He went on to say that: 

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2935 

 

In addition, I want then copies of the submission that were 

put in place by the private sector auditors . . . (the) Crown 

Management Board relative to, if you bid on the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation audit, what level of 

dollar bid did you enter so that I can determine whether or 

not it is going to be cost effective, as was the declared 

intention on January 16, 1987. 

 

Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, what is wrong with the Provincial 

Auditor asking whether the new method is going to be cost 

effective. That is his job. 

 

The minister forgot to mention that in his response to this 

legislature and his response to the press because he did not want 

the public to know what the real facts were. So since January of 

this year this government has refused to provide information so 

that the Provincial Auditor can do his job. 

 

Today we have the minister rise for about four minutes and say 

he’s going to put into the law what he has been doing, contrary 

to the law, since January 1, and everyone who is concerned 

about the public affairs of this province and the future of this 

province should be concerned. 

 

Now I ask the minister, and I’m concluding my remarks before 

I adjourn now, what has changed since 1983? Why this total 

about face, when in 1983 there were amendments . . . actually a 

new Bill introduced in this House called The Provincial 

Auditor’s Act. What we have today is a reversal of what was 

said then. 

 

I have here what the former minister of Education said about 

the independence of the auditor, and he said: 

 

He must not only be independent, but he must also be seen 

to be independent as he carries out his role. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker — Mr. Deputy Speaker now — somehow 

this Bill follows the same pattern as has happened to many 

other operations that this government has dealt with. And the 

pattern is this: if an agency of government, or if an agency out 

of government so much as questions some policy or some 

administrative fact of this government, it is then in jeopardy. 

 

The government established the Public Utilities (Rate) Review 

Commission. The Public Utilities (Rate) Review Commission 

dared to say to the government: this is the way you’re going do 

it; we have this mandate; we have made a decision. And the 

government today has a Bill in the House to do away with the 

Public Utilities (Rate) Review Commission. 

 

The Ombudsman dared to criticize some of the things that were 

happening in the government. The government now chose not 

even to go through the correct procedure of consultations before 

appointing a different Ombudsman. And in this case I’m not 

reflecting on the individual who is there, I’m saying that the 

process used is another example of how this government refuses 

to provide information that should be there. And when 

somebody criticizes them for it, they don’t get mad — or if they 

do they don’t show it — but they get even. 

(1500) 

 

Non-government agencies, all agencies all over this province 

have had massive cuts in their funding, and in some cases 

totally cut off because they dared to be critical of the 

government on some of its policies. Workers throughout 

Saskatchewan have dared to be critical, and the government 

threatened them. 

 

What is different, I ask you, between the kind of thing we see 

here in Saskatchewan today and the kinds of things we see 

happening in Chile or El Salvador or Afghanistan? Not much 

different, Mr. Speaker. These defenders of private initiative and 

individualism are the very same people who are not prepared to 

give individuals the right to ask questions and take part in the 

democratic process in Saskatchewan. 

 

This Bill is wrong. It’s an attack on this legislature; it’s an 

attack on accountability; it’s an attack on the right of people to 

know what the government is doing with their money. 

 

The Provincial Auditor will provide in this House, I hope soon, 

a report on this legislation and what his view is of it. I think, 

Mr. Speaker, that before this debate goes any further, it is 

important that we have the benefit of the advice of the 

Provincial Auditor. 

 

And so at this time, after having said the things that I have said, 

I want to move that we adjourn this debate until we have the 

benefit of that report and further study this legislation so that we 

can deal with it in a more adequate way. And I move 

adjournment of this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 42 — An Act respecting the Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the Enactment 

of The Provincial Auditor Amendment Act, 1987 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 

move second reading of an Act respecting the Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the Enactment of 

The Provincial Auditor Amendment Act. 

 

On January 14, 1987, I announced publicly that the government 

would be introducing a new policy concerning the auditing of 

certain Crown corporations. I indicated that the corporations 

would be given the option of choosing private sector auditors to 

provide them with auditing and accounting services if that 

option proves to be cost-effective. 

 

I also stated that this change in policy will not affect the Crown 

corporations’ obligations to report their audit results to the 

Legislative Assembly. Since my announcement, 18 Crown 

corporations conducted a selection process for a new auditor 

and have made their recommendations to the Crown 

Management Board. The board has reviewed and approved 

these recommendations, and the board is now prepared to 

recommend the appointment of these auditors. 

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2936 

 

However, certain Crown corporations involved in this selection 

process are obligated by legislation to have only the Provincial 

Auditor as their auditor. As a result, in order to allow these 

corporations to appoint a new auditor, it is necessary to amend 

each of their respective Acts. Accordingly, this new Act will 

change each existing Act to allow for the appointment by 

cabinet of a private sector auditor. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, was auditor asked to participate in these? 

Yes he was, on several occasions, and he refused to do so, Mr. 

Speaker. That was the Provincial Auditor’s choice, not the 

choice of the government. I find it unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Provincial Auditor is now taking a different approach. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Provincial Auditor says that he has a 

right to this information to determine if there’s value-for-money 

spent auditing. And, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor knows 

full well, because it’s been a long-standing practice and policy 

of this government, plus our predecessor government when the 

hon. member was minister of Finance, that the value-for-service 

auditing was not a function of the Provincial Auditor. 

 

And the hon. member knows full well, the hon. opposition 

finance critic knows full well that the request — and I believe it 

was stated in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix by the Provincial 

Auditor that he has the right to this information to determine if 

there is value-for-money spent — that was not a mandate of the 

Provincial Auditor. The Provincial Auditor, in fairness, 

certainly has requested it, I believe nearly every year for the last 

10, but that policy is no different under this administration than 

under the previous NDP government. So, Mr. Speaker, some of 

the allegations made, of course, are simply not true. 

 

We hear, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about changing to the 

private sector auditors, a comparison to Nicaragua and 

Afghanistan, and I think a rather sad reflection, Mr. Speaker, on 

those making those allegations. 

 

One can remember, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the 

Provincial Auditor, that it was the NDP government that took 

away the Provincial Auditor from reporting to the Assembly 

and made him a reporter to the government of the day, Mr. 

Speaker. So I don’t think it fair for anyone to stand up and 

make that type of . . . and I believe rather unfortunate. We all 

know the stress the hon. member’s been under lately, but to 

make that kind of unfair analogy, I think, is of the hyperbole 

that the member from Regina Victoria was so scornful of the 

other day, and not realistic when we deal with this debate. 

 

So again, was the Provincial Auditor asked for input? Yes, he 

was. He refused. 

 

Secondly, we should keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just advise 

the Assembly what the auditors of Saskatchewan said. When 

given a copy of the Bill they said, well really, what’s new? And 

as a consequence, Mr. Speaker, the second reading of the Bill to 

amend The Provincial Auditor’s Act and The Consequential 

Amendment Act  

really, Mr. Speaker, empowers the imposition of the changes of 

the Provincial Auditor to allow private sector auditors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to suggest that private sector auditors in 

Saskatchewan are going to defraud, mislead, deceive the people 

of this province and this Assembly is frankly, I believe, an 

unwarranted attack on the auditing profession in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. And I would hope that hon. members would 

refrain from that type of attack. I’m sure that the audit 

profession of Saskatchewan is going to be somewhat resentful 

of that attack, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that they take it in the 

spirit of debate as rather a true reflection of the views of the 

members of the New Democratic Party to the provincial 

auditors of Saskatchewan . . . private sector auditors of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I move second reading, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, may I have leave to 

introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my real pleasure to 

introduce to you, and through you to the members of this 

House, two very special guests who are seated in your gallery. 

One, a visitor from Vancouver, British Columbia, is the person 

of my aunt, Mrs. Dorothy Calvert, who I can assure members 

present is not from the Fraser Institute. And another very 

special guest from my own constituency, and a very special 

constituent, my mother, Mrs. Beulah Calvert. I would ask 

members present to help me welcome these guests. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 42 (continued) 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, before I adjourn the debate 

on this because they are consequential amendments to the 

previous Bill that we spoke of, I want to make a couple of 

comments on the minister’s comments, because once again he 

has not fully informed the House about what is happening here. 

 

I bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, when the minister talks 

about the consultation which was offered to the Provincial 

Auditor, he fails to say to this House on what issue. He talks 

about the amendments on which there was no consultation and 

no offer made, realistically, and applies that same argument to 

the refusal of the Crown Management Board to provide 

information to the auditor which the auditor had requested. 

Now let me just tell you, and I quote from the Provincial 

Auditor’s report. He says that: 

 

On April 3, 1987, I met with the Acting Deputy Minister 

of Finance (this is the auditor writing). He confirmed that 

all Crown corporation boards were engaged in the 

selection of private sector audit  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2937 

 

firms . . . 

 

And let me repeat that. This is the acting deputy of Finance 

who: 

 

. . . confirmed that all Crown corporation boards were 

engaged in the selection of private sector audit firms and 

the process of selecting auditors was nearing a conclusion. 

(This is in April) He also indicated (that) the government 

was considering amendments to The Provincial Auditor 

Act that would change my supervisory role with respect to 

the audits of Crown corporations audited by private sector 

auditors. 

 

And in fact, that is the legislation we have here today in which 

the supervisory role of the Provincial Auditor is now being 

restricted. And that is one of the major components of the issue 

that’s before us in this legislation. The auditor wrote on April 

13, 1987 to the acting deputy minister of Finance, and again I 

quote: 

 

. . . advised that any legislative enactments should not in 

any way make Crown corporations less accountable to the 

Members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

At no time was any consultation on these amendments provided 

to the Provincial Auditor in spite of what the Minister of 

Finance says. How can the government deal with legislation, 

and an officer of this Legislative Assembly, without allowing 

the officer which this Legislative Assembly appoints, without 

allowing that officer to have some input into that legislation. 

 

(1515) 

 

But the Minister of Finance says, that’s okay. What’s even just 

as equally disconcerting and should be of concern to us all is 

the comment that the Crown corporations were engaged in 

selecting private sector auditors in April of 1987. And I say that 

that’s disconcerting because of the time, and even today, there 

are those Crown corporations that under the law cannot use 

private sector auditors; they must have the Provincial Auditor 

do their audit. 

 

But this Minister of Finance is already appointing them, and 

said to the press the other day that he has appointed them. If 

that’s the case, just as he was breaking the law with trying to 

write a budget with special warrants prior to June 17, he has 

been breaking the law by appointing these auditors without the 

authority to do so. 

 

I can’t believe that any government, I don’t care which political 

stripe, could possibly be so arrogant as to say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, we’re going to pass laws and you’d better obey 

them or we’re going to take you to court, and then turn around 

and itself ignore those laws. But that’s what we’ve seen here — 

that’s what we have seen here. That kind of arrogance, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t think anyone has ever seen before. 

 

Now, Minister, once again — and I will only have a few more 

remarks to make here — says one more example of what the 

Provincial Auditor asked for. But again he didn’t say that the 

Provincial Auditor asked to see those board  

minutes which he had to have in order to be able to do his 

audits. This government, for the first time in history, refused to 

provide those board minutes. They have always been provided 

to the Provincial Auditor so he could do his audit effectively. 

 

All of this, Mr. Speaker, leads the Provincial Auditor to say this 

— and it’s on the record and it’s true, because I have checked it, 

and it’s confirmed — but it led the Provincial Auditor to say, on 

September 22: 

 

We are encountering some problems these days in that for 

the first time in the history of the audit office I am unable 

to get information that I asked for. 

 

This has never been done; this has never occurred before. It’s 

unprecedented and it’s clearly another attempt by this 

government to hide its management, to hide its corruption, to 

hide its deceit from the people of Saskatchewan. It has been 

doing it by breaking the law until now, and now it’s attempting 

to provide a law which will make it legal to do what it’s been 

doing illegally, and that is legally hide information which the 

public needs to know. 

 

That is all I want to say at this time on the consequential 

amendments because I’ve already spoken at some length on the 

first Bill. But we will also have more to say on this. I know my 

colleague, the member for Saskatoon South, and many others, 

will want to address this question, and we will want to address 

it particularly after we see the Report of the Provincial Auditor 

on these two pieces of legislation. 

 

So I beg leave at this time to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to repeal The Public Utilities Review 

Commission Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that the 

debate on this one will be quite interesting for its content, Mr. 

Speaker, as I had indicated some time back in May that the 

government would be repealing the Public Utilities Review 

Commission. 

 

As I indicated, the costs, Mr. Speaker, there was little doubt that 

the hearings before the Public Utilities Review Commission 

were becoming extremely complex and technical and, as a 

matter of fact, the Consumers’ Association of Canada, 

Saskatchewan branch, had expressed deep concern to the 

province of Saskatchewan at the increasing complexities of the 

review process. As well, Mr. Speaker, they had been expressing 

deep concern over the increasing costs of the review process 

and their inability to participate to the fullest extent because of 

the increasing complexities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be reverting to the previous practice of 

rates being determined and reviewed . . . I should say 

determined by the board, reviewed by cabinet, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s been the long-standing practice in this province prior to 

the Public Utilities Review Commission. 

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2938 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that hon. members opposite have on 

numerous occasions advocated the repeal of this legislation, 

have advocated on numerous occasions that the Public Utilities 

Review Commission be dropped, be scrapped, and that has been 

a long-standing position of the New Democratic Party 

opposition. So I expect, Mr. Speaker, once we get through the 

rhetoric, that hon. members opposite will be supporting 

unanimously this legislation. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. The 

legislation that has been introduced is a Bill to abolish the 

Public Utilities Review Commission. That is in effect what the 

Bill does, and it ties up some loose ends. And there are three 

major points that I want to make with respect to this Bill. 

 

First of all, the establishment of a public utilities review 

commission was a PC election promise in 1982. It was 

promised on numerous occasions to the public of 

Saskatchewan. It was their promise, Mr. Speaker, to have public 

input and public participation in setting the utility rates in this 

province. And what this Bill does, Mr. Speaker, is to renege on 

that promise. 

 

The second point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is this is another 

example, another example of the PC government being 

unwilling to suffer watch-dogs of government agencies. It’s 

another example of the PC government cutting off or abolishing 

an agency, or cutting back on an agency, that speaks out in a 

manner that the government doesn’t like. It’s one more example 

in a long list of examples, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The third point I want to make is that the PC Party and the PC 

government promised with a great deal of fanfare, Mr. Speaker, 

public participation in setting utility rates in this province. And 

now they want to abolish the Public Utilities Review 

Commission without coming forward with any alternatives for 

the public of this province. They are proposing not one single 

alternative to ensure that there is public participation in the 

setting of utility rates, in order to continue and hold good on 

their promise in 1982. 

 

And it’s our opinion, and we have suggested on other 

occasions, possible alternatives to the press and in press 

releases, which I know the government would have access to, 

and yet they have not come forward with a package deal in this 

Legislative Assembly putting forward alternatives for public 

participation in order to meet their promise of 1982, which was 

one of their major election promises, Mr. Speaker — major 

election promises. Instead, they choose simply to renege on it 

and not suggest any alternatives. 

 

The Public Utilities Review Commission, Mr. Speaker, is a 

watch-dog of the Crown corporations. It was a major 

corner-stone of the PC election campaign in 1982. And this is 

an example of another promise broken, without being replaced 

by anything. And there is no question in my mind that this issue 

alone substantially affects the credibility of the PC government, 

substantially affects their credibility, Mr. Speaker, not to 

mention all the other promises that this government has broken. 

How can anyone believe what they say? Where are the 

alternatives, if they really had the intention to have open 

government and people participate in the setting of utility rates? 

 

I just want to bring to the attention of the House some of the 

promises that were made by this government in 1982 with 

respect to the Public Utilities Review Commission. And I have 

here an ad or an election pamphlet of the Premier’s, Mr. 

Speaker, and a Premier’s commitment — it says commitment 

on it — and inside is says, freeze public utility and insurance 

rates. And it goes on to say: 

 

Saskatchewan families have faced tremendous increases in 

the past few years in telephone, power, natural gas, and 

insurance rates. A new PC government will institute an 

immediate freeze and establish a public utilities review 

commission to monitor rates and protect consumers from 

unjustified increases. 

 

Instead, what do we see, Mr. Speaker? A token freeze that 

lasted for, I think, a year at the most. It may have been less than 

that. And then increases in some utility rates that were as much 

as two or three times the rate of inflation. Is that keeping good, 

holding good on a promise, Mr. Speaker? I think not. I think 

not. If there’s anything to be said about rhetoric, it’s coming 

from that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. It comes from that 

side of the House. 

 

And what else do we see with respect to this promise? We now 

see the abolition of the PURC, of the Public Utilities Review 

Commission. And I look at “Pocket Politics” which is a 

photocopy that I have here from “A Quick Reference on PC 

Policy for Candidates.” So it’s the PC Party policy manual. And 

it says, the question is: 

 

Utilities rates and SGI rates are always increasing. Is it 

true a PC government will establish a Public Utilities 

Review Commission to protect the consumers? 

 

The answer for our PC candidates is: 

 

Yes, a PC government will establish a Public Utilities 

Review Commission to monitor (to monitor) and control 

rates in the government-owned utilities. 

 

An Hon. Member: — But they didn’t say how long they’d 

have it for. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Exactly. They don’t say how long this 

commission . . . They might establish it for how long, Mr. 

Speaker, but it’s not going to be there any longer as a result of 

this legislation. 

 

And we look at . . . I have another ad here from the member 

from Biggar. And he says: 

 

The current government doesn’t want anyone looking over 

its should. (They don’t believe in limiting Sask Power’s 

huge profits.) I stand for a party that will make our public 

utilities responsible, and to do that we will immediately 

freeze utility rates. 

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2939 

 

Referring no doubt to the temporary, inadequate freeze that this 

government engaged in. And the member from Melville: 

 

Consumers will be protected by a Public Utilities Review 

Commission. 

 

And a former member, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Lloyd Hampton: 

 

Consumers will be protected by a Public Utilities Review 

Commission. 

 

And the member from Kelsey-Tisdale. These are all election 

ads, Mr. Speaker, all election ads. 

 

Yes, there’s a better way for Saskatchewan. Creation of a 

Public Utility Review Commission. 

 

A better way, he’s telling the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And the member from Kindersley, Mr. Speaker: 

 

A new PC government will institute an immediate freeze 

and establish a Public Utilities Review Commission. 

 

And so on. And a former member, Paul Schoenhals, same thing. 

 

Consumers will be protected by a Public Utilities Review 

Commission. 

 

And we go on to many more ads, Mr. Speaker, that just go on 

and on and on, and say exactly the same thing. Here’s one, the 

member from Redberry: 

 

We are going to establish a Public Utilities Review 

Commission to monitor and control the 

government-owned utilities. 

 

Former member of Prince Albert, Paul Meagher: 

 

Consumers will be protected by a Public Utilities Review 

Commission. 

 

Commitment by the Last Mountain-Touchwood candidate, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Saskatchewan families have faced tremendous increases in 

the past years in telephone, power, natural gas, and 

insurance rates. A new PC government will institute an 

immediate freeze and establish a Public Utilities Review 

Commission to monitor rates and protect consumers from 

unjustified increases. 

 

Another one from the Kinistino PC association: 

 

Government as the servant, not the master. 

 

And yet what we see here today is government being the 

master, Mr. Speaker, because this government has a tremendous 

ability to cut back on organizations and associations that make 

decisions and come out publicly and say things that they don’t 

like. And that’s what I’m  

suggesting they are doing to the Public Utilities Review 

Commission. They will couch this in terms of it’s a cost saving. 

That’s the smoke-screen; that’s their smoke-screen argument, 

Mr. Speaker, but in fact what their complaint is, is that the 

Public Utilities Review Commission was making decisions that 

they didn’t agree with. 

 

And then we look at the member from Maple Creek saying the 

same thing, creation of a Public Utilities Review Commission; 

the member from Melfort, same thing — establish a Public 

Utilities Review Commission. And there are more here as well, 

Mr. Speaker, more here as well. 

 

The member from Yorkton, I believe, said something similar to 

that to do with easing the burden on utility bills. The member 

from Regina South makes the same statement, Mr. Speaker. 

And the list goes on, and the list goes on. 

 

The point of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is this government made 

the establishment of a Public Utilities Review Commission a 

major election promise, and today in its arrogance it comes 

forward and it wishes to abolish the commission without putting 

forward any alternative to hold good on their 1982 promise — 

no alternative whatsoever. 

 

So that we see a lot of rhetoric from the government, a lot of 

rhetoric as to openness of government and public participation. 

And we hear that today. We still hear that today, Mr. Speaker, 

but the people of this province can’t believe the government; 

they can’t believe the government because this is an example, 

this is an example of their commitment to openness of 

government. This is an example of their true commitment to 

public participation. 

 

Never let it be said again that they are implementers and that 

they believe in public participation. That’s not their reason for 

doing things. That’s their expedient answer, Mr. Speaker, but 

it’s not their reason for doing things. 

 

We find here that as soon as the heat is on with respect to the 

Public Utilities Review Commission, as soon as a body such as 

PURC makes decisions the government doesn’t like, that all 

this rhetoric about openness of government, about public 

participation, starts to vanish, and suddenly open government 

for the people doesn’t mean anything any more. And suddenly 

this long, fruitful relationship — and I’m quoting right now 

when I’m using these words from a statement made by the 

Minister of Finance of July 18, 1982, page 886 in Hansard, to 

this effect: 

 

I suggest to all hon. members that it’s a tremendous start 

to a long, fruitful relationship between the people of 

Saskatchewan and the new Progressive Conservative 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s what the Minister of Finance said with respect to the 

establishment of a public utilities review commission. That’s 

what he said. But suddenly, Mr. Speaker, this long, fruitful 

relationship between the people of Saskatchewan  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2940 

 

and the PC Party, or the PC government, isn’t important any 

more. Suddenly it isn’t important any more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1530) 

 

So let’s just look at the history of PURC; let’s look at what’s 

happened on PURC over the last little while. PURC was 

established in July of 1982 — it may not have been July, but it 

was around that period in 1982. And we find that as early as 

February 23, 1983, we see mutterings from the Premier that the 

final decision about rate increases rests with cabinet and not 

with PURC. 

 

Something like six or seven months later we see mutterings that 

the Premier is reconsidering his decision that the final decision 

of rate increases rest with PURC. He is having second thoughts 

about his Public Utilities Review Commission, Mr. Speaker, in 

spite of the fact that that’s not what he said on June 23, 1982, 

and on February 22, 1983. And On June 23, 1982, the Premier 

says: 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be introducing a public 

(utilities) review commission so the consumers in the 

province of Saskatchewan will have access to government. 

They’ve been asking for it for years. They want to feel that 

they can control government (and) not be controlled by 

government. 

 

And then what do we see? Six or seven months later we see the 

Premier reconsidering — reconsidering that, Mr. Speaker. 

February 22, 1983, the Premier said . . . I’m sorry, that’s not 

February 22; it’s December 6, 1983, in Hansard at page 506. 

The Premier says: 

 

With respect to the rates, the Public Utilities Review 

Commission makes the final decision. 

 

The Public Utilities Review Commission makes the final 

decision. That’s page 506, December 6, 1983, in Hansard, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But then on February 23, on February 23 we see a little 

difference approach from the Premier — a little different 

approach, Mr. Speaker. Now he’s making mutterings that 

maybe that’s not the way it’s going to be. And in a Leader-Post 

article the Premier is quoted as saying, he said: 

 

The final decision about rate increases rests with cabinet. 

 

So there we have the Premier in December, on December 6 

saying one thing, and on February 23 saying another; in June, 

when the commission was being established, saying one thing, 

and in the following February saying another. 

 

Now is this a question of the Premier not understanding what he 

was doing when he set up the Public Utilities Review 

Commission, Mr. Speaker? Or is this a question of the Premier 

reneging on his promise, having second thoughts about what he 

did, and betraying the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

Either way, Mr. Speaker, either way it causes me a lot of 

concern. 

On March 24, 1983, Mr. Speaker, the PC government acted 

unilaterally on the SGI deductible. And the former member of 

Regina South at that time, Mr. Rousseau said, and he’s quoted 

as saying this in an article from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 

dated March 24, 1983, that he told . . . I’ll just quote from this 

article. 

 

Rousseau refused Shillington’s request and said the 

deductible will jump to 500 on July 1 as planned. He told 

the legislature he still believes a change in the deductible 

is a decision for SGI management alone. 

 

And that surrounded a controversy as to whether or not PURC 

would have the ability to involve itself in determining whether 

or not deductibles could be raised or whether or not that was a 

matter to be left up to SGI management alone or cabinet. 

 

And Mr. Rousseau took a very firm stand, obviously from the 

newspaper articles, that the decision laid with SGI management 

alone. And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, where is the openness of 

government? Where is the public participation in setting rates 

on utilities when we have a minister that takes this position on 

this matter — some less than a year after we heard all this 

rhetoric in the legislature about open government and 

government for the people and things like: 

 

For too long rate increases were made (in) secret, (and) 

imposed upon the people of Saskatchewan in a manner 

that they had no opportunity to review. 

 

The minister . . . the present Minister of Finance said that, Mr. 

Speaker, on July 5, 1982, page 499 . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — On behalf of the Premier. 

 

Ms. Simard: — And he . . . on behalf of the Premier and the 

members of the PC caucus, he talks about PURC: 

 

As well, it is another example . . . of open government for 

the people of this province, Mr. Speaker — another 

commitment (made) by the Progressive Conservative 

Party of Saskatchewan, and Grant Devine, (and that’s a 

quote, Mr. Speaker) and another commitment kept, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The present Minister of Finance states that July 18, 1982, 

another commitment kept, Mr. Speaker; those are his words — 

another commitment kept. Here’s another commitment broken, 

Mr. Speaker, another commitment broken. 

 

And in spite of the fact that we’ve heard all . . . and I could 

quote here for half an hour from all the speeches that were made 

in this House — self-congratulatory speeches on this 

government’s open for participation, open government rhetoric 

by this government; I can quote endlessly on that. But what we 

see is less than a year later as much as from June or July to 

February; what we see is we see this government backtracking 

and reneging on that promise. We see this government taking a 

totally  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2941 

 

different stand. 

 

But they were somewhat confused about the whole thing, Mr. 

Speaker, because for another two or three years they continued 

to pay lip-service to open government. They continued to pay 

lip-service to the need for a Public Utilities Review 

Commission, but kept on overruling the commission in spite of 

that, Mr. Speaker, which is rather strange. 

 

In effect the argument, which is rather interesting, the argument 

with respect to SGI deductibles — and I just want to make a 

comment on that — the argument the government was putting 

forward on that is that PURC had no business looking at the 

SGI deductibles. And yet we heard them say over and over 

again that there should be public control of utility rates. And 

what they were attempting to do by putting forward that 

position was to circumvent accountability to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and circumvent the Public Utilities Review 

Commission by upping deductibles. And I think that that is just 

an example of how this government speaks through both sides 

of its mouth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In July of 1984 cabinet overrules PURC, Mr. Speaker. PURC 

was attempting to move the province from a philosophical 

position endorsing cross-subsidization whereby large industrial 

users subsidize power bills of farmers and residential 

customers. And I don’t mean to suggest for one single moment 

that I agree with PURC’s decision to move away from 

cross-subsidization; that’s not what I’m saying. That’s another 

argument, Mr. Speaker, but I am saying that in PURC 

attempting to move away from cross-subsidization it became 

very politically unpopular for the PC government to be 

supporting PURC’s decision. It was not political for the PCs, 

and that’s why they overruled PURC on that matter. 

 

Obviously the PC government found itself in a bind. Obviously 

it found itself in a bind, Mr. Speaker. It had created a 

commission on the ground of openness of government, and that 

commission had become a thorn in its side because that 

commission was making policy that this government did not 

like. And so if it didn’t like it, it overruled its decisions in spite 

of the fact that that was illegal according to two Court of 

Appeal decisions, in spite of the fact that the Court of Appeal 

was saying they didn’t have that authority, or subsequently said 

that after the overruling took place, and in spite of the fact they 

spoke here in the legislature about PURC having the ultimate 

decision, they still overruled the decisions of PURC. And that’s 

an example, Mr. Speaker, of how this government’s credibility 

is lacking, how this government has no credibility. That’s an 

example of how this government talks from both sides of its 

mouth. 

 

Here we have an open for business party, an open for big 

business party, if I may liken. The commission is making 

decisions that tend to say that industrial users are paying too 

much for utility rates; they’re paying their unfair share. It’s time 

to shift some of the burden over to residential owners, and 

farmers, and home owners and so on — we have a commission 

saying that. It’s time to shift the burden because home owners 

aren’t shouldering their fair share, and so the increases to oil 

companies and industrial users were less than the increases to 

residential  

home owners, and so on. 

 

So we have a government that’s open for big business, and we 

have a commission making decisions along this line, but the 

problem is, is the PC government realized, Mr. Speaker, that the 

votes were with the farmers, not with the oil companies or the 

industrial users, that the majority of votes were out there 

amongst the people. And so it became very politically 

unpopular for them to support PURC’s decision — very 

politically unpopular. And so they did the politically expedient 

thing. In spite of all rhetoric in this House about open for 

government and PURC makes the last decision, they did the 

politically expedient thing, Mr. Speaker. They overruled PURC, 

and now they’re abolishing it. And that’s their real reason for 

doing it, Mr. Speaker, not costs, as they attempt to say, not 

costs, as they would have people know, have people believe in 

this province. 

 

Another example of the PC government’s interference with 

PURC is the SGI reserve fund. PURC held that the fund should 

not exceed 38.5 million, but cabinet reverses PURC and tells 

PURC to leave the reserve fund alone. And one again, we see 

an example of the PC government going against PURC, paying 

lip-service to openness, but making the final decision behind 

closed cabinet doors — making the final decision behind closed 

cabinet doors notwithstanding, Mr. Speaker, that they pay 

lip-service to openness and talk about open government and 

public participation. They say one thing, Mr. Speaker, but they 

do another. 

 

The PURC goes to the Court of Appeal, Mr. Speaker, on the 

cabinet reversal of the SGI reserve fund decision by PURC, and 

therein lies the dilemma for the PCs, Mr. Speaker; therein lies 

the dilemma. They campaigned on a promise of an independent 

review body, but when the crunch came, when the crunch came, 

when PURC made decisions which weren’t politically good, 

they changed their tune. 

 

But this is very typical of this government, I might say, Mr. 

Speaker — very typical. We’ve seen it in many cases, this kind 

of attitude, where they say one thing and mean another. They 

say that they are going to eliminate the gas tax, and they put the 

gas tax back on. They say they’re going to reduce income tax 

by 10 per cent. This has never happened so far, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see one promise after another like the promise to 

establish the Public Utilities Review Commission which is 

reneged upon, which is not followed through on, and this is 

very typical of this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s typical, too, in that this government has shown a propensity 

to neutralize watch-dog agencies. It’s shown a potential to 

attempt to silence commissions and agencies and bodies that 

speak out against this government and say things that this 

government doesn’t want these commissions or agencies to say. 

And that is typical of this government. 

 

And we see it with respect to the Regina Transition House that 

spoke out against cut-backs in this province and are now facing 

a 14.5 per cent cut-back to their funding. We see it with respect 

to Saskatchewan human rights  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2942 

 

association cut-backs. They spoke out against the government 

and they were cut back. We see it with respect to the 

Ombudsman. The former Ombudsman spoke out against the 

government, moved to the John Howard Society, and the John 

Howard Society is cut back substantially. And that’s the 

conduct, that’s the behaviour, and that’s the manner and method 

in which this government operates, Mr. Speaker, and it’s totally 

unacceptable to the people of the province of Saskatchewan — 

totally unacceptable. 

 

We even have a situation with respect to PURC where Mr. 

Doug Cuddington, who I understand was a member of the 

board, left and resigned from PURC simply because he came to 

the conclusion that the government didn’t really want an 

independent body, they didn’t really want an independent body 

setting utility rates. And in that regard, I’m looking at a January 

24, 1987 Leader-Post article where Mr. Cuddington is quoted 

as saying: 

 

The government doesn’t seem to want an independent 

assessment of the factors that go into rate-making. 

 

(1545) 

 

And that’s his statement in January of this year, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s the problem that we have with the government and 

their attitude and the way that they’ve handled themselves with 

respect to the Public Utilities Review Commission. 

 

And with respect to the Court of Appeal decision, I just want to 

go back once again to the Court of Appeal decision ruling on 

PURC. And Wednesday, October 29, 1986 the Court of Appeal 

is quoted as saying: 

 

The SGI order in council offends the spirit and expressed 

intent of the Act. It cannot stand. 

 

There was no question in the minds of the court, Mr. Speaker, 

and I suggest to you, absolutely no question in the minds of the 

public, that what this government intended initially was for 

PURC to have the final decision in setting utility rates. There’s 

no question that that’s what this government intended, but it 

backtracked on that, Mr. Speaker, it backtracked. But the court 

recognized that that was the original intent of that legislation. 

 

Regardless of whether or not that was a good decision, and I 

don’t wish to debate that at this time, regardless of whether or 

not PURC should have had the final decision or the government 

should have had the final decision, the fact of the matter is, is 

that was their intention, Mr. Speaker. That was their intention 

and they reneged on it. 

 

And then we have, for example, the Premier saying in 1986 — 

now it says 5/9/86; I’m assuming that that’s September 5, 1986 

— we have the Premier being quoted as saying, Mr. Speaker 

. . . And this is rather interesting in light of the fact that this 

government has come forward with legislation to abolish 

PURC; this is very interesting. The Premier says: 

 

But PURC is going to be around for a lot longer. We’re all 

better for it. I’d do it again, and I  

wouldn’t hesitate for a moment. 
 

That’s what the Premier said, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to be 

around for a long time. 
 

But something like a year later we see a Bill brought before this 

House that abolishes PURC. And I suggest to you that that’s 

going to leave a very serious question in the minds of the 

public, a very serious question as to the credibility of the 

Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Another example of PC interference with a PURC decision, Mr. 

Speaker, was on cost of rural private line service. The Court of 

Appeal held that the government was wrong to interfere with 

PURC, and that PURC had the right and the obligation to 

approve rates. 
 

But as one editor put it quite succinctly, Mr. Speaker, and I 

can’t take credit for these words because they’re quoted from 

the Bible and printed in this editorial October 3, 1986. He says 

. . . and this is an article on PURC. The title is, “Pulling 

PURC’s teeth could nip government”. And the editorial says, 

“If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off,” is the Bible’s blunt 

suggestion to those who have difficulty living with their 

failings. 
 

And he’s taking that statement, Mr. Speaker, and he’s 

suggesting that that’s what the government’s doing with respect 

to PURC. “If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off.” If you have 

difficulty living with your failings, get rid of them. And that’s 

what this government’s doing with respect to PURC, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what they’re doing. 
 

And there’s absolutely no question, no question in our minds 

that the Minister of Finance was very frustrated by the 

unsuccessful attempts to exert control over PURC’s philosophy, 

Mr. Speaker. And now they are saying PURC may be costing 

too much. And I don’t wish to get into the argument about 

whether we agree with PURC’s philosophy because that’s not 

what we’re debating here. What we’re debating is the 

government reneging on a promise. What we’re debating is the 

government failing to come forward with alternatives to meet 

that promise, and to hold good on that promise. They have 

failed to come forward with alternatives, and I think that they 

should be looking at alternatives. 
 

There’s absolutely no question in our minds that the public 

wanted public participation, public input into setting utility 

rates. There’s no question in my mind, after I look at the 

editorials and all the newspaper articles, and the history with 

respect to PURC, that the press was slanted towards that point 

of view as well. Absolutely no question in my mind. But this 

government has failed to come forth with alternatives, Mr. 

Speaker, totally failed. 
 

We have suggested alternatives, for example, like taking 

representatives that are elected by the consumers’ association or 

like consumer bodies and putting them on the boards of 

directors of Crown corporations so they can have direct input. 

And sure, I may hear from the Minister of Finance that they 

already have ordinary people on the boards of directors, but I’m 

talking about directors, I’m talking about representatives that 

are directly appointed or elected by consumer associations. 

Why wasn’t that alternative explored by the government before 

they came  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2943 

 

forward with this Bill? 

 

We suggested perhaps advisory council or a type of advisory 

council — perhaps that’s not a good name for the kind of body 

that I’m thinking of — that would travel throughout the 

province and would hold non-judicial hearings, hearings of a 

non-judicial nature, to attempt to inform people how utility 

rates are set and get some input from the public. 

 

There has been suggestions also that have been put to me along 

these lines that what we need is a quasi-judicial body like 

PURC, but a great deal less formal than what PURC was, and 

that may have stricter guide-lines set out so that it cannot make 

political decisions such as abolishing cross-subsidization. 

 

And another one that has come to my attention is the possibility 

of an elected body to review utility rates that the people of the 

province have an opportunity to elect. So there are a lot of 

ideas, and I’m sure there are a lot of good minds on both sides 

of this House that can put their mind to what sort of 

improvements we can make and how this promise for public 

participation, which I believe the people of the province want, 

can be held good on. 

 

But we see absolutely no alternatives. Not a one from the PC 

government, Mr. Speaker, not a one. They’re simply going to 

abolish PURC and walk away from their promise and leave the 

people of the province in the lurch. They’re simply going to 

betray the people of the province and not come forward with 

any alternatives. We certainly have not had any brought to our 

attention. We have not been canvassed as to whether or not we 

would be in agreement with any alternatives. And all this, Mr. 

Speaker, all this in spite of the Premier’s comments, as quoted 

by the Star-Phoenix on September 5, that “the board is going to 

be around a lot longer.” All this, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the 

fact that government is still paying lip-service to consumer 

input into utility rates. 

 

But we all know, we all know now, and I know the public of the 

province of Saskatchewan know very well that we cannot take 

the Premier nor this government at its word. Its credibility is 

lacking and they can’t be trusted to keep their promise. 

 

It’s also fairly clear, Mr. Speaker, that the public endorse the 

idea of a public watch-dog. And it’s our opinion that if the 

public thinks this is needed, then in keeping with the 

government’s promise, it should bring forward a package that is 

an alternative and that should have been put on the table here 

today so that when PURC is abolished we look at the alternative 

for consumer input and consumer participation. And that would 

mean, Mr. Speaker, that this government was open and listening 

to the people. But it’s not open and listening to the people 

because it hasn’t come forward with that alternative; it hasn’t 

come forward with that package. 

 

They are doing absolutely nothing, just abolishing PURC. And 

once this Bill is passed, PURC is abolished, and there’s 

absolutely no incentive, Mr. Speaker, for the government to 

have public participation on utility grounds, no incentive for 

them to hold good on their promise once this Bill is abolished. 

There’s no question the PC government and the Premier were 

playing politics when they created PURC, absolutely no 

question. And they played this game for several years, Mr. 

Speaker. They played this game for several years, when they 

had no real intention of letting PURC do its job, no real 

intention. 

 

And now they’re so arrogant, they’re so arrogant, and they feel 

like they’re so safe over there that they don’t even hesitate to 

abolish PURC. And they don’t even bring forward any 

alternatives. They simply, Mr. Speaker, they simply cannot 

tolerate anyone who doesn’t march to their tune and there’s no 

question that PURC did not march to their tune. 

 

PURC and members of PURC were not PC hacks, Mr. Speaker, 

they were not. And they did not march to the PC tune so they 

got axed. And regardless of whether or not I personally agree 

with some of the decisions PURC made, the fact of the matter is 

that I object to the fact that they would get axed because the 

government doesn’t like what they say. 

 

And they will give you the excuse of cost, as I said a number of 

times earlier, Mr. Speaker, but that’s not the real reason. The 

real reason is PURC did not march to its tune. And until the 

government comes forth with a viable and acceptable 

alternative proposal for consumer input we have to register our 

concern, Mr. Speaker, over this government’s failure to fulfil its 

1982 promise. It’s time for this government to pull up its 

bootstraps and quit betraying the people and reneging on its 

promise — it’s time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s time for this government to pull up its bootstraps and 

quit axing public agencies that don’t march to its tune. Axing 

such agencies just proves that this government’s rhetoric about 

open government is hollow, is false, is shallow and is untrue. 

 

The people want openness, Mr. Speaker, and they want input. 

And we are urging this government to listen to the people. 

We’re urging them to come forward with an alternative to the 

Public Utilities Review Commission; we are urging them to do 

that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are many members on this side of the 

House who want to speak to this issue, who would like an 

opportunity to debate the issue with respect to PURC. And for 

that reason I would like to adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 44 — An Act respecting the Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Public Utilities Review Commission Repeal Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve dealt with the main 

Bill, and of course The Public Utilities Review Act had some 

consequential amendments, the particular pieces of legislation 

requiring their rates to be submitted to the Public Utilities 

Review Commission. The consequential amendment will 

reinforce and support the general Bill,  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2944 

 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I note that as we get into the debate on the particular Bill, that 

like everything else, Mr. Speaker, there hasn’t been anything 

new said in this House in about four months. I move second 

reading of the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Yes. With respect to that Bill, Mr. Speaker, if 

the Minister of Finance’s allegation that there hasn’t been 

anything new said in this House is correct — and I don’t agree 

with that; but let’s assume that’s he’s correct — it’s because 

this government’s behaviour time and time again, Mr. Speaker, 

is the same. It makes a promise; it breaks a promise. A public 

watch-dog agency speaks out in a manner that the government 

doesn’t like; it axed the public watch-dog agency. It repeats this 

behaviour over and over and over again. It betrays the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan on its promises. It misleads the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan with respect to gas tax, 

income tax, and so on. And I can go into that argument; I won’t 

do it right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But if the Minister of Finance is hearing the same argument 

over and over again it’s because his actions that be continually 

and repeatedly makes the same error . . . or his government I 

should say, makes the same error and time and time again in the 

manner that I have just mentioned. 

 

I would like, Mr. Speaker, to adjourn the debate on this Bill as 

well. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 12 — An Act to 

amend The Management Accountants Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1600) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 19 — An Act to 

amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 

Bill before us is a Bill that will transfer tax burden away from 

more progressive sources of revenue, of tax revenue available to 

the government, towards a tax on consumer items. 

 

We view that as a regressive shift in taxation policy. I would 

submit that most people, certainly the public of Saskatchewan 

will see it as a regressive shift in taxation policy. And we say 

that it’s regressive, and the people say that it’s regressive 

because the sales tax is not a progressive tax. And by a 

progressive tax, that is not to say that anyone particularly enjoys 

paying taxes, but a  

progressive tax is a tax where the tax you pay are to a great 

extent related to your ability to pay those taxes. Whether you’re 

poor or rich, the taxes you pay are related to your ability, to 

your income. And those are the taxes that you end up paying. 

 

This tax is related to consumption. And whether you’re poor or 

rich is largely irrelevant. What is relevant is that depending on 

what you consume and how much you consume, you end up 

paying the same taxes. In some cases people may in fact pay the 

same, they may consume the same, but the taxes they pay as a 

percentage of their incomes are in fact grossly different. And I 

just want to illustrate that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think most members of the House are aware, but I would 

submit — and let’s take tooth-brushes as an example. I believe 

tooth-brushes are taxable. It might be toilet paper. Toilet paper, 

I think, is also taxable. And whether you’re a millionaire or 

whether you’re a senior citizen living on a fixed income, the 

chances are that you will be paying the same and consuming the 

same in terms of tooth-brushes, or toilet paper for that matter. 

And whether you’re a millionaire or a senior citizen chances are 

that you’re not going to be paying a great deal more for that 

tooth-brush, because there’s a limit. You may pay marginally 

more, but there’s a limit, a limit on the amount of money that 

you will pay for the item. 

 

But irrespective of the income, and whether you’re the 

millionaire or the senior citizen on the fixed income, you will 

end up paying the same tax on that item. And whether it’s 

tooth-brushes or any number of consumer items, there is a limit 

to what people can consume. There is a limit to what they can 

expend in terms of consumer items, but there is no limit on the 

fairness. There is no limit on the taxes that poorer people must 

pay. 

 

And that’s why we call it a regressive tax. It is not a progressive 

tax, and that is why members of this House on our side have 

spoken in great numbers in opposition to this Bill. And that is 

why I and others will speak in opposition to the Bill. And it’s 

hard to understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s hard to understand 

why the PC government, given the access that it does as a 

government, to many and varied bases of revenue, whether it’s 

revenues from resources and, for example, oil companies, 

whether it’s any type or any number of revenue sources that it 

has which are fairer, fairer than a sales tax, would choose at this 

time to increase the sales tax. 

 

We simply don’t understand why they would do that. And we 

don’t understand it in the context of repeated campaign 

commitments by the members opposite as a group, as a party, as 

a policy, individually as members, all saying the same thing — 

all saying the same thing: if we are elected to form a 

government in Saskatchewan, we will do away with the sales 

tax; we will do away with the sales tax. 

 

And now we assume and the people of Saskatchewan assume 

that they were saying these things in 1982 because they 

believed, as many believe, that the sales tax is a regressive tax, 

and that a government who had access to other resources or 

revenue would be working towards  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2945 

 

doing away with that tax. 

 

What we see now is the government increasing the tax, 

increasing the burden, increasing the regressive nature of taxes 

that people must pay in Saskatchewan, as opposed to opting for 

more progressive ways to raise tax revenues. 

 

So it’s hard to understand — and perhaps it’s not so hard to 

understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you consider a couple 

of things. One, when you consider that these people opposite 

will say just about anything to get elected; and secondly, it’s not 

hard to understand when you examine their philosophy and 

their real true beliefs, and what it is that they really believe in. 

 

And that philosophy — if I might put it simply, and it’s a 

simple philosophy — that philosophy is that if a government 

can create the kind of environment and circumstances that 

allows the rich and the wealthy on our society to do well, if we 

give them breaks by shifting taxes away from the rich; if we can 

give them breaks by providing tax incentives; if we can give 

them breaks by providing head taxes — that is to say the same 

tax is to be paid whether you’re poor or rich; and if we can 

provide those kinds of breaks for the rich and the wealthy and 

the well-to-do, then the rich and the wealthy will somehow be 

encouraged, by giving them these breaks they will be 

encouraged to create economic opportunities. These are the 

people that will then build factories, diversify the economy, 

provide many, many opportunities. And then it’s submitted that 

these opportunities will then benefit the rest of the population, 

that the rest can then participate and enjoy and benefit from 

these breaks. 

 

And that’s the simply philosophy that the Progressive 

Conservative Party holds, and we see it practised time and time 

again, whether it’s this Progressive Conservative Party here; 

whether it’s their ideological soul mates in Washington, Ronald 

Reagan and his Republican Party; whether it’s Maggie Thatcher 

in Britain. We see the same philosophy over and over again — 

give breaks to the rich; the rich will somehow create jobs, jobs 

that will then provide benefits for the rest of the population. 

 

And that philosophy, Mr. Speaker, I think, was probably 

summed up best by a former member of this House, Tommy 

Douglas, and he called it, I believe, the . . . I believe he called it 

the “oats and sparrow theory” or philosophy. And it went 

simply that these people believe that if you give all the oats that 

you have to a horse, sooner or later some will get left behind for 

the sparrows. 

 

And I think in a very straightforward way, in a very simple way 

it illustrates the Tory philosophy of taxation, and it illustrates 

the Tory approach to economic development, and it illustrates 

the Tory approach to running government, and it illustrates the 

Tory contempt for society. 

 

This thinking of theirs goes back to their very roots in the 

18th-19th centuries when it was felt that because only the 

wealthy had access to information, only the wealthy had access 

to knowledge, only the wealthy had access to capital, only the 

wealthy had access to education, then it followed that only the 

wealthy were the ones that realistically could create economic 

development  

opportunities, employment opportunities, and therefore the 

purpose of government was to cater to the needs of the wealthy. 

The purpose of government was to assist the wealthy to do the 

things that they wanted to do, which would then be good for all 

of us. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, times are different now, and no matter what 

your income might be, no matter what your income might be, 

people have far greater access to knowledge, have far greater 

access to information. And I just might say that there are 

probably hundreds, thousands of people in Saskatchewan who 

are watching this program, and some watch it religiously. And I 

would submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that there are people in 

Saskatchewan that are every bit as much aware of the governing 

of this province; the administration of this province; what needs 

to be done; what should be done; what’s being done wrong, and 

what’s being done right, as there are members in this House. 

The people out there know. And these are not necessarily 

wealthy people; these are people that know what’s going on. 

 

Times have changed since the 18th and 19th century, something 

that the Progressive Conservative Party and the government 

doesn’t seem to understand. There’s a feeling now that all of us 

can contribute towards building society, that all of us can 

contribute to creating opportunities. People will not accept 19th 

century taxing solutions or variations in today’s times. They 

will not support what I would submit, in a very real sense, is a 

reverse Robin Hood — you know, the Robin Hood of 

Sherwood Forest, Mr. Speaker, the one who took from the rich 

to give to the poor. Well this party seems to believe that if you 

take from the poor, you give it to the rich, and that somehow 

this is good for all of us. 

 

Well I wish they would explain that just a little bit more. I wish 

that more of their members would get up and explain their 

reasoning behind this Bill. We do not believe that hoary old 

trickle-down theory that they subscribe to, that theory which 

says we give it to the rich and somehow this is good for the 

poor. We know different. The people of Saskatchewan will not 

support this increase in the education and health tax. This is, in 

fact, a double-edged blow that they’ve had to contend with from 

this budget. There’s a bitter irony to discussing the E&H tax, 

because as the government proposes to take more from those 

with moderate incomes and take more from the poor, at the 

same time it’s instituted a reduction in services which will see 

the poor and those of moderate incomes again paying 

comparatively more for the services that all of us are entitled to. 

So there is a real bitter irony to discussion on this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. But again it illustrates this government’s beliefs. It 

illustrates the lengths toward . . . that this government will go 

towards in support of their ideology, in support of their 18th, 

19th century thinking as to how you govern a jurisdiction. 

 

The PCs do not simply seem to believe in fairness. They do not 

seem to believe in simple principles, such as ability to pay, and 

that to the extent that it’s possible to do that, tax revenues 

should be raised from people based on their ability to pay, not 

based on what you think you can extract. This is not the 

consumer market-place, Mr. Speaker. This is a government, and 

a government should do things in a fair way. Saskatchewan 

people believe very  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2946 

 

strongly in fairness. 

 

I mentioned yesterday that notwithstanding the difficult times 

that we’re experiencing in this province, Saskatchewan people 

will support a government faced with difficult decisions in these 

difficult times provided, one, they believe the government to be 

honest and above board in explaining the current situation to 

them — and we don’t think that the government has been doing 

that; and secondly, that in apportioning the burden that we must 

all share to get us out of the problems that we’re in, that in 

apportioning that burden, that we do that fairly, and we do that 

across the board. 

 

The E&H tax does not meet those tests. The E&H tax does not 

do that. The E&H tax is a regressive tax. It’s a tax which 

proportionately will tax the poor more than the well-to-do. And 

it’s for those very simple reasons and especially given the fact 

that government does have access to other revenues, and also I 

would say has access to better management, and has access to 

better wisdom so as to not allow the wasteful patronage that 

we’ve seen, because government has access to those things, that 

the people of Saskatchewan will not support this Bill, and we 

will not support this Bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question of 

taxation takes us in a sense to the very heart of any government 

and its policy. It takes us to the heart of how a government will 

deal with its people. It gives us a window on how government 

operates, but more than that, on what it values and what it 

disregards. 

 

Taxation policy really is a question of the trust relationship 

between the people of the province and their elected 

representatives in terms of the taxation policy that the elected 

representative promulgate and perpetuate. It’s something like 

perhaps giving an allowance to a child — the relationship 

between a parent and a child — the tax relationship between 

elected officials and the government and the populace. There’s 

a definite trust relationship when a parent gives an allowance to 

a child to . . . on the part of the child to believe that the parent 

will in fact live up to that responsibility to see that the 

allowance is there on a Saturday morning and, correspondingly, 

that the child earns the allowance or spends it judicially. And 

the same principles pertain to the way in which a government 

deals with money that is given by the people. 

 

With the increase in the 5 per cent sales tax to 7 per cent then, 

we see that this PC government has given us a very concrete 

and clear measure as to how we can evaluate their action, how 

we can evaluate their trust relationship with the people of the 

province. The taxation policy doesn’t just have to do with the 

getting of revenue — it certainly has to do with that, but it also 

has to do with the spending of revenue. And this is especially 

true with the sales tax. 

 

So the E&H tax, by its very name, reflects the getting of 

revenue by virtue of a sales tax and presumably the spending of 

this revenue on education and health purposes. So I’d like 

briefly this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to  

examine the education and health tax to evaluate the actions of 

this government, especially in terms of fiscal responsibility and 

the trust relationship that has been established or disestablished 

by elected representation. 

 

And so where are we to start in this evaluation? What has this 

government done when on June 17 the Minister of Finance 

increased the sales tax from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. First of all, 

we note that they have failed to keep faith, good faith with the 

people of Saskatchewan, and that the Premier has failed to keep 

his word and his election promises when it came to the sales tax 

and its elimination. 

 

What had been promised back in 1982, before the election took 

place, that the PC government, an elected PC government, 

would eliminate the sales tax — not just reduce it, but eliminate 

it entirely. And now we come to their second term, and what do 

we find? We find an increase in the sales tax, of course; that the 

government has failed to keep its promise to the people of 

Saskatchewan; that the people have been betrayed in their trust 

relationship. And that’s happened on the simplest of terms, the 

very failure to keep good faith, to keep an election promise. 

 

But now in a more fundamental level than that, the second thing 

we note about this sales tax increase from 5 per cent to 7 per 

cent is that the PC sales tax increase is fundamentally unfair. 

Quite simply, the sales tax is a regressive form of taxation. It’s 

an inherently regressive form of taxation. And you can take any 

two families in this province with two children, let’s say, and 

with the same basic household needs, and the same basic 

household wants and desires and hopes and aspirations, but not 

with the same two incomes. One earning, say, $25,000 a year, 

and the other earning, say, $50,000 a year. You could take these 

two families and the identical circumstances except for income, 

and you will note that the one earning $25,000 a year is going 

to pay proportionately more of disposable household income in 

sales tax than the household earning $50,000 a year — 

proportionately more for the household on the smaller income. 

And that’s because they will have to pay a 7 per cent sales tax 

on meeting basic family household needs. Whereas the family 

that’s earning $50,000 a year certainly will pay the sales tax on 

basic household family needs, but after that’s been done, after 

the sales tax has been paid — lo and behold! they have the same 

income as the first family still left over for discretionary 

spending purposes, to spend on anything that they please. 

 

And so the principle is that this sales tax is regressive. It takes 

proportionately more from those who have less. And this PC 

sales tax is anything but fair then; it’s exactly the opposite. It 

places the burden of taxation unfairly on low and middle 

income groups, in typical PC fashion. 

 

I can give another example. One the one hand we have, let’s 

say, a senior citizen who goes to buy a tricycle for a grandson 

or granddaughter, a tricycle, let’s say, that costs $50, and on 

that expenditure of $50 will pay a full dollar more by virtue of 

this sales tax increase, and feel it deeply. A senior citizen on a 

fixed income, I say, will feel that $1 increase deeply, as a result 

of this 7 per cent sales tax. Instead of paying $2.50 on a 5 per 

cent basis, that person,  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2947 

 

that senior citizen, would not pay $3.50 on that tricycle as a gift 

to a grandchild. 

 

On the other hand, we can take a young, single lawyer, let’s 

say, who buys, let’s say, a new $50 mirror for his sports car. 

That lawyer will pay the same $3.50 in sales tax, but will 

scarcely feel it at all because that individual is not on a fixed 

income. And that’s how the sales tax works, and that’s why it’s 

unfair. It takes disproportionately from those who can afford it 

least, and who will feel it the most in terms of their disposable 

discretionary spending power. 

 

So in terms of fairness, when all is said and done, what 

Conservative tax reform means is a continuation of unfair tax 

policy, of regressive taxation. Little wonder then that we see the 

PC sales tax increase right here in Saskatchewan, and we see 

their federal cousins talking about — lo and behold! yet a sales 

tax possibly on food, a perpetuation of what is patently unfair 

here in Saskatchewan. And it’s measures like these that do 

nothing to rectify or reform our tax system, a system that is 

viewed increasingly with cynicism and scepticism, that 

encourages people to find tax dodges because they view it as so 

unfair and unjust. 

 

And that leads me, Mr. Speaker, to a third observation in my 

evaluation of this PC tax increase, and that is that this sales tax 

put on by this PC government not only fails to keep good faith, 

not only perpetuates an unfair regressive tax structure but it also 

is not up front with Saskatchewan people in terms of detailing 

its getting and spending. 

 

How many Saskatchewan people, for example, realize that in 

paying just 2 cents on the dollar more in sales tax, that 

collectively they will hand over more than $81 million more in 

sales tax to their government. That’s a 21 per cent increase over 

last year, an increase from $386 million to $467 million. And 

that 2 per cent increase in sales tax, then, actually represents a 

bigger tax grab by this PC government than the increase in the 

sales tax . . . pardon me, the increase in the flat tax that was 

announced in the same budget. That tax grab, the flat tax grab, 

amounts to $52 million more in revenue to the provincial 

government. The sales tax grab amounts to $81 million more 

for the provincial government. All at the same time, and I 

emphasize this, when corporate capital tax is down $4 million, 

and corporation income tax is down $30.4 million. 

 

No wonder we have tax revolt on our hands. No wonder we 

have yet to have one government member stand up and defend 

this tax policy. They simply can’t. They’re afraid to be up front 

and frank about their own policy, and that’s why they can’t 

defend it. 

 

And this brings me finally to the question of fiscal 

responsibility, which as I mentioned at the beginning, is at the 

very centre of taxation policy — the questions of getting tax 

revenue and spending it in responsible fashion. For a fiscally 

responsible government not only looks after the front end of the 

taxation equation, the getting of taxes; keeps faith with its 

people; taxes fairly; and is up front about its tax policy; but a 

responsible government also looks after the back end of 

taxation policy, the spending of it. 

And on this score we see all too clearly the miserable failure of 

this government and of this Premier to manage the 

Saskatchewan economy and the affairs of Saskatchewan people 

in a trustworthy fashion. This education and health tax bears 

eloquent testimony to the fact that, quite simply, there is no 

fiscal responsibility with this government. There is no fiscal 

responsibility. 

 

And I ask the people of Saskatchewan a very simple question. 

Is this sales tax increase, the education and health tax increase 

going to result or issue in increased spending on health and 

educational services? Well it doesn’t take a Ph.D. in economics 

to figure this one out. Anyone who’s lived in this province for 

the last several months, especially those months prior to the 

budget when these tax increases were announced, will know 

full well that that simply isn’t the case. People will know that 

the PCs are increasing the education and health tax at the very 

same time that they’re cutting and slashing education and health 

spending. 

 

Twenty-five years ago right wing political parties in this 

province failed to stop Saskatchewan from becoming the 

birthplace of medicare. And now we have another right wing 

government that is doing everything in its power to make 

Saskatchewan the graveyard of medicare. At the same time that 

it’s increasing taxes, allegedly for education and health, this 

government is closing rural hospitals, is gutting the prescription 

drug plan, is privatizing children’s dental plan, is limiting 

medical coverage for chiropractic care, and is inflating waiting 

lists in Saskatchewan hospitals. Eighty-one million dollars more 

in sales tax over last year, $81 million more in this 2 per cent 

tax increase, and yet less spending on health care — greater 

waiting lists, greater costs for drugs for individual 

Saskatchewan families, which incidentally is an indirect form of 

taxation. 

 

And in education we have essentially or tantamountly the same 

thing. They’ve frozen funding to the University of 

Saskatchewan and the University of Regina for the last two 

years. They’ve cancelled the student bursary programs and 

forced students into debt. They’ve cut one-third of the staff at 

Kelsey Institute in Saskatchewan. And all this enhances 

Saskatchewan education? Hardly. 

 

They’ve cut funding for new school construction in the 

province from some $60 million down to $30 million and yet 

we have an education and health tax. All at the same time we 

have tax increases and cut-backs, and people say, well how can 

this be? How can it be that we pay more and we get less? We 

have an increase in the sales tax, we have an increase in the flat 

tax, we have an increase in the gas tax, and we get less. 

 

Quite simply the answer is that the Premier and this government 

have mismanaged the Saskatchewan economy. They’ve 

squandered our resources during the good times and now when 

the bad times are here there’s nothing left to do but bleed the 

people to death in forms of unfair taxation. 

 

(1630) 

 

They’ve given oil and forest resources away to big  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2948 

 

companies like Weyerhaeuser. They’ve given $10 million to 

Peter Pocklington. They made patronage appointments to 

George Hill and people like Paul Schoenhals. And that’s why 

the rest of us get stuck with an education and health tax, which 

doesn’t go to fund education and health. Instead it goes to pay 

for the PC deficit that has been run up from the day that they 

took office. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a sales tax that fails Saskatchewan 

people. We have a government that has failed Saskatchewan 

people. It has failed to keep faith with Saskatchewan people. 

It’s failed to be fair in its taxation policy. It has failed to be up 

front and frank about that tax policy, and it has failed to be 

fiscally responsible. And I therefore moved, seconded by the 

member for Prince Albert: 

 

That all the words after the word “that” be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

Bill No. 19 not now be read a second time because: 

 

(a) the 40 per cent increase in provincial sales tax is a 

betrayal of the Progressive Conservative promise to 

eliminate the provincial sales tax in their first term of 

office; 

 

(b) the 40 per cent increase in provincial sales tax makes 

Saskatchewan people among the highest taxed people in 

Canada; and 

 

(c) the 40 per cent increase in provincial sales tax is a 

regressive and unfair tax on Saskatchewan families. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, we have moved a motion that 

the flat tax which is proposed by Bill 19 . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — E&H. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — . . . the E&H tax proposed by Bill 19 not be 

approved by this Assembly. 

 

There are a number of reasons that my colleagues have raised 

prior to this day, Mr. Speaker, and most of them relating to 

reasons for the government’s move to raise the flat tax, which 

leads back to the incompetent way in which the government has 

been handled. And secondly, related to the betrayal of the 

people of Saskatchewan, the betrayal of the promise of 1982. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have many more comments that I would 

like to make relating to this motion, but in view of the time 

being 4:30 and us wanting to proceed to the next item of 

business which was Bill 27, which is the item related to the flat 

tax, I would beg leave of this Assembly to adjourn debate on 

this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 27 —  

An Act to amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

allowing me the opportunity to enter this debate. I am 

somewhat surprised, Mr. Speaker, however, that we’re even 

debating this Act to amend The Income Tax Act. I say surprised 

because I remember vividly the Conservative promises in the 

1982 election, an election in which I was a candidate for the 

New Democratic Party, an election in which the Conservatives 

promised to reduce person income tax by some 10 per cent. 

 

They also promised, Mr. Speaker, to eliminate the E&H tax or 

the sales tax, which at that time was 5 per cent, and yet we’ve 

just finished debating in second reading an Act to increase the 

sales tax to 7 per cent. I guess what we have here, Mr. Speaker, 

is more broken promises by the Tories — promises made, 

promises broken. 

 

I also recall the Minister of Finance, the member from 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, earlier this year, when the people of this 

province first learned that government of the Premier, the 

member from Estevan, had underestimated the provincial 

deficit for the year 1986-87 by more than $800,000. And in 

response to a question from the media, the Minister of Finance, 

the minister who is taking these Bills through the legislature, 

said to the media that that’s politicians and that’s the way they 

behave. Well you can mislead the public; you can 

underestimate a budget by some $800 million; you justify it by 

saying, that’s politicians, that’s the way they behave. 

 

Well I think the Minister of Finance can speak for himself, he 

can speak for the members opposite. He sure can’t speak for 

me, the member from Saskatoon Nutana, and he certainly can’t 

speak for this side of the House. He does not speak for New 

Democrats. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have here and in the past, we’ve had a 

promise to remove the 5 per cent E&H tax. And what did they 

do? They increased it to 7 per cent — a broken Conservative 

promise. They promised to reduce personal income tax by 10 

per cent. What did they do? We now have An Act to amend The 

Income Tax Act. They’ve increased the flat tax by another half 

per cent, the total now is one and a half per cent flat tax on net 

income. It’s another broken promise, another Tory politician 

promise, and the situation goes on and on and on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they said last year that we would have a $400 

million deficit in this province. They said that for the year 

1986-87 — that was one year alone. Before the election they 

said that, they said $400 million. After the election, what 

happens? We have a $1.2 billion deficit after the election. 

Another Tory politicians, the member from 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the Finance minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are debating an Act to amend The Income Tax 

Act, an Act to raise the flat tax on Saskatchewan people. What 

this Bill will do, Mr. Speaker, is to take an additional $100 

million in additional taxes out of the pockets of Saskatchewan 

people — people who each and every one of us represent. I 

think the members opposite shouldn’t forget that. You represent 

people and so do we. We represent  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2949 

 

everybody in this province. We represent the taxpayers in this 

province. 

 

And as you’re taking $100 million out of our pockets — and I 

do say our pockets — you have forced municipalities to raise 

taxes on property; you have forced people to take money out of 

their pockets to pay for prescription drugs because of your 

changes to the prescription drug plan; you have eliminated 

dental coverage for children over the age of 16 . . . or over the 

age of 13; you’ve raised sales tax to 7 per cent; and you have 

cut service after service after service. 

 

You are the government of cuts. You are the government of tax 

increases and public service cuts. You increase taxes while you 

cut services. And what you Conservatives have done has 

increased taxes, asked people to pay more; you’ve cut services 

and told people they’ll receive less. That’s what you’ve done. 

 

Now how is that fair? Well it reminds me of my time working 

for the Office of the Rentalsman. And there were times, Mr. 

Speaker, when tenants would complain of huge rent increases, 

while landlords withdrew services. When they moved in . . and 

I’ll give you an example, Mr. Speaker. When the tenant moved 

in the rent might be $400 a month for a two-bedroom 

apartment. And they had a dishwasher, and they had a fridge 

and stove; they had air-conditioning; the place was freshly 

painted. And then over time the equipment started to fall apart. 

But the rent kept going up and up and up. And they’d be paying 

$500 a month for an apartment that had worn out carpets, had 

no fridge and stove, a dishwasher that didn’t work, a paint job 

that needed replacing. And that was the situation. 

 

Well the rent is going up in Saskatchewan, hon. members, and 

the equipment is falling apart, Mr. Speaker. That’s what’s 

happening in Saskatchewan right now. 

 

And I want to talk about what this flat tax will do to ordinary 

people, ordinary working people who do not have the 

advantages as some of the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, this 

flat tax is on net income. It does not come into effect after 

you’ve deducted your basic exemptions — your spousal 

deductions, your children’s deductions, your deductions to your 

church or your charity, your deduction for your disability. It 

doesn’t come into effect after all of those things have been 

taken into consideration. It comes into effect after you’ve been 

able to deduct allowable business investment losses, or 

investment in motion pictures, or investments in legal and 

accounting fees, so you can run your business or petroleum 

exploration ventures. Those things are deducted before the flat 

tax is applied. 

 

Or what about carrying charges which include interest paid on 

money borrowed to earn investment income? How many 

citizens in this province, hon. members opposite, have the 

finances and the resources to invest in motion pictures or drill 

oil wells, or invest in buildings, or afford investment losses. 

Very few people, very few people. Most people, most taxpayers 

in this province are able to get any kind of tax advantage by 

deducting personal exemptions. Their children, their charity, 

their  

church, those are the kinds of things they can deduct. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that I represent, who are working 

people in this province, don’t have the ability and the financial 

resources available I should say, to invest in these kinds of 

opportunities that the big business friends of the members 

opposite can invest in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an unfair Bill. It’s a betrayal. They have 

gone against everything that they stood for in that 1982 

election. They promised the people of this province to reduce 

personal income tax by 10 per cent. And have they done it? The 

answer is no. People are paying more and more money in 

income tax and receiving fewer and fewer services. That’s what 

you people are about. That’s what you people are about and we 

cannot support this Bill to increase the flat tax. It’s not a fair 

tax. It takes money out of the pockets of ordinary working 

people; it does not take money out of the pockets of your big 

business friends. 

 

And we will not be supporting this Bill, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving an amendment 

right after my presentation and so before I do that I will proceed 

to make statements in regards to the motion. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I might state that the PC Government 

of Saskatchewan is following a pattern that we are seeing on an 

international level, whether it’s in Britain with the Thatcher 

government, or whether it’s with the Regain government in the 

United States. They seem to be following a pattern where they 

will tax the ordinary people and let big business go free in terms 

of less taxes for them. 

 

(1645) 

 

In regards to the income tax in general, I would like to update 

the public in regards to this general trend. One must remember 

that in 1962 the personal income tax was 32 per cent. In 1987 

the personal income tax rate is 46 per cent. From 32 to 46 per 

cent — there has been a jump. These figures are taken from the 

Wilson budget figures. 

 

There’s also been a jump from . . . there’s also been a decrease 

in the corporate tax level. In 1962 the amount of money we 

received from corporate taxation was 20 per cent; in 1987 the 

figure is 10.5 per cent. In other words, what we see here, Mr. 

Speaker, is an increase of 14 per cent of payment by ordinary 

people across Canada and Saskatchewan, and the large-scale 

corporations don’t have to pay . . . they only have to pay half as 

much as what they used to in 192. I would like to start out . . . 

So that’s the general background, Mr. Speaker, in regards to 

that. 

 

We see this PC government providing more give-aways and 

less taxes to big business, at the same time it’s cut and slash for 

ordinary people and increases the taxation. 

 

When we look at the flat tax, one has to look at the  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2950 

 

promises made first of all by the PC government. And if we 

look at the platform in 1982, we look at this, and I quote: this, 

Mr. Speaker, says here, “Elect Grant Schmidt, the progressive 

alternative.” And it goes on to say here, “PC policies for good 

government.” And right underneath it, it says, “tax cuts.” And 

the minister had this to write at that point in time; he said, 

“reduce provincial income tax by 10 per cent.” Not only did the 

Minister of Human Resources say that at that point in time in 

history, Mr. Speaker, he also said, and I quote, “concern for 

people.” It said, “Real families can count on a Progressive 

Conservative government to reduce taxes.” It says here on this 

information, under it says, “Elect Grant Schmidt.” It must be 

our minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’d like to ask the hon. member 

to refrain from using the member’s name. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I though that I could quote from a 

. . . could I get you to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are you challenging the Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member may have thought that, and 

perhaps that in fact has at times been used. However, actually, 

according to Beauchesne’s the use of a member’s name is not 

permitted, even in quotes. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Could you give me the citation that 

covers that, please. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Beauchesne’s 

citation 319, reads: 

 

It is the custom in the House that no Member should refer 

to another by name. Members should be referred to in the 

third person . . . (etc.) 

 

Then we go on to citation 328: 

 

A member may read extracts from documents, books or 

other printed publications as part of his speech provided in 

so doing he does not infringe on any point of order. 

 

Debate continues. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — It says here then, Mr. Speaker, it went on to say 

that the Minister of Human Resources at that point in time said: 

 

Real families can count on a Progressive Conservative 

government to reduce taxes. 

 

It also went on to state: 

 

Funding for health and education will be increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the same minister who this year we have seen 

make some of the most outrageous and cowardly cuts in the 

history of the Saskatchewan legislature. 

I would state also too, Mr. Speaker, as I look at the idea of 

promises being broken, I looked at a former member of 

Education, the present Minister of Energy. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The member from Swift Current. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — And she reminds me that she’s the member of 

Swift Current. At that point in time, she stated: 

 

A Progressive Conservative government is dedicated 

(dedicated) to phasing out provincial sales tax and 

reducing personal income tax by 10 per cent. 

 

I will say now, this same minister of Education, who is out 

there to protect our education system, is the same minister who 

is now joining her colleagues to put across this unfair, “unflat” 

tax. 

 

As I look to the history of what has been said, from promises 

we go from the statements by the PC MLAs to the present 

reality. We are seeing the betrayal where they say one thing and 

they do another. They bring on this unfair taxation to ordinary 

people. And I was reading this here editorial from the Prairie 

Messenger on April 24, 1985 and it says: 

 

Hefty (and I quote, hefty) deductions can still be made 

before the declaration of one’s net income — deductions 

few farmers or $30,000 wage earners are in a position to 

make. 

 

I also quote on the same editorial: 

 

The most significant factor in the income tax reform which 

Mr. Andrew has introduced is not that the rich will finally 

begin paying at least a minimum amount, it is that the 

lower middle class will begin to pay a large share. And 

that includes an endangered spies, the small family farmer. 

 

So here is again information even from the press who has 

picked up that this unfair, unflat tax . . . this flat tax is the one 

that hits out at ordinary people. 

 

Also there is another statement by the Star-Phoenix on April 12, 

’85, and this is from a public accountant, Don Ackerman. It 

says here, and I quote: 

 

Ackerman is particularly upset with the flat tax being 

levied on the calculation of taxable income section of the 

form. In that section a person may deduct RRSP 

contributions, RHOSP contributions, union dues, child 

care expenses, management fees, accounting fees, 

investment counselling fees, and safety deposit fees — all 

deductions are subtracted from the total income to arrive at 

net income, the target of the flat tax. 

 

So here again is an example where the ordinary people are 

being treated unfairly. It is a betrayal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what about the other point, the other point, Mr. Speaker, 

where what does it do in regards to the rich? And again, I will 

quote from the Star-Phoenix on April 16,  

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2951 

 

1985, and it says here: 

 

“Loopholes (and I quote) loopholes are available to allow 

rich taxpayers to dodge paying at least part of the 1 per 

cent flat tax proposed in the provincial budget,” Finance 

Minister Bob Andrew told the legislature today. 

 

Along with Prime Minister Grant Devine . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I know the hon. member 

is not doing it on purpose; you kind of get into a habit, but he 

knows that hon. members’ names shouldn’t be . . . What’s your 

point of order? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to raise a point of order which 

was raised before and which is now being referred to now, Mr. 

Speaker. And I want to know how it is possible for a member, 

reading a direct quotation, to alter the quotation and still 

maintain that it’s a direct quotation. That is impossible, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would suggest that citations that you give us 

refer to other discretions a member may make with regard to 

naming members. 

 

And I can understand the point of order when it’s easily 

identifiable who the person is, and to make personal reference 

to them is unparliamentary and not permitted by the rules. But 

there may be a case, Mr. Speaker, where a member is . . . it’s 

not clear whether the member that’s being referred to happens 

to be a member of this Assembly. 

 

For example, election promises made in an election, or perhaps 

the person was a Liberal at one time and is now a Conservative, 

or something of that nature. But I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, 

that you cannot make a direct quote by altering the quote; then 

it is not a direct quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I thank the hon. member for his concerns, 

however Beauchesne does not make any exceptions to 

circumstances. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I’ll apologize for the statement that I made, 

then made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to then move on to the issue of what the Financial 

Post has to say on April 20, and what they say is: 

 

We would like to see a simpler and fairer income tax 

system. And we would like to see a system that 

encourages people to maximize their income and then to 

be more productive, rather than to minimize their tax. But 

the new, so-called flat tax contained in the Saskatchewan 

budget strikes us as not the way to achieve these goals. Far 

from catching these high-income earners who pay little 

tax, the essential purpose of the minimum tax, it’s tougher, 

relatively, on those people with lower incomes. 

 

So in general, Mr. Speaker, I would say this flat tax hits out at 

ordinary people, and it leaves the large multinational 

corporations basically out there not paying as much tax. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, we also know its effects, that our 

educational system suffers, and so on. So with that  

statement, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move this amendment 

— this motion, I mean, which is seconded by the member from 

Saskatoon University, and the motion states: 

 

That all the words after the word “That” be deleted, and 

the following substituted therefor: Bill 27 not now be read 

a second time because: 

 

(a) the 50 per cent increase in the provincial flat tax is a 

betrayal of the Progressive Conservative promise to 

reduce income taxes by 10 per cent; 

 

(b) the 50 per cent increase in the provincial flat tax 

makes Saskatchewan people among the highest taxed in 

Canada; and 

 

(c) the 50 per cent increase in the provincial flat tax 

unfairly increases the tax burden on low and middle 

income Saskatchewan families. 

 

So with that I make that motion. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I have a number of things I’d 

like to say on this motion, but I see it’s 5 o’clock. I’ll call it 5 

o’clock and adjourn the debate if I could. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

  



 

September 29, 1987 

2952 

 

Corrigendum 

 

In the Hansard 85B of September 28, 1987 on page 2907 in the 

lower portion of the left hand column, the address of the New 

York trade office should read 630 — 5th Avenue. 

 

[NOTE: The online version has been corrected.] 

 


