


















































June 24, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 24, 1987 
 

691 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to 
welcome to the House 18 grade 7 and 8 students from St. 
Margaret School in the constituency of Moose Jaw South. With 
them today is their teacher, Mr. Claude Morin, and their 
chaperon, Mrs. Thingvold. I’m sure they have already enjoyed 
the tour of the building, and I hope they will enjoy question 
period. I look forward to meeting with them immediately 
following question period. I would ask all members to, with me, 
welcome these students. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Through 
you, and to all members of the House, I’d like to introduce 19 
students, grades 7 and 8, seated in east gallery. They’re from 
Drake School in my constituency. Attending with them is their 
teacher, Lyle Emmons, Donna Balon, Judy Dumanski, and 
Esther Laskowski. I want to welcome the students and their 
chaperons here today, and their teacher. 
 
I hope you enjoy the proceedings, and shortly after the question 
period I’ll have the pleasure of joining with you for a few 
drinks and some questions and some information with respect to 
the operation of the House. 
 
Will all members join with me to welcome the students. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure for me to 
introduce to you and through you, Miss Regina, a member of 
my constituency. She is with her father. I’d like to introduce 
Donna Rybchuk and her father, Metro Rybchuk. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I know that all members will 
wish her the very best when she competes in the Miss Canada 
Pageant in October. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to members of the Assembly a number of 
students from Regina Plains Community College, from the 
University of Regina, and from the Wascana Institute, who are 
seated in all three galleries today. We want to welcome these 
students to the Assembly. I’m sure they’ll enjoy the question 
period and the ensuing debate. And would you extend a warm 
welcome to them, please. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, members will know  

that there is in Regina a cancer patient lodge where cancer 
patients, who are receiving treatment, house themselves. And it 
has been a custom to have some patients visit our Assembly, 
and it is happening again today. And I would like, Mr. Speaker, 
to introduce to you, and to all members of the House, some nine 
patients seated in the Speaker’s gallery who are here with their 
staff member, Shirley Murray, and with two volunteer drivers, 
Mary Backman and Merna Kew. 
 
I hope they will enjoy their stay with us. It has been something 
of a custom for them to come. I look forward to meeting with 
them after question period in the Speaker'’ boardroom when we 
can have an opportunity to discuss the proceedings they have 
witnessed. And I ask all hon. members to assist me in greeting 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, would 
like to draw your attention and, through you to the members of 
the House, introduce a group of 23 grade 5 students from the 
Stewart Russell Elementary School in the constituency of 
Regina North East in the city. It’s a great way to spend the last 
day of school prior to Friday, when I think they’ll be getting 
their report cards, which I’m sure all will be terrific report 
cards. 
 
Also with the students are their teacher, June Heinrichs, and 
chaperons, Bryan Dovell, Georgina Fluter, Dale Gerhardt, 
Tracy Loewen and Glenn Loewen, Glen Martens, Shirley 
Morphy, and Joan Pelzer. Please join with me, Mr. Speaker, and 
members, in welcoming these students and extending to them 
our best wishes for a very enjoyable and educational stay in the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Minister of 
Urban Affairs I, too, would like to welcome Miss Regina to this 
Chamber. As the member for Regina South, it’s very 
encouraging to see her attend as Miss Canada. 
 
But I should tell her and the Assembly that I have had the 
opportunity of meeting Miss Prince Albert on the weekend and 
my wife served as a judge, with due respect to the Moose Jaw 
pageant, who will also be attending. And the competition is 
going to be very, very difficult, but I’m proud to say we have 
some young, talented, beautiful young ladies representing 
Saskatchewan as only they can. Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Cuts at Saskatchewan Technical Institutes 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
Minister of Education, my question is to the Premier, and it 
concerns the cuts that the government has made in the courses, 
in the student spaces, and the instructional staff at 
Saskatchewan’s technical institutes. 
 
And my first question deals with the Kelsey Institute in 
  



 
June 24, 1987 

692 
 

Saskatoon. The cuts at Kelsey have all but devastated that 
institution. There have been fired 74 instructors, another 39 
forced to take early retirement, six programs have been 
abolished, and there have been dramatic cut-backs in 12 more. 
 
My question, Mr. Premier, is this: how can you justify wiping 
out hundreds of student training spaces at the Kelsey Institute, 
where over 4,700 students are waiting to get in next year, and 
there are only just over 1,000 training spaces available? Under 
those circumstances, why cut courses? Why cut space? Why cut 
staff? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 
member, he will know that we increased funding to technical 
schools 21 per cent since we’ve been in office in our first term. 
During that period of time we built a brand-new technical 
school in Prince Albert. 
 
And looking at the classes that need to be taught to stay 
competitive with Americans, with Japanese, with Europeans 
and others, we found, in consulting with people in education, 
that some new classes needed to be taught, and that in fact some 
instructors needed upgrading. And in some cases, Mr. Speaker, 
we found that not many students at all were attending particular 
classes, maybe just a handful, and in other cases we found that 
when they did graduate they couldn’t find the appropriate 
market for their skills because the classes were no longer as 
relevant as they could be. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are modifying and rebuilding the 
educational system so in fact the students will be taking what’s 
appropriate, so that the classes will be appropriate to fit the 
market conditions of today. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we have 
expanded the technical school by 21 per cent, when you look at 
the increase in funding from 1982 through 1986-87. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Students 
who are speaking with us are asking for protection from your 
rebuilding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I refer now to the Wascana Institute 
and the cuts you have made there such as in accounting, 
administrative studies, and business programming, where I am 
advised there has been a good opportunity to get jobs. And the 
cuts, as I understand it, Mr. Premier, will force students in these 
courses to move to other cities to complete their studies. In 
many cases they’re half-way through their course. 
 
My question is this: will Wascana Institute students, forced to 
move for the most part to STI in Moose Jaw to complete their 
courses, receive any financial assistance to relocate in Moose 
Jaw, or any travel assistance to commute to Moose Jaw, since 
they are being interrupted in the middle of their course, and 
since this is being brought about by a decision of your 
government? Will you help these students to complete the 
courses which they have already commenced? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
knows that people come from Kindersley, and they come from 
North Battleford, and they come from Prince Albert, and they 
may come from Estevan to go to technical schools and Wascana 
Institute in Regina. So they don’t just all live in Regina. When 
we provide an educational program that is specialized — and 
some will be specialized in Regina; some will be in Prince 
Albert; and some will be in Moose Jaw — then it’s appropriate 
that people take the classes there. Now we can’t have all the 
areas of specialization in every jurisdiction or every 
community. 
 
With the advice of the technical school people and educational 
people, they say, specialize in this area in Moose Jaw; 
specialize this area in Wascana . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — . . . specialize in this area in Prince 
Albert, which I believe you’ll see will be the case. The same 
applies to Kelsey. With our increase in expenditures, we’re 
asking for specialization, and the students will pick up on the 
classes. Now you have to begin sometime. If you said you 
would begin three years from now or five years from now, 
we’re saying, in reviewing the entire system to date, that the 
specialization and the new upgrading in classes is necessary. 
Some retraining of technical people and professors is necessary, 
and some new classes are necessary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Quick supplementary, Mr. Premier. If I 
accept your view that the technical institutes should specialize, 
and therefore somebody might have to go to Prince Albert for 
one course and Moose Jaw for another, do you not recognize 
that where you interrupt the student in the middle of the course, 
there is a separate situation and you ought to assist that student 
to relocate — relocate because of a decision which you made to 
interrupt his course in the middle of its pursuit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if a student is allowed to 
finish one year here . . . I mean, I’m sure you have attended 
more than one university, and I have, and many here have. So 
when you’re in your post-secondary education, you can go for a 
year at the University of Saskatchewan, a year at the University 
of Alberta, and you may finish your . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 
if you can get your appropriate classes and you’re going to have 
specialization which gives you a better education, a more 
marketable education, but you have to go to another campus to 
finish it, that’s not unreasonable. In fact, students do it all the 
time. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, again in the absence of the 
minister I direct my question to the Premier. And I want to ask 
you, Mr. Premier, about the way your government  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

693 
 

cast aside the more than 140 instructors of technical institutes in 
Saskatchewan. I want to say that I find particularly appalling 
the way that the former principal of the STI (Saskatchewan 
Technical Institute) in Moose Jaw, Dr. Andy Nicol, was 
dismissed. 
 
And let me make it clear that my question is about the way that 
he was dismissed. And you will know, Mr. Premier, that he was 
dismissed without notice, while he was supervised to clear out 
his desk immediately, was given the infamous “red box” 
treatment that has become a characteristic of dismissals in the 
Government of Saskatchewan. He was then escorted from the 
building, was told he could not even attend the graduation 
ceremony which was scheduled to happen a few days later. 
 
That’s just one of the examples, Mr. Premier. And I ask you, 
how can you justify this kind of disgusting, inhumane treatment 
of professional educators in Saskatchewan who have dedicated 
themselves to students and the people of Saskatchewan? Can 
you justify that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell the hon. member 
from Moose Jaw that the . . . His Worship the mayor, Scoop 
Lewry, from Moose Jaw, wrote me with respect to Dr. Nicol 
and asked me to examine what was happening with respect to 
Dr. Nicol. I responded to His Worship the mayor, and I said Dr. 
Nicol can teach and has taught for some time. I said we are 
putting together a consolidation and Dr. Nicol will be able to 
apply for any number of positions that are available, and that he 
will be, and in fact he will be in . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me add specifically, with 
respect to changing departments or changing any process. Let 
me say this. The hon. member’s probably had some classes at 
university; members here on either side have probably gone to 
school. I’ve had several, probably 10 years of it. I have never 
had a class . . . I’ve never had a class at university that showed 
me or told me in theory or in any other way how you can 
down-size or modify a department and make all the employees 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Let me repeat the 
question, because I asked a specific question. I would like a 
specific answer to the specific question. Are you proud of the 
way that you dismissed the principal of the STI (Saskatchewan 
Technical Institute), and will you justify it for the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand. I can 
understand why it would be difficult for anybody to be advised 
that their position is no longer there. I can understand that. It’s 
not . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. He is answering  

the question — perhaps not exactly the way some members 
might like, but it is on the topic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s never very easy when 
you have a position that will be vacant and you inform the 
individual that it will be vacant. It’s not easy. And I understand 
that, and I have some sympathy — and a great deal of sympathy 
— for people who have to experience that. 
 
Nobody ever said that it would be simple to change a 
department from this to this. You advise me how you would 
change a department, how you would consolidate, or how you 
would down-size and make it easy for the people who you 
advise and say, this position is no longer relevant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have sympathy for the individuals that have to 
experience the fact that their position is no longer relevant. In 
many cases, we’re going to have to modify it, and we have. 
 

Elimination of Saskatchewan Student Bursary Program 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier, 
again, in the absence of the Minister of Education. And it 
concerns the elimination of the Saskatchewan student bursary 
program announced in last week’s budget. 
 
You’ve replaced student bursaries, which don’t have to be paid 
back, with student loans that do have to be paid back. You 
claim that these new student loans are forgivable loans, based 
on academic performance. But my enquiries reveal that a 
student must now take out nearly $6,000 in student loans before 
any portion of that loan is deemed forgivable. And even then, 
only that portion above the 6,000 is redeemable. My question 
is: will you now admit, Mr. Premier, that this change which 
destroys the student bursary program forces students to go 
heavily into debt to get an education? And further, will you 
admit that this kind of debt load represents an enormous 
obstacle for low-income students and middle-income students 
to be able to afford an education? Will you acknowledge that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly won’t 
acknowledge that. I can acknowledge to the students and to the 
parents and to the people of Saskatchewan that our funding for 
universities is up 38 per cent, is the highest in western Canada, 
in our first term of office — 38 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no other administration provided 6 per cent money 
to students, and the loan bursary combination has always been 
there as I understand it. You’ve had some loans and you’ve had 
some bursaries. And to ask for performance and say that you’re 
going to be able to forgive some of the money that’s going to 
the students based on performance, I believe, is something that 
has been recommended by academics and by parents and by 
people in the community. 
 
They appreciate that we’ve got 6 per cent money there. They 
appreciate the fact that we have increased our  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

694 
 

funding to universities 38 per cent, and the combination of 
student loans and of bursaries and the increase in funding is 
precisely what people have been asking for. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Premier, you know that, under the former 
NDP government, in 1981 students only have to borrow $1,100 
in loan before they got a bursary. Then your government was 
elected, and the amount they had to borrow doubled. Now today 
you’re telling students that they need to borrow $5,940 in loan 
before they get a bursary. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you acknowledge that today in Saskatchewan 
students have to borrow five times as much in the form of a 
loan compared with what they did in 1981 before they’re 
eligible for a bursary. Now do you honestly . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! I think that the member 
is going on a little bit too long in the preamble to his question. 
Please put the question. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, my question is: will you 
acknowledge that students now have to borrow five times as 
much as they did in 1981 before they can get a bursary, and will 
you further acknowledge that this is, in effect, creating a new 
generation of students that are going to leave university with 
debts of at least $25,000? Will you acknowledge that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, Mr. Speaker, I won’t acknowledge 
that. The students in the province of Saskatchewan know that 
they’ve had more funding and more protection than they’ve 
ever had in the history of education in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The fact that we would increase our expenditures and protect 
students . . . And you can look at other jurisdictions, and we’ve 
compared the figures. The members opposite may not want to 
review them and look at them, but in our jurisdictions, increase 
in funding is up 38 per cent, and we’ve provided the 
low-interest loans which were never provided before. In fact, if 
I just might add, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 when we were first 
elected, interest rates . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You 
mention interest rates. Interest rates were at 20 percent, and you 
didn’t do a thing to help students — nothing to help students 
when interest rates were 20 per cent. We stepped in and said, 
the cap will be 6 per cent for students, and they’ve welcomed 
that ever since we’ve done it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Before question period goes on 
any further, I’d just like to make one or two comments about 
the questions and the answers, and I don’t mean to cast blame 
on specific individuals, but I think if we were listening to some 
of the supplementaries, they kind of have a little long of 
preamble, and while they place a question, sometimes they have 
two parts. Sometimes the answers are going on a little longer 
than they need to, and in order for us to have a good, crisp 
question period, I’d like all members to keep those things in 
mind. 
 

Mr. Prebble: — One final supplementary, MR. Speaker. My 
question to the Premier will be very short indeed. Mr. Premier, 
during the election you said you were going to make 
post-secondary education more accessible to students. Before 
the election students only had to borrow $2,680 in loan before 
they got a bursary. Why is it that after the election, you’ve 
broken your promise to students and are now requiring them to 
borrow $5,940 in loan before they get a bursary? Why have you 
broken your promise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is saying 
to me and to students that he doesn’t believe in performance. 
And if there’s any relationship, it would be between 
performance and bursaries and loans. Mr. Speaker, the 
graduates from the university and the technical schools are 
going to have to compete in the real world when it comes to 
performance to get the jobs . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: —. Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
Please allow the Premier to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we are providing more 
funds for university than we have in the history of 
Saskatchewan. That’s a fact. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re basing 
some of the money we’re providing to students on the basis of 
performance of academic careers. Now I believe there’s a link, 
and a legitimate link between performance and the funds that 
are going to students. And I believe most Saskatchewan people 
would agree with me, and that’s precisely why we’ve provided 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Changes Made to Saskatchewan Community Colleges 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister 
of Education I would direct this question to the Premier. It 
concerns the drastic changes that the Department of Education 
has made to Saskatchewan’s 15 community colleges. The four 
urban community colleges have been swallowed up by your 
new centralized technical institute, losing their local boards and 
their local autonomy in the process. This fact was a particular 
concern in my constituency of Prince Albert, where the Prince 
Albert Regional College, which not only had an autonomous 
local board, but also had four board members elected by the 
community. 
 
My question is, Mr. Speaker: how does your decision to 
centralize education jive with your government’s and your 
party’s position to decentralize government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to 
specialization and decentralization, there’s a place for both. If I 
might use an example. Today I opened a brand new crop 
insurance building in Melville, okay, which is decentralization. 
Okay? And that corporation is among the farmers, it’s in rural 
Saskatchewan, and it’s very successful and very positive, both 
for people here and outside. 
  



 
June 24, 1987 

695 
 

When you’re looking at education, I just went through the 
exercise of explaining to the hon. member, the Leader of the 
Opposition, that we need to specialize. And we can’t have a 
little smattering of everything on every campus or every 
community college, because you won’t get the quality of 
education — the quality. 
 
Now when we want to provide that quality we’re going to 
consolidate and say, in this area, in this junior college, we will 
be able to provide top-notch quality here. In technical schools 
we’ll be able to provide the quality in this area. 
 
In Prince Albert, for example, Mr. Speaker, we will teach 
different classes there than we will in Kelsey, or that we will in 
Wascana. The University of Regina will not have the same 
departments and colleges, likely, as the University of 
Saskatoon, because you shouldn’t have either duplication, and 
you shouldn’t have either duplication, and you shouldn’t be 
without quality. So the combination, you can decentralize 
where it’s appropriate . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Supplementary. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The Premier talks about quality. Mr. 
Premier, your decision to centralize education in this province 
has already meant loss of instructors and other staff in 
Saskatchewan’s community colleges. Ten more were dismissed 
in Regina just this morning, and the loss of dozens of courses. 
Now how can you call this dismissal of these 10 instructors and 
the loss of dozens of courses here and around the province, 
progress? How can you call that progress? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, to be fair, the member from 
Prince Albert could at least acknowledge that a brand-new 
technical school in Prince Albert is fair if he likes to see growth 
in education. I have never heard him give me or this 
administration one bouquet about the new technical institute of 
Prince Albert. Now he’s talking about changing 10 instructors 
in Regina and he says that’s unfair. Well obviously, again in all 
respects, the members opposite can’t have it both ways. You 
don’t give us a bouquet when we build a brand-new technical 
institute or we add 38 per cent in government funding for 
universities — not one word of bouquet. When we change 10 
instructors, we’re going to upgrade them so you can have 
specialized, fine-quality education — you can condemn. 
 
Well we will provide good education and more institutes and 
better universities because we will have the courage to make the 
changes that re right. We won’t just sit in the dark and put 
blinkers on and get defeated twice in a row because we 
wouldn’t make . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Supplementary. Mr. Premier, the reason you 
lost two seats in Prince Albert were because you did not 
consult. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Neither did you consult with the community 
colleges before you made sweeping changes. I want to know: 
do you know, Mr. Minister, that by changing the boundaries of 
the community colleges that people now in Buckland, just one 
kilometre north of Prince Albert, have to be serviced by a 
community college from Nipawin, 140 kilometres away? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I won’t accept that 
information. I will take it on notice to find out if that’s, in fact, 
true. I will say that the minister can respond in specific detail 
with respect to the boundaries . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Next question. 
 
Rumoured Sale of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Transportation Company. Mr. 
Minister, has the Saskatchewan Transportation company been 
sold to Grey Goose Bus Lines of Manitoba, as is persistently 
rumoured, or has it been sold to any other firm, and if so, can 
you please provide this Assembly and the people of 
Saskatchewan with the full details? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can give the 
hon. member opposite, and I can give the people of 
Saskatchewan, the assurance that the bus company, contrary to 
rumours, perhaps started by members of your party, has not 
been sold. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because these rumours 
are so persistent and are so consistent and persistent and 
passenger and freight is so beneficial to rural Saskatchewan, my 
question to the minister is simply: is your government in 
negotiations with Grey Goose, or any other company, for the 
purchase of STC at this time, at any level, and if so, what is the 
state of those negotiations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have already 
stated to the hon. member opposite that the Saskatchewan 
Transportation company has not been sold, and I would suggest 
to the member opposite that if he were here in a co-operative 
spirit, if he were here in. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — If he were here in the best interests of 
his constituents, he would do his best to go to the people who 
were starting the rumours about the bus company being sold 
and inform them that I have given you my assurance that the 
bus company indeed has not been sold. 
 
Mr. Trew: — My question was very simple: is Saskatchewan 
Transportation in the process of  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

696 
 

negotiating? Are you or anyone from . . . involved with 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company . . . involved in the 
negotiation of sale of that company to Grey Goose of Winnipeg 
or to any other firm? Are you in negotiations for sale? Simple 
question. Yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I will respond to the hon. member 
opposite once again. The company has not been sold. You can 
go back to your people . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please, 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — You can go back to your people, 
whoever is starting the rumours and you can give them that 
information that the bus company has not been sold. You can 
also give them the information . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — You can also give them the information 
that I am not in the process of negotiating with Grey Goose 
from Winnipeg, or some folks from Halifax, or wherever else 
you want to come up with these rumours. We are not in the 
process of negotiations for the sale of the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company at this point in time. 
 

Student Centre at University of Regina 
 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the minister 
from advanced education, I direct this question to the Premier. 
 
Just before the last provincial election, Mr. Premier, with a 
great deal of fanfare, your government promised that it would 
pay 50 per cent of the cost of constructing a new student centre 
at the University of Regina, and 100 per cent of the cost of day 
cares in the children’s centre in the old building. 
 
During the election the PC party pointed to this promise as 
evidence of your commitment to the University of Regina, and 
after the election you betrayed that promise and reneged on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Does the member have a question? 
 
Ms. Simard: — My question is: Mr. Premier, will you do the 
honourable thing and live up to your commitment now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as my hon. colleague 
knows, we have deferred several projects, and I can give her an 
example. We’re building a regional hospital in my riding of 
Estevan. We’ve raised over $8 million locally, and we’ve 
deferred it because we can’t do them all at once. 
 
I am asking my constituents to do that, and people in Prince 
Albert, or people e in Moose Jaw, or people in Regina, and 
other places. We will build the student centre, but we can’t 
build them all at once when we’re short of money — and the 
hon. member knows that. 
 

So we’re asking all constituents and all people of Saskatchewan 
to bear with us. We have a bigger budget than we did a year 
ago, I mean increased expenditures. But we’re short about a 
billion dollars because of wheat prices and potash prices. And 
she complains . . . I’m sure she understands it. If you have a 
deficit on one hand, and you don’t like cuts in the other, and 
you don’t like taxes, you have to come up with an alternative, 
and I haven’t heard any yet. 
 
So yes, Mr. Speaker, we will build it, but we’re going to defer it 
until we can have the money to put them all together in a fair 
fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Hon. members 
should know that when the Speaker is on his feet, regardless of 
how they may feel like making comments, to resist making 
comments from their desks. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to lay 
on the Table before the Assembly, the report of the 
Ombudsman, covering the period January 1, 1986 to December 
31, 1986. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Privilege 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Also before orders of the day, I would like to 
read to the Assembly the following statement: on Thursday, 
June 18, 1987, the hon. member for Regina Elphinstone raised a 
point of privilege concerning certain statements made outside 
the House by the Minister of Justice about the Legislative 
Counsel and Law Clerk. I deferred my ruling at that time. 
 
I have now had an opportunity to review the point raised and 
the circumstances surrounding it. I first want it clearly 
understood by all members that it is not the role of the Speaker 
to decide if the privileges of the Assembly have been breached. 
I refer all hon. members to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules 
and Forms, Fifth Edition, pages 24 to 25: 
 

(1) A question of order concerns the interpretation to be 
put upon the rules of procedure and is a matter for the 
Speaker or, in a committee, for the Chairman to determine. 
 
(2) A question of privilege, on the other hand, is a question 
partly of fact and partly of law — the law of contempt of 
Parliament — and is a matter for the House to determine. 
 
(3) It follows that though the Speaker can rule on a 
question of order, he cannot rule on a question of 
privilege. His function, when a question of privilege is 
raised, is limited to deciding whether the matter is of such 
a character as to entitle the motion, which the Member 
who has raised the question desires, to move to priority 
over the Orders of the Day. 

  



 
June 24, 1987 

697 
 

The role of Speaker is to review the arguments as presented and 
to determine, on the face of it, whether a prima facie case of 
privilege has been established. It is thus quite properly up to the 
Assembly as a whole to decide whether any privileges have 
been breached. 
 
With regard to the role of the Legislative Counsel and Law 
Clerk, it is her role and duty to advise the Chair and all 
members equally and impartially. It is the duty of the 
Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk to offer opinions when 
requested from any member of the Legislative Assembly and, 
once that opinion is given, it is beyond the control of the Law 
Clerk as to how it is used. It is then the responsibility of the 
member to act in such a way as to protect the independent status 
of the officer of the Assembly. 
 
With respect to the specific point of privilege, I refer all hon. 
members to Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, Twentieth 
Edition, page 162: 
 

Both Houses will treat as breaches of their privileges, not 
only acts directly tending to obstruct their officers in the 
execution of their duty, but also any conduct which may 
tend to deter them from doing their duty in the future. 

 
From this quotation from Erskine May, it is clear that any 
action which may tend to deter a parliamentary officer from 
doing his or her duty may be considered to be a breach of the 
privileges of parliament. It is vital, if parliament is to get fair 
and impartial service from its officers, that these officers must 
be defended from intimidation while conducting their duties. 
Critical comments attacking the competence of and credibility 
of an individual can be construed as a form of obstruction. 
 
I do feel that remarks made by the member may have harmed 
the credibility of the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk and 
may have drawn into question her capacity to serve the Leader 
of the Opposition. While a member may disagree with a 
particular legal opinion, in this case the Minister’s remarks may 
have gone beyond the bounds of fair comment. Because the 
officer's capacity to carry out her function may be inhibited, I 
find that this matter is of sufficient concern to merit 
consideration by the Assembly. I find that a prima facie case of 
privilege has been established and I leave the matter in the 
hands of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, you have made the 
particular ruling on the motion by the Leader of the Opposition. 
And out of respect for this institution, and in the interests of 
seeing that this matter is dealt with in a very expedient manner, 
I would at this time unequivocally apologize to the House and 
to the Law Clerk for the statements that I made. 
 
I agree that the ruling that we must not and should not attack, 
whether it’s the clerks or anybody involved in that, and for that 
I certainly apologize to them and apologize to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I accept the member’s apology. Does the 
House accept it? 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, first I want to thank you 
for your statement which dealt with the situation in the manner 
which I think is indicated. I am not being presumptuous here; I 
am simply saying that your statement, as I heard it, seemed to 
establish points which I felt ought to be established. 
 
The first is that statements by members reflecting on the 
competence or impartiality of officers of the House constitute a 
breach of privileges of all members of the House, and that those 
statements therefore are a breach of privilege, or the House can 
decide they are, and that by this rule we as members protect our 
officers. 
 
We are not speaking only of Legislative Counsel, but of the 
Ombudsman and the Clerk and the Provincial Auditor and 
similar officers who report to the House, and in some cases 
whose professional reputation is all they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would like to ask the Leader of the 
Opposition if it is his intention to move a motion. If it is not his 
intention to move a motion, then it is not the tradition of this 
House to have a member speak to the ruling on a point of 
privilege. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I will move a motion, and 
I will need to have it written out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague, the member 
for Saskatoon Riversdale: 
 

That this House accepts the apology of the Minister of 
Justice with respect to statements reflecting on the 
credibility of the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk, and 
confirms that a reflection on the credibility of an officer of 
the Assembly represents a breach of privilege of this 
Assembly. 

 
That’s all I will say, because I think that covers the ground and 
I don’t want to get overly controversial. I had, Mr. Speaker, a 
different motion and, Mr. Speaker, I will send a written copy of 
that in a moment. 
 
You, Mr. Speaker, quoted from Erskine May at page 155. I 
want to make a couple of points. I first want to thank the 
Minister of Justice for his gracious apology. I feel that this 
statements were inappropriate — grossly inappropriate — and I 
think particularly so because he was Minister of Justice and 
reflecting on the legal officer of the House. He has tendered an 
apology, both directed to Legislative Counsel and to this House, 
and I do not intend therefore to bring any other adjectives to 
mind in describing the particular comments of the minister. 
 
I want to refer to some comments of the Government House 
Leader when he, as it seemed to me, attempted to assert that 
parliamentary privilege did not extend to officers of the 
Assembly. It may well have been that it was the Deputy 
Premier. And I think that that has now been disposed of by your 
ruling. I think that the Deputy Premier was incorrect, and the 
many citations which you might have cited and the one which 
you did cite, Mr. Speaker, put that matter to rest. These are 
breaches of the privilege of the House, and that is why we’re 
dealing with it. 
  



 
June 24, 1987 

698 
 

(1445) 
 
I was particularly distressed that the minister indicated 
unhappiness with the opinion of the Legislative Counsel and 
Law Clerk without offering any alternative opinion and, as I 
suggested, where in the case of a minister of Justice that 
represents, I think, a particular concern for the House. 
 
My point, sir, is this, recognized I think now by all members: 
that if we, as members, attack the officers of this House in their 
professional capacity, without any evidence being adduced, as 
was the case in this instance, we thereby announce to the 
officers of the Assembly that they are likely to be reflected 
upon in their professional capacity if they act in a manner which 
is unacceptable to a minister of the Crown. And that of course 
goes to the very root of what members can expect from officers 
of the Legislative Assembly, and will clearly discourage them 
in the performance of their duties. I think, Mr. Speaker, I will 
not go beyond this point. You have established the matter from 
the point of view of its legal basis. I accept the apology of the 
member for Kindersley in his acceptance of the impropriety of 
his remarks, and I accordingly will repeat my motion: 
 

That this House accepts the apology of the Minister of 
Justice with respect to his public remarks attacking the 
credibility of the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk, and 
confirms that those remarks constituted a breach of the 
privileges of this Assembly. 

 
And if I may say as an aside, Mr. Speaker, if the Clerk needs 
any assistance in the deciphering of this particular document, I 
refer him to the member for Riversdale, the House Leader. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, when I left off last night I was 
speaking about day care. However, because there were so many 
questions that arose today in question period concerning 
education. I’d like to just quickly go back and talk a little bit 
about some of the educational opportunities that now are 
available in this province as a result of the Progressive 
Conservative government. 
 
For instance, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan . . . the PC 
government has substantially increased funding to universities, 
as the Premier mentioned just a few moments ago. We 
introduced a core curriculum which is a core curriculum 
designed for students from  

kindergarten to grade 12, and that was designed to upgrade the 
kindergarten to grade 12. Mr. Speaker, teachers across the 
province are hailing that with great applause because they feel 
that it’s the finest thing that’s happened in the lower levels of 
education in a long, long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that has happened as a result of 
community colleges becoming regional colleges is the fact that 
now first-year and second-year university classes are now 
available, will be available in the regional colleges beginning in 
Prince Albert, and following through in the other regional 
college centres. Women with children now have access to 
university because of this opportunity. No longer will they have 
to drive long distances in order to get first- and second-year 
universities. If they live near Prince . . . if they live in Prince 
Albert, they can go there . . . no longer have to drive to 
Saskatoon or other areas, to Regina. This’ll be a great 
opportunity for them. I might add, too, that women with young 
children who wish to attend community colleges or technical 
schools or universities are given additional bursaries to help 
them through their difficult times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have created opportunities for natives who 
will now have a say in the operation of the new science and 
technology institution in the province, and I’m sure they’ll be 
very delighted to hear that and will be strong supporters and 
contributors to that program. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when I left off last night I was speaking 
about day care. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, a 
day or so ago, made reference to what he suggested was an 
uncaring government to social issues. Mind you, it’s not 
surprising, that’s an old NDP tactic — scare and threaten — 
peddling the politics of fear, and we expect that of them, Mr. 
Speaker. So let me straighten him out with only one example. 
And it relates specifically to the critical issue of day care; how 
the NDP ignored day care and how the Progressive 
Conservative responded to the needs of day care. For instance, 
this government has increased the number of spaces available in 
day care centres by nearly 2,000. That’s responding to the needs 
of the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through to 1970, those concerned with day care 
lobbied the previous administration, the NDP, for help, and 
time and again they asked the NDP for help in organizing 
day-care centres. But they were ignored by the NDP— they’re 
ignored in day case as they were in so many other areas of 
social need during the ‘70s. But the Grant Devine government 
has responded. In 1986, the government of Devine introduced 
operating grants for day-care centres. We responded, Mr. 
Speaker, to help cover the costs of operating day-care centres. 
The NDP ignored this critical and important issue. We cared. 
We delivered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when one looks back over the history of this 
province during the years of the NDP government, specifically 
through the ‘70s, it is absolutely astounding to see how the 
NDP callously ignored the needs of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mind you, Mr. Speaker, this was a government 
that stumbled through the 1970s without a clear policy, without 
a grand plan with which to face the  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

699 
 

challenges of the future. And even today, after two rejections by 
the people of this province, they still don’t have a clear policy 
on anything — just the same old line, the same old repressive 
NDP dogma that the state knows best. 
 
But it’s not surprising, really, that they don’t have a clear 
policy, because they have a leader who can’t decide if he’s 
staying or if he’s leaving; a potential leadership candidate from 
Saskatoon riverside, Riversdale rather, who can’t decide if he 
wants to go federal or stay provincial; a financial critic from 
Regina East who can barely get his foot in the door to run for 
the leadership campaign; and now emerging a potential 
leadership candidate from The Battlefords who does not believe 
in free enterprise in a city that is thriving in new business. So 
it’s not surprising, Mr. Speaker, it’s the same old NDP stuff — 
they haven’t had a new idea since potash nationalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to clear up a couple of other matters with 
the member from Moose Jaw North. The member from Moose 
Jaw North spoke of battered women’s homes or, as they are 
sometimes called, transition houses. I want to point out to the 
member that since 1982, when the Progressive Conservative 
government took office, funding to battered women'’ homes has 
tripled, Mr. Speaker. The funding to transition homes, to 
battered women'’ homes, has tripled under this government 
That’s caring; that’s sharing. 
 
He suggested that the people of the province would cheat on 
their gas tax receipts, which I find quite astounding. Mr. 
Speaker, we believe, we trust the people of this province, just as 
they trust us to do what is right for Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
they know we are right. 
 
The people of my constituency, Regina Wascana, tell me that 
the government is right. They respect that it takes courage to 
make tough decisions through tough times. They like our 
education initiatives; our concern to protect and improve our 
health plan; our social initiatives; our concern to protect and 
make life easier for the elderly; and Mr. Speaker, they tell me 
that they appreciate the opportunity to take their children to the 
dentist, to the professionals, at no cost. They encourage the 
government and applaud our interest in facing serious drug and 
alcohol problems of our youth. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the people of Regina Wascana know this 
government is right in trying to control the budget while 
continuing our proven concern for the education, health, and 
social issues of the day. Mr. Speaker, the budget is right for 
Saskatchewan, and I give it my full support. I will be voting 
against the amendment, and for the main motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to take part in this budget debate this afternoon. And as 
advanced education critic, I want to spend a large part of the 
time I’m going to devote to my remarks, to the attack that this 
government has launched on the adult education system of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

But before I do, I want to focus on a couple of other concerns 
that are special concerns of my constituents, Mr. Speaker. The 
first of these is the PC government’s unprecedented attack on 
health care. The attack on medicare, and particularly the 
decision to financially penalize those who are dependent on 
pharmaceutical drugs; those who are dependent on treatment 
from chiropractors; those who are dependent on services 
through the dental plan; and those who reside in nursing homes 
— those kind of cuts, Mr. Speaker, I think, are some of the most 
cruel decisions that this government has made in the five years 
that it’s been in office. 
 
These cut-backs to medicare violate the basic social tradition 
and the tradition of human decency that’s been the hallmark of 
Saskatchewan society. At the time when we in Saskatchewan 
are celebrating the 25th anniversary of medicare, this 
government is choosing that anniversary as an opportunity to 
embark on dismantling medicare. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that 
we on this side of the House will not let that happen. 
 
I want to look at the record of the past two months. When the 
New Democratic Party left office in 1982, Saskatchewan had 
Canada’s best drug plan. We were the only province in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker, with a universal prescription drug plan where all 
the essential drugs that were needed by people who are sick 
were covered under the drug plan. 
 
In 1982 during the election, the PC government misled the 
public. They said that they were going to dismantle and do 
away with the dispensing fee of approximately $3 that people 
had to pay when they bought prescription drugs at a drug store. 
They promised, Mr. Speaker, that they would do away with that 
$3 charge. And instead of keeping their promise, the people 
who were told that they would pay even less for their 
prescription drugs are now being told by this government that 
they’re going to have to pay more, a lot more. And we on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker, think that that’s fundamentally 
unfair. 
 
What’s going to happen to a senior citizen who has expenses for 
medications running into 2 to $3,000 a year and finds that over 
and above the deductible they have to pay 20 per cent of that 
cost. Their expenses could easily run to $500 a year — $500 a 
year that someone on a fixed income can simply not afford. 
 
I say to the Premier that he may choose to destroy the 
prescription drug program in 1987, but in 1990 when the New 
Democratic Party is elected back to government of this 
province, we intend to restore that prescription drug program 
within a year. That’s a commitment that we make to the people 
of Saskatchewan. He may think today that he can dismantle that 
program, but we will rebuild that program again. 
 
One of the other special concerns of people in my riding, Mr. 
Speaker, is the decision that this government has made to 
increase nursing home fees by $73 a month. The PC 
government is telling residents of nursing homes that there is 
not enough money in the public purse to keep the cost of 
nursing home rents down, but there’s plenty of money in the 
public purse to grant Weyerhaeuser corporation of Tacoma, 
Washington a $250 million pulp  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

700 
 

mill and have them purchase that mill with no down payments 
or no requirements for an annual payment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if there is money available for 
Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington, or if there is money 
available for companies like the one being run by Mr. 
Pocklington in North Battleford, it’s the view of members on 
this side of the House that there is money available to keep the 
price of nursing home costs down to people who can’t afford to 
pay the extra $73 a month. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Prebble: —Now I can tell the members opposite that the 
people of my constituency strongly oppose this increase. And at 
this time, as an example of the opposition that my constituents 
have to that increase, I want to present members of the 
conservative government with a copy of a petition signed by 
148 residents of Luther Tower, the largest senior citizens’ 
housing complex in my riding. Almost three-quarters of the 
people who reside in Luther Tower signed this petition, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to present it to the government members 
opposite by tabling it in this Assembly. The petition reads as 
follows: 
 

We, the undersigned of Luther Towers in Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, hereby express our opposition to the $73 
increase in nursing home fees imposed upon nursing home 
residents this spring. We feel that this increase in unfair; 
that it’s unfair that senior citizens who built this province 
should now be forced to pay an extra $73 a month. This is 
far higher than the inflation rate, and much higher than any 
increase in our pension income. The increase is creating 
hardship. We therefore ask you, Premier Devine, and your 
government, to roll back this unjust and unfair rent 
increase. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my constituents, I 
am pleased to table this petition to present to members of the 
PC government opposite, and I’d ask one of the pages to lay it 
on the Table, please. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on one more issue that’s of 
special concern to my constituents before I turn to the major 
subject of my address, which is the cuts that this government 
has implemented to the adult education system. 
 
One of the special concerns to residents in my constituency, a 
large number of whom are students, is the decision that this 
government has made to severely cut back on the Opportunities 
’87 summer jobs program for students. 
 
Last year at this time, just before the election, Mr. Speaker, we 
had a situation where members opposite committed $10.5 
million to create over 10,000 summer jobs for the young people 
of this province. And during the election I heard members 
opposite commit themselves to assist students in pursuing 
post-secondary education by continuing to commit significant 
sums of money to  

employment opportunities for student summer job creation. 
 
And what do we have after the election, Mr. Speaker? We have 
a situation where this government cuts back student summer 
employment opportunities in this province by at least 6,000 jobs 
— from 10,000 jobs created last summer to 4,000 jobs created 
this summer; from funding of $10.5 million in 1986 to funding 
of only $4 million in 1987. 
 
And in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, what have the members 
opposite done? They have consciously ensured that all 
volunteer organizations in this province and all municipalities 
in this province were completely cut off from all financial 
sources available from the provincial government to hire 
students during the summer. One of the most interesting and 
exciting opportunities that university students and high school 
students had to work during the summer, Mr. Speaker, was 
employment opportunities with non-government organizations 
— with volunteer organizations. And what did the members 
opposite do? They completely cut volunteer organizations off 
from funding from this provincial government for summer job 
opportunities. 
 
Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the result of that decision 
has been devastation in my constituency in terms of 
employment opportunities for students. Students have either 
had to go home, back to rural Saskatchewan, to try to look for 
work, they’ve had to leave the province to look for work, or 
they’ve been forced to go back to university and pursue studies 
at intersession and summer school because the summer job 
opportunities are not available. 
 
And we say, Mr. Speaker, that that’s fundamentally unfair. 
What’s required, Mr. Speaker, in this province at a time when 
there’s 14 per cent unemployment among young people and at a 
time when 30,000 students are coming on to the job market this 
summer to find only 4,000 summer jobs being created for them 
by this government, what’s required by this government is a 
commitment to invest at least $25 million into a program that 
will create at least 25,000 summer jobs for students. That’s the 
only way, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to be able to create a 
society in this province in which young people who need and 
deserve to have a job, will get a job and will receive the respect 
that is due to them from having that job. And we, on this side of 
the House, call on members opposite to meet that commitment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn at this point to the thrust of 
my remarks which deal with this government’s attack on the 
education system in Saskatchewan. Because not since the 
Liberal government of the 1960s launched its attack on the 
universities have we seen such an ill conceived plan to 
undermine the adult education system in Saskatchewan and to 
essentially set this education system back at least two decades. 
 
The PC government is destroying our adult education system in 
Saskatchewan under the guise of claiming to improve it. Before 
the election this government promised to make education one of 
the four pillars in its planning for the future, and it’s betrayed 
the people of Saskatchewan in failing to keep that promise. 
Instead,  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

701 
 

what we see is a Department of Education that’s been gutted of 
the leading professional educators that it had on staff. These 
people have been replaced with persons who know nothing 
about education, people who come from finance, people whose 
task it was, Mr. Speaker, to dismantle the education system in 
this province, not to build it. 
 
And what we’ve seen, in effect, Mr. Speaker, is a conscious 
attempt by this government to move large parts of the publicly 
funded adult education system in Saskatchewan into the private 
sector, to be run by private companies who are in the education 
business solely for the purpose of making a profit. 
 
Privatizing adult education is really what the cuts at 
Saskatchewan’s technical institutes are all about. The Minister 
of Education claims that the cuts in institute programming are 
being made because the demand is not there for the courses that 
were being offered, or because the graduates in those programs 
were not getting jobs. But his claims, Mr. Speaker, just don’t 
jive with the facts. 
 
And I want to take Kelsey Institute as an example. At Kelsey 
Institute this government has dismantled the office education 
program, where 75 per cent of all those who graduated, Mr. 
Speaker, got jobs within six months after graduating. And the 
only explanation that I can think of for this move is that this 
government wants to turn over training opportunities for office 
education to its friends in the private sector. We’ll no doubt see 
one of the private schools in Saskatoon expand its office 
education programs in the fall to accommodate the cuts at 
Kelsey. 
 
I want to give another example, Mr. Speaker. This government 
at the same time as it was cutting office education, also chose to 
dismantle the program for dental assistants at Kelsey Institute. 
It claimed, Mr. Speaker, that there was no market for the 
graduates — no job market for the graduates in the dental 
assistants program. Maybe the Premier and the Minister of 
Education can explain to the public of Saskatchewan why it was 
that this program was cut when 85 per cent of the people who 
graduated from that program got jobs within six months of 
graduating. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Education’s claims that 
he was simply eliminating programs where there was no 
demand from students, are patently false. He also claimed, Mr. 
Speaker, that he was eliminating programs where there was 
duplication in the technical institute system. And one of the 
programs that he severely cut back was the program for 
agricultural machinery technology students, at Kelsey again. 
That happens to be the only program to train students in 
agricultural machinery repair in this province. That course was 
not duplicated anywhere else in the institute system. And today 
it’s gone, although it had a record of at least 70 per cent of the 
people who took courses in it getting jobs in it within six 
months. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a host of other examples. This 
government said, for instance, that one of the reasons that it was 
cutting programs was because students who were taking those 
programs were not taking them in sufficient numbers to justify 
the continuation of the program. He said, for instance, that there 
was a shortage  

of students to take particular courses that have been cut. Well 
I’ve examined the cuts and I can tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that there is simply not an example that can be 
pointed to, of a course that was cut, where there wasn’t a 
significant waiting list. 
 
The government opposite, for instance, chose to cut the nursing 
assistants program and the dental therapists program. There 
were significant waiting lists for both those programs. In the 
case of nursing assistants, there were over 150 young people at 
Kelsey, waiting to get into a course that had only 55 positions 
available. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I can venture a guess about why the nursing 
assistants program has been cancelled by this government, and 
why the dental therapists program has been cancelled by this 
government. And I think it’s very simply because of the fact 
that this government is cutting back on home care services, 
forcing fees in home care services up 66 per cent, and then 
telling the people of Saskatchewan that because of those 
increases home care services, because of the fee increases, are 
not in demand in the way that they used to be. And lo and 
behold, it’s not surprising that one of the major areas in which 
nursing assistants were hired was in home care. So of course, if 
you cut back home care, you don’t need to train as many 
nursing assistants. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the same pattern applies to the cuts in 
diploma nursing and the cuts in dental therapy. This 
government cut the dental therapists program at Wascana in 
May because it knew that in June it was going to eliminate the 
Saskatchewan dental health plan and lay off 411 dental 
therapists in this province, and that therefore there would not be 
a demand for further training for dental therapists students in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That ‘s the reason that dental therapy is no longer being offered 
at Wascana, because this government had chose to eliminate 
Saskatchewan’s dental health plan, one of the best preventive 
health measures in Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s the same, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the diploma 
nursing program. Why was there a cut of 80 diploma nursing 
students, 80 less who will be able to enter Kelsey next year? 
Because this government has cut back funding to the hospital 
system of Saskatchewan, cut back the ability of Saskatchewan 
hospitals to hire new nurses, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, our 
need to train diploma nurses in this province accordingly is 
reduced. 
 
That’s the reason why the education cuts have taken place, 
because this government was intending to dismantle medicare, 
which it’s embarked on doing, and because this government 
was intending to turn over to the private sector the opportunities 
that were being offered to Saskatchewan young people at our 
technical institutes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the implications of these 
moves are very clear. Students at the technical institutes pay 
tuition rates of less than $500 a year. In comparison today, in a 
private school that these students will now be forced to go to, 
they’ll be looking at tuition  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

702 
 

rates of 2,500 to 3,000 to $3,500 — five to seven times as much 
as they would have paid at the technical institutes. 
 
And when they graduate, what will they have? They’ll have 
diplomas from private business education institutions that are 
not recognized across Canada, but in some cases will barely be 
worth the paper that they are produced on, Mr. Speaker, in 
contrast to the diplomas that they get today from recognized 
publicly funded technical institutes whose credentials are 
recognized across this country. 
 
In effect, Mr. Speaker, what has taken place is that, instead of 
this government meeting its commitment to expand 
opportunities in the technical school system of this province for 
young people, 1,150 student spaces have been cut from our 
technical institutes — 1,150 spaces have been cut at a time 
when there’s at least 8 to 9,000 young people on waiting lists to 
get into institutes across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At a time when 530 spaces have been cut from Kelsey Institute, 
4,750 young people are waiting to get into Kelsey, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s the implications of these government’s cuts, and they’re 
shameful cuts that can’t possibly be justified. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, before I leave this question 
of technical institute education, I want to touch on the inhumane 
treatment that this government has dished out to the 142 
instructors and support staff who were fired in May. 
 
These firings came without any consultation whatsoever with 
the staff affected. People who had worked for 15 or 20 years, 
Mr. Speaker, to build up the educational system, and to build up 
the programs that they were employed in, have essentially been 
thrown aside by this government as though the work that they 
did over all those years counted for absolutely nothing. 
 
(1515) 
 
Never had I seen professional educators treated so unfairly. And 
on behalf of my colleagues in the New Democratic Party, I call 
on the Minister of Education to reinstate every one of the 142 
institute instructors that he fired — reinstate them immediately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — That’s the only way that the Minister of 
Education can begin to undo the injustices that he’s inflicted on 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to repeat again to the minister that there should be 
absolutely no changes implemented in the technical institute 
system of this province without the full involvement and 
consultation with the institutes and the staff affected. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to the attack that the PC 
government has launched on Saskatchewan’s community 
college system. Under this government, the  

fundamental mandate of community colleges has in effect been 
destroyed. The college system was consciously set up by the 
NDP in the 1970s as a vehicle for lifelong learning. It 
recognized that adult education programming should be 
responsive to community needs. And thus, it was organized 
around a series of local boards and dozens of community-based 
contact committees. 
 
Now in Regina and Saskatoon and Moose Jaw and Prince 
Albert, those local boards are gone. Local autonomy has been 
destroyed by the PC Party, Mr. Speaker. The community 
college system recognized that there was more to education 
than just training for a job. Adult basic education programs 
were to be developed in such a way that they encourage 
students to complete their grade 12 and get a good general 
education before focusing on specific job-related training. 
 
It’s now very clear from the PC government’s commitment to 
the Canadian job strategy program that the PCs want to alter the 
approach to getting a good general education for students when 
they take their upgrading programs and instead replace this 
approach with more training that is narrowly tied to a particular 
job. And we don’t favour such a narrow approach to education, 
Mr. Speaker. Once again the Tory plan is clearly to privatize 
adult education. That is essentially what the Canadian job 
strategy is all about, that the minister is so proudly proclaiming 
that the signed an agreement with the federal government on. 
 
And that’s what we’re seeing in the cuts that have come down 
today in the Regina Plains Community college system. 
Excellent instructors in fields such as life skills and career 
planning are being cut at the Regina Plains Community College 
while the PC government contracts with private companies to 
put on the same courses with less qualified and less well paid 
staff and with diplomas for graduates that wont’ be recognized 
outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
This same warped and narrow view of education that the PC 
government offers the general public can be seen in the actions 
that the Tories have taken to abolish funding for personal 
enrichment courses in the community college system. In many 
rural community colleges in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 60 to 
80 per cent of the programming is essentially personal 
enrichment courses. 
 
Now members opposite may not think that there’s any value to 
the public studying things like woodworking and drama and 
photography and cooking and the fine arts. They may not see 
any value, Mr. Speaker, in those courses. They obviously don’t, 
because they’ve cut off all funding to them. But we in the New 
Democratic Party say, Mr. Speaker, that that kind of 
educational opportunity is an essential part of people being able 
to round out their education, being able to pursue education for 
lifelong learning purposes that go beyond just the immediate 
needs of getting a job, being able to pursue an education for the 
purposes of becoming a better citizen and a more well-rounded 
person. And I can assure members opposite that while they may 
dismantle those personal enrichment courses today, we will 
reinstate them, Mr. Speaker, when we next form government. 
  



 
June 24, 1987 

703 
 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure the Minister of Education that for 
every wall that he tears down, members of the New Democratic 
Party will rebuild that wall, brick by brick, when we form 
government in 1990. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And I can assure him, Mr. Speaker, that we on 
this side of the House will do everything in our power to defeat 
this government at the earliest opportunity and reinstate a sense 
of vision to the process of educational planning in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I want to conclude my discussion of education 
with a subject that’s dear to my heart, and that’s the future of 
our universities. The PC Minister of Education, the member for 
Weyburn, has talked about how his new post-secondary 
education plan provides for an increased role for university 
extension courses to be offered throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, to date that claim has been misleading, to 
say the least. All we’ve witnessed since the 1986 election is one 
cut after another in extension programming being offered by 
our universities. And those cuts, Mr. Speaker, have become 
unavoidable in the face of a government that’s chosen to cut 
back university funding over the next two years by 10 per cent. 
 
We’ve seen the University of Regina forced to cut its most 
successful extension service, the school of social work at the 
University of Regina and the School of Human Justice at the 
University of Regina — the School of Human Justice to be 
eliminated completely; the school of social work to be 
dramatically cut back, with all its extension services, Mr. 
Speaker, essentially being abolished. 
 
Now this government, a few days ago in the budget speech, said 
that it was committed to expanding extension courses in 
university programs throughout this province. And what have 
we seen, Mr. Speaker? What we’ve seen instead is cut-backs to 
the universities which have forced them to dramatically reduce 
the best extension services that the universities ever offered, 
namely the school of social work extension programs 
throughout rural Saskatchewan at the University of Regina, and 
the University of Saskatchewan’s extension services in the 
health care field in the three hospitals in Regina, which have 
resulted in the lay-off of at least 41 staff, many of whom were 
medical specialists which simply cannot be replaced. 
 
Now I ask the Minister of Education how he can square his 
commitment to expanding extension services in the university, 
system to the massive cut-backs in extension services that have 
taken place to our universities. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to members of this 
Assembly, and to the public, that what in effect we face today 
in this province is a crisis in terms of quality of post-secondary 
education at our universities. We’re seeing a government that, 
as a result of cuts that it has made in previous years, prior to this 
budge, already put the University of Regina and the University 
of  

Saskatchewan in a situation where, while enrolments were 
dramatically increasing, class sizes were increasing, university 
library services were deteriorating, relationships between 
students and their professors were becoming much more 
difficult from the point of view of a meaningful student-teacher 
relationship because classes were getting so much bigger. In 
effect what at the two-year freeze that the Tories have now 
imposed on our universities means is that, because budgets on 
the two campuses were already tight, now major program cuts 
are inevitable. 
 
And we’re seeing this borne out at the University of 
Saskatchewan at the present time, because for the first time in 
provincial history we have a situation in which the University 
of Saskatchewan has had to impose an enrolment quota on entry 
to qualify its students in the College of Arts and Science, and 
where, for the first time in the history of the university, an 
entire college, namely the college of Home Economics, is being 
phased out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I think that this is symptomatic of further program cuts to 
come, and the responsibility for those cut-backs that the 
University of Saskatchewan is being forced to make today lies 
squarely on the shoulders of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I want to close, therefore, Mr. Speaker, by 
making one final point, and that is that members opposite tin 
the PC Party claim that these cuts to post-secondary education 
are inevitable because the moneys are not in place in the 
budget; the moneys are not available to them, they claim, any 
more, to fund these programs adequately. 
 
Well I just want to give this government two examples of where 
they could get the money for post-secondary education if they 
had the political will to change their priorities and commit 
funding to education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first prime example is in the Minister of Education’s own 
constituency, the constituency of Weyburn, where $120 million 
is going into a dam, the Rafferty dam — a dam, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s going to flood 20,000 acres of farmland; a dam that 
environmental experts believe won’t ever fill up; a dam that’s 
going to create a giant mud flat in the constituency of Weyburn, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s a dam that ought to be cancelled. It’s $120 
million that ought to be transferred into health and education, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s’ one obvious example of where the PC 
government could save themselves $120 million. 
 
And a second example, and I’ll use this in closing, Mr. Speaker, 
is that this government, as I mentioned earlier, just sold a pulp 
mill valued at $350 million, and it sold it with not a penny from 
the buyer in the form of a down payment. It sold it, Mr. 
Speaker, without making any provisions at all for annual 
interest payments on the purchase price. It sold it, Mr. Speaker, 
without making any provisions for annual principal payments 
on the purchase price. An asset worth $350 million, and not a 
single penny coming into the public purse from the sale of that 
asset. 
  



 
June 24, 1987 

704 
 

Now I say, Mr. Speaker, that if members opposite were simply 
to take the money that they ought to have gotten from the 
Prince Albert Pulp Company sale and put it into education and 
put it into health care, there wouldn’t be need for a single 
cut-back in medicare or post secondary education in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Can there by any doubt, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government has betrayed the public trust; it’s betrayed the 
people of Saskatchewan; it’s brought down a budget for which 
it has no mandate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be opposing the budget, and I will be 
supporting the amendment which expresses non-confidence in 
this government. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s indeed a pleasure for me to enter into this debate 
on the budget. On behalf of the constituents of the Meadow 
Lake constituency, in the north-western part of our province, 
that I have the privilege of representing here for the third term 
. . . I always consider it a considerable honour, frankly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to represent those people in this House, and 
it’s one that I know all members feel a similar feeling about, 
representing their people in this House. Often we don’t address 
it in that sort of way in here, but I want to say on the record 
today, as I have done on other occasions in the past, that it is 
indeed a pleasure to represent those salt of the earth people in 
this legislature and to speak on their behalf. 
 
I want to congratulate my colleague, the Minister of Finance, 
for the budget speech and for the budget that he brought down 
here one week ago here today. The budget presented by my 
colleague is realistic and it’s responsible, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
On the one hand it recognizes that some hard decisions were 
needed if we are to stabilize our province’s revenue and 
expenditure picture; but on the other hand it recognizes the need 
to preserve the essential safety net of social support programs 
for the people of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at times like these, governments can be tempted to 
ignore deficits and to keep on spending as if money was readily 
available. That might be a popular thing to do in the short term, 
but sound financial management is not a popularity contest, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It’s a matter of acting in the province’s present 
and future best interests, and at times it involves difficult, yes 
indeed, even some tough decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has had the courage to make 
these decision, because we know that in the long run they are 
going to lead to a stronger Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I believe that the people of Saskatchewan recognize 
that what we are doing is right and it’s necessary. They are 
realistic people who know that if you don’t keep your financial 
house in order, sooner or later it will catch up with you as a 
society. Unfortunately, the members opposite, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, don’t have the same grasp on reality as those  

Saskatchewan people that I represent and that I speak for here. 
 
(1530) 
 
They refuse to understand some very basic facts. If your 
expenditures are higher than your revenues you have three 
options. You have basically three options, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
You reduce your expenditures; you raise taxes to increase the 
revenue, or you do a combination of those two; or you do 
nothing and you let the deficit pile up. That seems pretty 
obvious, but apparently not to the members opposite, some of 
whom are chirping away here just now. They criticize 
expenditure reductions, and many of them have done that in the 
past few days. We’ve heard it here and out in the media and 
elsewhere. They criticize measures to increase revenues. 
They’re against that. Don’t raise taxes; they’re against that. 
Don’t make any kind of cuts in programs or changes to any 
programs; don’t do that. And yet they still insist that the deficit 
has to be reduced. Don’t have a deficit. That’s what they say, in 
all cases. They can’t have it both ways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As I said, the members opposite just don’t have the grasp on 
reality that our people in this province have. They have to be 
reminded that we’re living in changing times, and we are. 
We’re living in changing times, folks, and that the world is a 
much different place than it was some years ago. 
 
The changes were dramatically illustrated by the Minister of 
Finance in the economic and financial report he issued last 
March, on March 5th. That document shows what has happened 
on the world markets with respect to the products of our 
primary industries here in this province — wheat, oil, potash, 
uranium. We’re part of the global economy whether they want 
to accept it or not, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And for anyone to 
suggest that Saskatchewan should be able to carry on as though 
that economy were strong and healthy is sheer nonsense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the role and responsibility of government to be 
constantly looking for more effective and efficient ways to use 
the taxpayers’ dollar for the benefit of the public as a whole. 
And that doesn’t mean looking for ways to keep spending more 
money, adding more and more programs, and building a bigger 
and bigger public service to administer those programs. That’s 
not the answer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It also means re-examining needs and priorities. It means 
looking to see if there are better ways to provide services, and 
sometimes it means deciding that it is simply no longer 
appropriate to keep on funding a particular service. It’s a 
dynamic process of change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it is 
essential if we’re to remain a strong and progressive province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems those same members opposite 
don’t like that process of change. They seem to think that once 
something has been put in place it has to stay there in the same 
way for ever. If the NDP had invented the automobile, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we’d all still be driving Model T’s. This 
process of dynamic change applies to the field of health care 
just as much as to any  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

705 
 

other area of government expenditure and public policy. And as 
Minister of Health, this is naturally the area of the budget with 
which I am personally most involved. 
 
When Premier Devine’s government took office in 1982, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we stated very clearly that the health care 
system would always be one of our top priorities. We’ve lived 
up to our commitment and would be here a long time if I were 
to list the numerous ways in which we have strengthened health 
care services for the people of our province in the last term of 
office. Some people would argue that if health care is a priority, 
it should be excluded from all considerations of fiscal restraint. 
Some would say that. Many of those members have said just 
that. They’ve just said that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Relax. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And they say it should not be subjected 
to the same rigorous scrutiny as other programs. That’s what 
they say, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But that’s a completely 
unrealistic and untenable approach. The fact is that one out of 
every $3 spent by the provincial government goes to health 
care. Health expenditures now amount to over $3 million a day, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, every day of the year. Or to put it another 
way, we spend $1,200 per capita on health care each year. 
 
When we talk about deficit reduction, there is no way we can 
approach it realistically if we ignore such a substantial element 
of provincial expenditures. Certainly it will be a major 
challenge to all providers of health care services, including the 
government, to continue providing quality services to the public 
within these constrained circumstances. 
 
However, I know that we can meet this challenge and that the 
integrity of essential health care programs will be maintained, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be maintained for the people in our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And let me suggest that health care 
should be seen as a beneficiary of this exercise, rather than as 
some type of victim, as has been portrayed as well by some of 
those members opposite. 
 
If we didn’t get our financial house in order, our economy 
would eventually reach the point where we might not be able to 
sustain an acceptable level of health care and other social 
programs that we have. But by acting now, we will put 
ourselves on a firmer footing for future growth and 
development. And when that happens, the public will benefit 
through enhanced health care services, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s the context in which we have approached health care in 
this budget, and it is the underlying basis of the changes we 
have made. 
 
Those members over there, through their over-inflamed rhetoric 
that we’ve heard on several days we’ve come back here, and on 
some days before that, would like the public to believe that 
somehow the action we have taken with respect to the drug 
plan, for example, and the dental plan and other areas, reflects 
some dark scheme to dismantle the health care system. You’ve 
heard it; I’ve  

heard it from my member, from the person who preceded me in 
this debate. 
 
But let me just remind all hon. members of a few very simple 
points, Mr. Speaker. Who was it that eliminated extra billing in 
this province? Was it you? No, it wasn’t. It was this 
government, right here. Who was it who introduced the 
property program for seniors? Was it those members over there, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? No, it wasn’t. It was the members on this 
side of the House, and this government of the Hon. Grant 
Devine, Premier. Who was it who launched the new Wascana 
Rehabilitation Centre in Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Was it 
them? Certainly not, over a good number of years — not them. 
It was this government that launched that program, a very 
important one for this province. Who was it that built the new 
cancer clinic and the 238-bed Parkridge Centre in Saskatoon? 
Was it them, Mr. Deputy Speaker? No it was not. It was this 
Progressive Conservative government of Premier Grant Devine. 
 
And does it make any sense at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
suggest then that a government who did all of these things is 
now trying to destroy the very system that it worked so hard to 
improve? Does it make any sense? Certainly not, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I ask all members over there to keep your 
opposition and your rhetoric in all of these areas in some kind 
of perspective. Keep that in some kind of perspective when 
you’re dealing with the public in a province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan will still have an excellent 
children’s dental program. And to suggest that we won’t is an 
insult to every dentist in this province, many of whom are 
graduates of our own dental college at the University of 
Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. 
 
We’ll still have quality basic programs in our hospitals, in our 
medical care, in our home care, in our special care homes, and 
so on. And even with the changes that will take effect in the 
drug plan on July 1, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will still have the 
most generous universal drug plan that exists in the Dominion 
of Canada, and that’s not something that we’re hearing from 
those people over there. The scare tactics and the rhetoric that 
they’re using would have people believe that there is to be no 
drug plan, that there is to be no dental care for children. That’s 
absolutely false, Mr. Deputy speaker, and what I say to them is: 
keep your opposition in some perspective on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll have a SAIL 
program, Saskatchewan Aids for Independent Living program, 
that will provide services more effectively and conveniently for 
people who need rehabilitation equipment. The Saskatchewan 
Abilities Council is recognized far and wide throughout this 
province and beyond our borders for its expertise. And I’m 
pleased to say that we’ve been able to reach an agreement with 
the abilities council that will result in a better program for SAIL 
beneficiaries through a network of five depots around this 
province to replace the two depots that existed when that 
program was under government. Five depots around the 
province — much better services for  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

706 
 

the people that need it. 
 
Do I hear them saying anything about that? No, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because they know it’s the right decision, and it is the 
right decision, and it’s been well received by the people and the 
handicapped people in the province. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting that when the 
members opposite talk about health care, they conveniently 
forget to mention a couple of very significant initiatives that our 
government is taking, and has taken over a period of time. Let 
me remind all members in this House today, and the people of 
Saskatchewan, that even in these constrained times the budget 
for the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse commission is 
being increased this year by 69 per cent to $13.2 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, substance abuse has been identified as on of the 
major health care issues among our young people, and we are 
responding to that concern by giving it priority attention. I want 
to mention in particular the new Whitespruce youth treatment 
centre near Yorkton. We are spending $1.5 million this year on 
what is the first facility of its kind in Canada — a specialized 
youth treatment centre for substance abuse. Together with many 
other initiatives we’re taking in this area, we’re responding in a 
very significant way to an issue that has emerged as one of the 
most important health concerns in our society today. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, we’re responding to the growing 
problem and the growing public concern about that horrible 
disease . . . virus, AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency 
Syndrome). Some people would argue that AIDS is not a major 
issue in Saskatchewan, compared to other parts of the country. 
But, Mr. Speaker, people are dying from AIDS, and every one 
of those deaths is a human tragedy. Because there’s no cure for 
AIDS yet, the only effective approach is prevention and 
education. As one expert put it, “the only vaccine against AIDS 
is knowledge.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, last month my department sponsored a very 
successful two-day symposium on AIDS in Saskatoon. This 
symposium was designed to build on the valuable work already 
completed by the advisory committee appointed by the former 
minister of health, my colleague, the member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley. The symposium was also the next logical step 
in the development of an effective strategy for AIDS education 
here in our province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, this government is responding in a 
positive and concrete way to health care issues as they emerge 
in the changing society in which we live. Unlike those members 
opposite, we’re not trapped in the past, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
are establishing policies and programs that will meet the needs 
of today, and of the future. 
 
The budget speaks for itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Total health 
care expenditures for 1987-88 will be higher than they were last 
year, or at any other year in the history of this province. And in 
a time of overall fiscal restraint, that  

is clear evidence of our continuing commitment to maintaining 
a quality health care system. The fact that we need to take a 
good hard look at where and how we spend our health care 
dollars and the number of dollars we spend in no way 
diminishes the importance of ensuring that Saskatchewan 
people have access to quality health care services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget speech talks about new direction and 
new priorities in health care. The opposition evidently believes 
that change is a bad thing. When we talk about a new role for 
rural hospitals, they, all of them, immediately talk about closing 
hospitals. You’ve heard them, I’ve heard them, and the people 
of Saskatchewan have heard them. When we talk about 
revitalizing regional hospitals, they can’t focus on anything but 
a particular problem in this location or that location. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you don’t build and maintain an effective health 
care system by looking at specific parts of the system in 
isolation; you do it by looking at things from a global 
perspective, and making sure that all facilities and all programs 
are working together properly. That’s what we’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re recognizing the reality that the roles of health care 
facilities have changed over the years. We’re recognizing that 
the hundreds of local boards that have grown up over the years 
may not be the most effective or efficient way to administer 
services at the local level. We recognize that the system is 
lacking in adequate mechanisms for accountability. And we 
recognize that people need to be encouraged to assume more 
personal responsibility for their health or, to put it another way, 
for their personal wellness. People need that. And we will be 
facing these issues in a consultation with administrators, with 
providers of service, and with the public. We know that only in 
this way will we ensure the continuation of effective health care 
for our people in to the 21st century and beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have no intention of developing some game 
plan and then telling Saskatchewan communities, this is what 
you must do. AS the Minister of Finance indicated, we will 
soon begin an extensive consultation process to discuss how we 
can best restructure services on some type of regional basis. I’ll 
shortly be releasing a white paper setting forth the need for 
change and suggesting some direction we could be moving in. I 
hope that this document will serve to stimulate discussion 
among all the stakeholders in the system; and I don’t just mean 
professionals and administrators. I also mean the general public, 
the people who create the need and demand for service sand 
whose tax dollars are used to pay for those very services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just reiterate the goals of this consultation 
process. We intend to redefine the mandate of rural hospitals to 
accommodate the needs of the communities they serve. Note 
that we aren’t talking about closing hospitals, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but about making them more effective. We intend to 
revitalize regional facilities and, where appropriate, to reduce 
duplication of services in cities. Again, Mr. Speaker, a logical 
goal if we’re to have a rational and efficient system. 
  



 
June 24, 1987 

707 
 

We will assess the ratio of spending on health care 
administration to spending on front line patient care. This is 
where the question about the number of boards comes in, Mr. 
Speaker. The time has come when we have to ask ourselves 
seriously if we need over 400 separate local boards to 
administer health care programs for a population of one million 
people. We have to ask ourselves whether we are spending 
money unnecessarily on administration — money that could be 
better spent on actual services. 
 
Finally, we intend to decentralize the decision-making process 
to ensure that all participants have a stake in the performance of 
the system, thereby making it more responsible to the needs of 
the people. To put it another way, we want to see that those who 
generate expenditures in demands for funds become more 
accountable for the effective priorization and utilization of the 
health care dollar that they’re spending. 
 
(1545) 
 
As I’ve said, we have no preconceived ideas about where this 
process will eventually take us. And unlike the members 
opposite who seem intent on creating unfounded fears and 
anxieties among the public, we intend to lay out the facts in a 
frank and open way and to engage in constructive dialogue. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have faith in the people of this 
province. And I believe that when they see the need for change 
and see that effective alternatives are available, they will 
respond in a positive way. 
 
As I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, the budget speech clearly outlines 
the need for new directions in health care, and we are 
committed to taking the necessary steps, both through funding 
and other initiatives. Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite 
aren’t trying to see some dark scheme in health care, they claim 
that the government is making random decisions with no 
common elements to those decision. They can’t seem to make 
up their minds which it is, but it doesn’t really matter because 
they’re wrong on both counts, Mr. Speaker. But if the question 
is whether health care fits into overall government policies and 
strategies in some logical way, then the answer is definitely yes 
to that. 
 
And I want to explain the relationship from three perspectives. 
First, as I have said, health care remains the number one social 
priority for the provincial government. It’s the most critical 
component of the network of social support services that are in 
place to provide necessary protection to our public. And that is 
why in making program changes, we’ve been mindful of the 
needs of special groups such as seniors and those on social 
assistance. 
 
In the drug plan, for example, seniors will have a much lower 
deductible than other families and individuals, and the social 
assistance recipients will continue to receive the same benefits 
as they do at present. So health care is indeed part of broader 
government strategy in terms of ensuring we protect the health 
and well-being of Saskatchewan people, but is also part of 
broader  

strategies in other ways. 
 
Our health care system is a major user of a wider range of 
supplies, equipment, and other products, Mr. Speaker. This 
means it is a source of potential opportunities for Saskatchewan 
business in terms of manufacturing and distribution. One of the 
key components of the government’s economic strategy is to 
develop and diversify our economic base by encouraging and 
assisting new enterprise. And we want to see the health care 
system contributing to this objective to the greatest extent that’s 
possible. 
 
One way of doing this is through the Buy Saskatchewan 
program that all members will be aware of, in which purchasers 
are strongly encouraged to direct as much of their expenditure 
as possible to Saskatchewan-based suppliers, distributors, and 
manufacturers. 
 
A second way to promote economic development is by assisting 
new companies to locate in the province to serve the local 
market. An excellent example is the new Canapharm plant 
making intravenous solutions in Wolseley which will help to 
reduce our hospitals’ heavy dependency on sources outside our 
own province. 
 
And now I want to mention a third and final way in which 
health care fits in with overall developments in the province. 
Throughout society, not just here in Saskatchewan, but across 
Canada and in other countries as well, some major stock-taking 
and re-evaluation is going on. People are recognizing that, on 
the one hand, we want to maintain excellence in the programs 
that have been built up over the years, and to improve and 
expand where possible. But they are also recognizing that 
government cannot continue to be the source of all or nearly all 
funds for every program that might be desirable. This is true in 
health care as it is in any other area. 
 
The challenge is to look at other ways of sustaining programs, 
to see where volunteers might be encouraged instead of paid 
staff, or to look for additional funding within the community. 
This is not a question of government backing off from its 
responsibilities, Mr. Speaker, it’s a matter of defining the extent 
of government responsibility as opposed to responsibility of the 
community and of the individual. And it’s a matter of achieving 
a realistic and appropriate balance among those three. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government does not believe that direct 
delivery of services by government is necessarily the best 
approach in all cases. Sometimes it is the only effective option, 
but where we have the human resources and other necessary 
strength in the private sector, we believe that it is the route we 
should be looking to. Nor do we believe, Mr. Speaker, that a 
program whose costs are offset in part by direct public charges 
is necessarily worse than a program whose costs are borne 
entirely by government, with no charge to the public. 
 
No one would suggest that we return to the days of premiums or 
utilization charges for medical and hospital care or other 
essential services. But that policy does not have to be extended 
to very single program and service. As I said a minute ago, it’s 
quite appropriate for  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

708 
 

communities and individuals to assume a reasonable level of 
financial responsibility. It is a matter of achieving a realistic 
balance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated health care fits into broad provincial 
strategies and developments from three perspectives: protection 
of the public; economic development; and reassessment of roles 
and responsibilities in our society. 
 
To put it another way, it fits into the three priorities that were 
laid out so eloquently by my colleague, the member for 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the Minister of Finance, those three 
priorities being: to build this province; to protect our people; 
and to diversify the economy within which we live. 
 
Obviously many challenges are involved in successfully 
achieving our objectives. But this government is committing to 
meeting those challenges, in co-operation with those who are 
responsible along with us, for the delivery of health care 
services: the federal authorities, administrators, non-profit 
organizations, all of the health professions, and others. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as Minister of Health, I’m not averse to 
criticism, provided it is genuinely constructive, and it isn’t 
simply based on impractical emotion that any changes or any 
reduction in funding, programs or services, is unacceptable. 
That’s what we hear from there. Any change, any addressing of 
change, any realization that we’re in a world of change is 
inappropriate. That’s the inappropriate sort of rhetoric that we 
hear from those opposite. 
 
As I have emphasized, the government is committed to deficit 
reduction, and my specific task is to contribute to that objective 
in the health care field in a realistic, but in a sensitive way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been a pleasure for me to rise in this Assembly 
today and to outline for the people of Saskatchewan our 
government’s commitment to an effective and efficient health 
care system. that commitment is characteristic of the dynamic 
and forward-looking policies of all members on this side of the 
House. And when this debate concludes, I’ll be proud, 
tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, to lend my personal support to the 
budget delivered by my colleague. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, as I begin my remarks 
today, I’d like to allude to some made by another member of 
this legislature last evening, those remarks mentioned by the 
member from Melville. 
 
Two that stuck out in my mind from his speech, and the first 
was that he consistently said that this government’s doing the 
right thing and the other one he said, Mr. Speaker, was that this 
government is hearing nothing from the opposition side but 
cuts, cuts, and cuts. Well if he had been listening, Mr. Speaker, 
he would know that we’ve been talking about other things that 
this government’s been doing since 1982, as well. We’ve  

been using words like “unfairness,” words like “unfit,” like 
“unfeeling,” like “insensitive,” “irresponsible,” “incompetent,” 
“deceitful,” and, Mr. Speaker, as well, “morally corrupt.” 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been waiting patiently 
for one of the members from the back benches to realize what 
their constituents have been telling them back home. But I want 
to say, Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid they’re not listening. And I want 
to share with them a little news. We were talking about some 
news from Manitoba yesterday that the Premier was alluding to. 
But I want to share some new news from the University of 
Manitoba, a little poll that came into the province and we found 
out about. And I’m sure it’s not news to the cabinet, the 
front-benchers; certainly they would know. And it shows where 
the Tories are sitting in terms of the public feeling of the people 
of this province. And I want to read three figures for you, just in 
percentages, Mr. Speaker, and I want all the back-benchers to 
have careful notice of what this poll says. It shows the NDP at 
56 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — It shows the Tories, Mr. Speaker, it 
shows the Tory government at 27 per cent, and the others I 
don’t suppose are worth much mentioning. But all I want to say 
is that this was before the budget, Mr. Speaker, and since . . . 
that was on the pre-budget dribble that people had had enough. 
And now we look at a situation where they’ve delivered the 
most callous, the most uncaring, the most irresponsible budget 
that ‘s ever been delivered before this House. They’ve dropped 
even further, I’m sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this long-awaited budget has been unfair to the 
people of this province. And what’s more, it proves beyond any 
doubt that the people were deceived, not only in 1982 but in 
October of’ 86, and every member on that side of the House 
should be hanging his head in shame. It’s irresponsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget is finally showing the true Tory 
agenda. Mr. Speaker, it shows that a right-wing government, 
whether it’s in Ottawa, their buddies there, or whether it’s 
Reagan in the United States of America, or whether it’s their 
pal, Maggie Thatcher, have all got the same agenda. Mr. 
Speaker, their cards are finally on the table for all of the people 
of this province to see, and I’m telling you that I don’t believe 
the people of this province are very comfortable with what 
they’re looking at. You give to the rich; you take from the poor; 
you cut health care; you shatter education; and you put more 
people out of work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has spent six long years filling 
the pockets of their friends. And I want to mention some of 
them. Some of them have sat in this House prior to ’86 when 
they got dumped. I want to mention Paul Schoenhals. I want to 
mention George Hill. And I want to mention Peter Pocklington, 
your buddy from The Battlefords who you dumped $20 million 
upon. And I tell you, I want to as well mention the people from 
Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington who you guys gave 
more than a quarter of a billion dollars in the most shameful 
display that’s ever been show in this province. 
  



 
June 24, 1987 

709 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to forget 
the oil companies who they’ve given a billion and a half dollars 
since 1982. You’ve given it away, and all the while you’ve 
done that, you’ve amassed the deficit of some $3.3 billion, a 
terribly shameful display. And now you come to the people of 
this province to pay for it. Mr. Speaker, this budget is asking the 
people of this province to pay the bill for irresponsibility. 
they’re paying the bill through cuts in health care. And as I said 
before, you’ve torn apart our educational system, parts of it, and 
you’ve increased taxes terribly unfairly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I want to mention a few things about what 
you’ve done to my community. I want to talk about the hurt that 
you’ve inflicted upon the people of Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
and the area that surround sit. And I want to talk about the 
intention to close North Park Centre. I want to talk about the 
110 people who are losing their jobs permanently — people 
who served the people, the residents of that facility, and the 40 
part-time people who are losing their jobs who have served that 
facility and the people who live there. 
 
But mostly, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the 180 people 
who are losing their homes. And I want to tell you that whether 
the Minister of Human Resources will stand up in this House 
and talk about consultation; and that he’s got the courage to 
make that kind of a statement in this House, I think, Mr. 
Speaker, is unacceptable, because I want to tell you that I’ve 
met with the parents, and the member from Prince Albert has 
with me met with those parents, and we know what kind of 
consultation went on. And I tell you that the poll that came from 
the University of Manitoba is indicative of how they feel. 
 
(1600) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk 
about something that’s happened in terms of education in our 
community. 
 
My daughter attends the Riverside School, and her and her 
friends all understood that there were going to be some 
renovations done at the Riverside School. And because of the 
callous, uncaring attitude of this government and the cutbacks 
and what you’ve done to the school boards, that renovation isn’t 
going to go ahead. And I tell you, I know the parents of those 
children; I know the teachers who teach them. And I can tell 
this government that that’s why they’re sitting at 27 per cent in 
the polls in this province. 
 
I want to tell you about the closing of the tree nursery in 
Macdowall in the rural part of my riding. The lack of 
commitment to forestry and to re-forestation and to the future of 
that industry is something that should be looked closely at by 
members who represent he northern part of this province, and 
by every member of this House. We caught them last year when 
they were going to cut funds to it. But this year they didn’t cut 
funds; they closed it. Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad commentary. 
 

And I tell you, as well, I’ve talked . . . and the Minister’s had 
letters from people at the Herb Basset Home and from Pineview 
Terrace and from the Goodwill Manor in Duck Lake, 
complaining about the increase of $73 a month in the rates that 
you’re charging them. 
 
And I want to tell you, as well, Mr. Speaker, I was surprised 
when I read in the Prince Albert Daily Herald on May 7, 1987, 
where a member of this Assembly was quoted as saying — and 
he sits, by the way on the government side; you might know 
him — that some people don’t think we’ve gone far enough, in 
terms of the cuts. 
 
“Some people don’t think we’ve gone far enough.” Well, I want 
to tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people that I talked to, whether 
they’re in his riding, or whether they’re in my riding, or 
whatever part of this province they come from, think you’ve 
gone too far, and enough is enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, people are frightened, 
people are angry, and they feel betrayed. 
 
I want today to spend a little time dealing with my critic area, 
my role as critic of Tourism and Small Business with the New 
Democratic Party caucus. I want to talk about what that 
department’s been promoting since 1982 — the promotion of 
small business. And if there’s any small-business man in this 
community or in this province that hasn’t seen that its produced 
very meagre results, I’d be very surprised. 
 
And I tell you, they don’t ‘have much faith in you right now, 
and neither do I. I’m talking about the people on Main Street, 
Moos Jaw, and the people on Main Street, Prince Albert, who I 
deal with daily. And I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, don’t kid 
yourself. I know what they’re saying. I’m there daily. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Since ’82 we’ve been subjected to a list 
of rhetorical slogans that would knock your ears off almost. 
We’ve heard “open for business,” and then it was “economic 
diversification,” and then it was “Saskatchewan Builds.” We 
heard Partnership For Progress and then we heard: there’s so 
much more we can be. Well I tell you, they believe there’s so 
much more we can be right now, Mr. Minister. They’re all 
empty slogans, and your record proves it. You have a look at 
your record. Look at the record of bankruptcies in this province. 
You got money for the large corporations and your political 
pals, but you aren’t doing much for small business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — You’ve lumped Saskatchewan 
consumers, the small business community and the farmers 
together, and you’ve abandoned them to face these tough times 
that you’ve created. I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, and I want 
to read into the record, that in 1986 there were 21 per cent more 
bankruptcies in this province  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

710 
 

than in ’85 — and that’s the second highest in this country, and 
you should be aware of that. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that there, furthermore, 
from the corporate register in this province there are no less 
than 2,234 fewer businesses registered. Businesses don’t have 
to go bankrupt to close the doors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has chased young people from 
the province. In the last two years we’ve lost more than 12,500 
people from this province, a lot of them young people who were 
raised and educated in this province and who could be an asset, 
but they’ve had to go out to find work. It’s unforgivable what 
you’ve done to the people of this province, and they aren’t 
going to forget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to know, after this reorganization, 
where your commitment to small business is now. Is it lost in 
the reorganization? What the story? I want to know when this 
government is going to come up with some even-handed, 
long-range, comprehensive plans for economic development in 
this province. 
 
We’ve all seen your assortment of job creation programs and 
your patchwork approach to economic development. But the 
people out there know that there’s been an absence of a 
co-ordinated economic plan or strategy. You failed in business, 
and I believe you’re going to fail in tourism — your new 
Messiah. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that people are telling 
me that this government hasn’t listened to people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to say the people are telling me 
that this government is clearly out of control. They’ve got no 
short-term solutions; they’ve got no long-term plans. They 
show absolutely no signs of common sense, no compassion, no 
credibility and, Mr. Speaker, I tell you that they face a very 
bleak and short future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this amendment simply 
because it shows non-confidence in this government, and I will 
vote against the budget. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 
to, first of all, indicate that it is indeed a pleasure for me, and an 
honour, to participate in this budget debate. 
 
I might indicate that as a newborn of seven to eight months as a 
politician, I still find it exciting to stand up in this House. I find 
it exciting to be part of the democratic process during this 
debate, and being part of it, and I find it particularly exciting 
too, as the debate goes on, each side scores a point. Scores a 
point here. Scores a point there. 
 
And so I think all of us in this House, even though tempers get a 
little warm at times, are proud to be part of an  

institution like this, and to live in a country and to live in a 
province, Mr. Speaker, where we can fulfil the democratic 
process. And so I am delighted, I am excited to be part of the 
process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And having said that, I would like to go on to the budget debate 
itself, where I would like to say: I feel that this year’s budget 
debate carries with it a sense of urgency and a sense of 
importance. Crucial and vital decisions must and are being 
made, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re not always popular, but 
they must be made — decisions that require the co-operation 
and understanding of the Saskatchewan people, for the 
challenges that our province faces cannot be overcome by the 
government alone. Mr. Speaker, this budget is a recognition and 
a response to those challenges. 
 
This is a budget of change, not simply for the sake of change, 
but because of necessity. This province is undergoing stress. 
We must adapt, and I would ask the hecklers from the opposite 
side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to take their heads out of the sand, 
because we must recognize that conditions are changing, and if 
we do not adapt, we’re going to wind up like the dinosaurs. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is something that we cannot 
allow to happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — I would suggest to the people of 
Saskatchewan that they do not want to back into the 1990s; they 
do not want to back into the future, as the opposition is tending 
to lead us. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I could just for a moment relate my 
impression of this opposition. They give the impression that 
they are concerned. They give the impression that they are 
do-gooders. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I got into politics I recognized 
the fact that I would no longer have the time necessary to spend 
on my own family farm, so I had to go out and had to hire 
people to take my place. And in so doing, during the interview 
of the man that I eventually hired, I recognized in him that there 
were components there that would probably qualify him as a 
candidate for the NDP party. But being broadminded, I did not 
let that stop me or concern me too much, so I wound up hiring 
him. 
 
Now in the hog industry, one of the things that we learn is that 
management is a key issue. And one of the management 
facilities that you have to be fairly good at is in the taking care 
of the little piglets as they are born. What you have to do is you 
take their needle teeth, their eye teeth, and you have to clip all 
eight of them out with a side-cutter. It’s not a pleasant prospect, 
but the alternative is worse, because if you do not do that they 
will bite each other, they will infect each other, and they will 
die. Or they will bite the mother, irritate her; she will stop 
giving milk, and the entire litter will die. So you have to make a 
choice. 
 
And further that that, Mr. Speaker, a part of the process is to 
take that same side-cutter pliers and snip off the tail, right about 
one-half an inch away. That’s also not a very  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

711 
 

pleasant prospect. But the opposite is worse. And observing my 
hired man, I noticed that as a do-gooder, what he was doing is 
he did not have the heart to take and chop the tail off in one big 
chunk like that, he was taking a knife and cutting it off in little 
pieces. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker that . . . that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
attitude of our friends across the way. For, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
if we do not change, we risk losing both the institutions that we 
have built and the ability to build and strengthen these same 
institutions for the future. 
 
And I’m referring specifically to health care, Mr. Speaker — 
I’m glad you could join us. It was health care, Mr. Speaker, in 
particular, special care homes, that helped motivate me to 
become involved in politics. In the six or seven years prior to 
1982, I watched while the then NDP government enforced a 
moratorium on nursing home construction. This was during the 
good times, the moratorium was introduced. And at the same 
time, Mr. Speaker, they spent hundreds of millions of dollars on 
potash mines, uranium mines, and pulp mills. They spent 
money creating nothing, no new jobs, but what they did do was 
hang a millstone around the neck of generations to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — To me this showed how little the NDP cared 
for the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. And yet, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP claim that they are caring — caring and 
sympathetic to the needs of people. And in their egotistical and 
sanctimonious way, I think that they actually believe that, I 
really do; I think they believe that. they believe that they have, 
and that they claim to have, a monopoly on compassion. Where 
was their compassion, Mr. Speaker, when they introduced the 
infamous death tax to succession duties. Let’s review that 
inheritance tax a little bit and see just how compassionate that 
was. 
 
(1615) 
 
A man and wife struggling through their entire life time, 
working to establish a homestead, and when they had it, and if a 
misfortune arose where the husband would die, what did the 
NDP government of the day do? The next day they came 
knocking on the door of that grieving widow and said, pay up, 
pay up because we want some of that! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — And, Mr. Speaker, when this widow in her 
grief was unable to come up with this payment, what did they 
do? They said, well in that case we’re going to charge you 
interest. And she wound up having to sell, having to sell part of 
that inheritance, part of the lifelong work that she had struggled 
for and was hoping to pass on to her children. And they took it 
away from them. And they say they are compassionate, that 
they care, Mr. Speaker, I suggest they did not. 
 
Where was their compassion when, during a nine-year period of 
reign, they built, Mr. Speaker, 245 nursing home units over nine 
years of time. We more than doubled that in the first three years 
of office in our first  

term. We more than doubled that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — But what did they do? They introduced a 
moratorium. They said, no more. They turned their cold 
shoulder to the seniors of this province; they tossed them out 
into the cold. This is what they did. And we are building more, 
and we are building more because we care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Where was their compassion, Mr. Speaker, 
when over 10 years, when over 10-years’ period of time they 
increased by $5 — they increased by $5 — the seniors’ 
supplemental income. Over a 10-year period of time, of $5. 
When we got in, we doubled it. We doubled that supplemental 
plan. Why did we double it? Because we care. That is why we 
care. And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the only doubling 
that the NDP party did was to live a double standard by 
allowing extra billing, by making it harder for the people of 
Saskatchewan to get quality health care. We, Mr. Speaker, care 
for our elderly; we care for the sick; and we care for the poor, 
because we had the courage to ban that extra billing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — And, Mr. Speaker, they continued to show 
their indifference when mortgage rates shot up past the 20 per 
cent mark. And what did they do while the farmers were 
watching their crops dry up and blow away during the drought? 
What did they do? The farmers of Saskatchewan know what 
they did. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I was not the only one who was fed up with 
the NDP’s inaction. So it was, in April 1982, that the people of 
Saskatchewan overwhelmingly elected a Progressive 
Conservative Party, led by Grant Devine. And, Mr. Speaker, 
four years later, in October 1986 the people of Saskatchewan 
re-elected that same government and won . . . that I’m proud to 
be a part of because we are looking toward the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — As a little bit of an aside, Mr. Speaker, I also 
noticed that the members of this province, the people of this 
province, also elected the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who is sitting across the way, who is 
sitting in this House now as an independent — although, Mr. 
Speaker, I must admit that rumours have it that he has some 
kind of connection with the Liberal Party at the same time. And 
I am gravely disappointed, Mr. Speaker, because I must admit 
that when I heard of his election there was a kind of a thrill that 
went through me because I recognized that we were in difficult 
times and it take a lot of heads being put together to bring our 
province out of it. And I thought that what we would be seeing 
here would be a new dimension. I thought we would be seeing a 
third dimension with perhaps new ideas coming forth, with 
perhaps deeper insights being contributed to the discussions. 
  



 
June 24, 1987 

712 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you that the people of my 
constituency who supported him are also deeply disappointed. 
Many of those Liberal supporters in my constituency are 
beginning to have second thoughts because there is nothing 
new; there has been nothing added. Whenever the NDP 
opposition comes up with a motion condemning this 
government, what has that member done? He has voted in 
support of that motion — every time. There has not been one 
exception, Mr. Speaker. It is that way all the time. In fact, as I 
look over to the other side, I am convinced from day to day that 
I see that desk of his moving closer and closer to the opposition 
desks. And the surprising thing is that he is also even to the left 
of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order! Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for bringing the 
House to order once more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could not help, with some amount of regret, 
notice what was going on during what was called “condolence 
day” in the second day of this session, where this member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg had the chance, with no cost to him, 
with no cost to his convictions and so on, to show that there was 
some difference between him and the other members of the 
opposition. Did he choose to? No. Once more he voted with 
them. 
 
But the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to continue on, 
did elect a Progressive Conservative government. I’m going to 
ask a rhetorical question. Why, Mr. Speaker, did the people of 
Saskatchewan elect a Progressive Conservative government? 
Why? Why did they do that? 
 
They did because they knew that a Progressive Conservative 
government would continue to protect them. They remembered 
how our government had helped home owners keep and 
improve their homes by bringing in the mortgage interest 
reduction program and the Saskatchewan home program. They 
remembered how Grant Devine had gone to bat in Ottawa for a 
farm deficiency program. And last fall we had the pleasure, the 
Premier had the pleasure in this House, to announce a $1 billion 
payment to the farmers of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — And, Mr. Speaker, $416 million of that $1 
billion has come to Saskatchewan — enough, Mr. Speaker, with 
one slash of the pen to double the income of the Saskatchewan 
farm economy. 
 
And I remember very distinctly the member of Humboldt, the 
so-called agricultural critic of the NDP caucus, standing up and 
saying, whoa, Mr. Premier, not so fast. We must have a study 
first; we must see if it’s really needed; we must suggest that 
there is a means test necessary before this money is handed out. 
The member from Quill Lake could not resist, but continuously 
say, miserable amount, miserable amount. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan people are not saying, miserable amount. They 
are saying, right on; that is what they are saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan people remembered how, when 
drought and floods struck, producers were protected and helped 
immediately. And there’s a long list that I could go through 
here of the various things that our government has done for 
agriculture. I think the people of Saskatchewan know what they 
are. Agriculture is the backbone of our economy. A healthy 
Saskatchewan economy depends on a healthy agricultural 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan also saw a 
government that had brought insignificant social programs and 
reforms. And, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to just 
compliment the minister from Melville in his speech last night. 
We are being accused of not doing things for the people of 
Saskatchewan and he proceeded, in a completely non-partisan 
way, a very low-key . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please, order, please. It’s 
difficult for the member to speak if we have a loud outbursts. 
Let that continue, and I would like to ask the member to resist 
doing that. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
during the minister’s presentation, this low-keyed, non-partisan 
approach was a simple reciting of the government of 
Saskatchewan, our commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it took him almost one and a half hours to 
tell the people of Saskatchewan what we are doing for them in 
the realm of social services. That is a commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition, the -Saskatchewan Pension Plan, a 
first in North America, offers many who would not have had 
access to a pension plan an opportunity to build for their own 
futures. Home-makers, farmers, small business employees and 
others now have that opportunity that was denied them 
previously. 
 
The seniors’ heritage program and the Saskatchewan student 
loan program are just two more of the initiatives that our 
government brought in to protect and enhance the lives of the 
people of Saskatchewan, initiatives, Mr. Speaker, that the 
people of Saskatchewan approve of. Now, Mr. Speaker, the 
initiatives I have outlined here were important indeed to the 
people of Saskatchewan. But what perhaps impressed them 
most was our ongoing commitment to build, strengthen, and 
improve the health care system in our province which, 
regardless of what they say, is still the best in this country of 
Canada. 
 
To begin with, our government removed, as I have mentioned 
before, the NDP nursing home moratorium and began the job of 
rebuilding our hospitals and cancer clinics. And this was a 
massive undertaking, Mr. Speaker. The system had been 
allowed to run down. The funds needed to do that were indeed 
great, but our government makes no apology — the work 
needed to be done. The people need to be protected. 
 
In my constituency, one can point to initiatives such as the 
special care home that has been built in Dalmeny. We are 
protecting the seniors in our province. Somewhat in the two or 
three weeks ago, I had the privilege to be in Warman and 
participate in the opening of the seniors  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

713 
 

enriched housing complex, another six-unit building that was 
being added to the already existing six units. And in a few 
weeks, Mr. Speaker, I will again have the privilege to duplicate 
that and open a six-unit special care . . . a seniors enriched 
housing unit in the town of Martensville. And the seniors, Mr. 
Speaker, I submit, are grateful. 
 
We have also brought in initiatives like the chiropody program 
for seniors, new “catscanners” for our major hospitals, and an 
improved ambulance system. And as a result, Mr. Speaker, 
health care expenditures rose 60-some per cent over the past 
five years, so that as everyone in Saskatchewan knows by now, 
our total health expenditures are in the neighbourhood of $1.2 
billion, which translates to $1,200 for every man, woman, and 
child in this province. And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
that is a signal of our commitment to the health of this province. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, it is this cost that we must address. We 
must reorder our priorities by and within government, or we 
risk jeopardizing the future of our health care system and other 
social institutions. This means tough decisions. It also means 
that some programs must be dropped or changed in order that 
we can face these challenges of the future. The economic 
realities of the past few years have given us little choice but to 
engage in deficit financing. The Leader of the Opposition 
knows very well whereof I speak, because he fathered a deficit 
himself when he was Finance minister. And now he says that he 
does not particularly see anything wrong with deficits in tough 
times. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we must still keep in control of it, 
because with the growing size of the deficit comes reduced 
freedom to establish new social and economic programs. So 
when we introduce programs like the Whitespruce (youth) Drug 
and Alcohol Treatment Centre, we find ourselves in a dilemma 
— how to maintain existing programs and yet bring in new 
ones. 
 
(1630) 
 
Our government is attempting to reduce costs by streamlining 
the civil service and increasing the effectiveness of its various 
programs. I could not help notice, Mr. Speaker, that the member 
from P.A-Duck Lake, during his address, made mention to the 
fact that the North Park institution was closing. 
 
I have a copy here, Mr. Speaker, of the magazine called Dialect. 
This magazine, Dialect, is the news magazine of the 
Saskatchewan Association for the Mentally Retarded. I would 
just like to make a few comments on an article within this 
Dialect. The heading indicates, “North Park closure an 
opportunity for quality community living.” The 180 people are 
now going to be living in the community instead of an 
institution, and I would like to quote from the president, Norm 
Jones, who says: 
 

“Scaling down institutions and creating options in the 
community have long been goals of the SAMR, which is 
largely a parent organization,” added Jones. “We want to 
respond to the government’s decision to close the facility 
by activating human and financial resources to make sure 
that the  

transition will be a positive and productive one.” 
 

A positive and productive one. 
 
Then Gordon Porter, president of the national organization, and 
I would like to make quote, one of his statements: 
 

I would (and this is the president of the national 
organization of SAMR, saying) I would compliment the 
Saskatchewan government on the general direction it is 
taking with moving people into the community. 

 
This is what people in the organization are responding to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I say the 
Saskatchewan people are saying: right on. Now having said 
that, we must limit some of the programs, like I have just said. 
Yes, it is not necessarily a popular choice at times, and it can be 
a painful process. Yet, Mr. Speaker, I believe the Saskatchewan 
people, in their heart of hearts, recognize that it must be done. 
They are saying: right on. 
 
However, as much government can given through increased 
efficiency and streamlining of itself, it is still not enough. With 
revenues from resources at such low levels — and I’m not 
going to go into them because we understand by now where that 
is at — with such low levels of income, government must look 
to programs that delivers, and see where changes will have to 
be made in order to reflect the reality of the economic changes. 
Because Mr. Speaker, changes must be made. 
 
The deficit will continue to mushroom if unchecked. By 1990, 
projections are looking at a $10 billion deficit — $10 billion, 
Mr. Speaker. And I suggest to you, it does not take a 
mathematician, it does not take a chartered accountant to find 
out what it costs, even at 10 per cent interest rate, to service a 
debt of $10 billion. That, Mr. Speaker, is $1 billion — $1 
billion of dead money being paid out in interest to service that 
debt. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is what the Manitoba government has 
chosen to do. They have chosen to try to spend their way out of 
their deficit, and they now have $10 billion hanging on their 
necks — $10 billion that the future generations are going to 
have to be paid for. And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that is 
why they do not have money for funding their organizations. I 
suggest to you that is why their cancer patients are coming to 
Regina to be treated in this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we can’t let that happen here, Mr. Speaker; we cannot let 
that happen. And I suggest o you that changes are going to have 
to be made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the drug plan is an example of these changes, 
examples reflecting the reality of today. The cost of this drug 
plan has risen 400 per cent from 1975 to 1986 — 400 per cent. 
And if we had allowed this trend to continue, the drug plan 
would have cost some $125 million by 1990. So the need to 
bring these costs under control is obvious. And indeed those 
who are able — and  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

714 
 

I repeat that, those who are able — are asked to accept a greater 
share of the cost of these drugs. But, Mr. Speaker, we are 
committed, we are committed to protect those who cannot 
shoulder their responsibilities, who cannot shoulder as much of 
this burden. 
 
Unlike Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, we consider our seniors to be 
special. Senior citizens will have significantly lower deductible 
levels, while those in nursing homes will continue to receive 
services through the drug plan at the same cost that they do 
now. Likewise, people on social services and those with 
recognized special needs will be taken care of and covered. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I could not also help but notice the NDP 
financial critic, during his budget address, said to the people of 
Saskatchewan, “We will be viewed as being doom and 
gloomers.” Yes, Mr. Speaker, I think that he was absolutely 
correct in that assessment of how the people of Saskatchewan 
interpret his speech, because what they — NDP — over there 
have done is done nothing but spread fear. They have done 
nothing but to use scare tactics. They have done nothing but 
crying wolf all the time. 
 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that by trying to take 
advantage of those people out there who are wondering what is 
going on, they will be castigated in the future. Because once the 
people of Saskatchewan really understand how this drug plan 
works, they will see that they have been had by the opposition. 
They will see that the opposition has been trying to lead them 
down the garden path. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — It is true, Mr. Speaker — and we’re up front 
on this issue — it is true that most of us will be asked to pay 
more for our prescriptions. However, I believe that those same 
people will do so knowing that they are trying to protect and to 
help those who cannot protect themselves. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the tradition that built our province, and 
has seen us through some other tough times that we have had 
before. That, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of stuff that the people of 
Saskatchewan are made up of. They would not want their 
government to be any other. Mr. Speaker, it is in that tradition 
of loving and caring that will see us into the future. 
 
I would just like to portray a few personal impressions at this 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This loving and tradition is something I think that is inherent 
with all of us, and I think that most members in this Chamber 
will recognize when I say that I love and I cherish my parents. 
They are elderly now. Mom and dad are both well into their 
80’s by now, but when I think back over the years, over my 
childhood and my youth, when I think back to the ‘40s and the 
‘50s, the sacrifices that they made. When I went to high school 
as a youngster, and many of us are my age group, times were 
tough. When I went into high school as a youngster, I can still 
remember we had a few cows, we had a few chickens, we had 
even a few pigs. How those milk cheques, how those cream  

cheques were saved together for mom and dad to buy me one of 
those new, fancy, long coats, with a hood with no cover on it; 
buttons were those wooden ones that you put in, that was the 
style. I was a poor country bumpkin coming into the big town 
of Hague to go to high school. My parents made those 
sacrifices, Mr. Speaker. They made those sacrifices in hard 
times, and all I can say is the deep-down appreciation that I feel 
for my parents. And I wonder how many people there are in this 
Assembly today who can dispute that fact, even in their own 
lives. 
 
And when I see them now in their 80’s, frail, having done all 
that they could for me and this province, my heart goes out to 
them. And I find also that when they finally decided to retire, 
Mr. Speaker, they sold their farm. They had a little bit of money 
left over. They bought a small house in the town of Warman 
and they spent many good years in there. But as they grew older 
they looked for something else, and what did they find. They 
found that in Warman, the government had just built six senior 
citizens low rentals and they were fortunate enough to move 
into them. Today they are living in Bethany Manor in 
Saskatoon, also in one of those homes, and they appreciate that 
— they appreciate that. My uncle, my aunt, moved into that 
new home that we just opened in Warman, and they are proud. 
They are proud to be in there, and they appreciate that. 
However, my Uncle John and Aunt Anne are not that fortunate. 
They’re still living in conditions where we would like to see 
them improved. 
 
So what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is that I recognize the fact 
that no matter how much we have done, it is not enough. There 
is never enough. There could always be more. But we must do 
what we can, we must priorize, and we must spend our money 
wisely. 
 
And I’m going to go on with just a little bit more. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, my wife, Alma, and I have four kids — four children 
— and like any parent, I’m just immensely proud of them. My 
oldest, Dean, is 17 years old right now. It’s quarter to 5; he’s 
home from school; he’s probably done his chores for me. And 
he’s going to be writing his exams tomorrow, and he’s going to 
be finishing them, and then he’s going to be going to university 
next year. I’m proud of that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 
he’s been accepted, already. Yes, he’s going to be going to 
university. I’m proud of him because he is everything that I 
would want him to be. 
 
I have a daughter, 15-year-old Cheryl, who is in grade 10. This 
daughter right now is studying. She loves athletics. She’s a real 
go-getter, and she would be out there getting gone right now if 
she hadn’t been bucked off a horse and just suffered a broken 
arm. But she was cared for. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to indicate to you — yes, 
these two older kids of mine are not receiving dental care. They 
will not be receiving dental care. And I have no problem with 
that. I think I, as a family . . . I think I, as a father, have a certain 
amount of responsibility, and I will be glad to accept that 
responsibility, and I will take care of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — And not only that, Mr. Speaker, not only  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

715 
 

that. Priorization. Where is this money going to be going, then? 
I suggest to you, we have priorities. I suggest to you that the 
teenagers out there have more of a problem than just the 
problem with cavities. Look at what’s going on out there. Look 
at the drug problem. Look at the alcohol problem. Are we going 
to assess our priorities properly, or are we just going to go 
merrily along our way and refuse to adapt, refuse to change, 
refuse to live up to the realities of the world the way they are 
today? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that that is exactly, that is exactly 
what this government is doing, and that is exactly what those 
members across the road should start to believe in and start to 
think about, so that they will change the error of their ways and 
see that times have changed. That, I suggest to you, is 
something that the members of the opposition are going to have 
to be able to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, I have two more children. I am 
not going to go . . . I wish I would’ve brought along my 
pictures, but I left them at home. I might add that Duane is 12, 
Cindy is 11. I will be taking them to the dentist, I will be taking 
care of them and I’m just glad that we have good dentists in this 
country that are going to be doing that. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will conclude by saying we must all work 
together to protect and improve the quality of . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The hon. member has just 
indicated that he’s going to finish his speech, in a minute or 
two, and if we all allow him to do that, well, we’ll move on to 
the next speaker. So I’d like to have order, please. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, I realize that sometimes the 
truth hurts and I fully understand, I fully understand the reaction 
coming from across the way, and I can appreciate that. I have 
no problems with that. So if that makes them comfortable so be 
it; that’s all right. 
 
But I was saying before I was interrupted, Mr. Speaker, we 
must all work together to protect and to improve the quality of 
life of our loved ones. The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, are willing to do their part. And I believe that this 
budget shows that the government is determined to do so as 
well. I feel this budget and this government shows the 
determination, the courage, and yes, Mr. Speaker, the 
compassion to take our problems into the ‘90s and beyond. By 
preserving our financial freedom today we will have the ability 
to grasp economic and social opportunities in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why I will be voting against the amendment 
and fully supporting the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I intend to limit my remarks this 
afternoon in deference to the many other speakers on both sides 
of the House who hope to enter into this debate in the one day 
that we have left. I want, therefore, to discard a great deal of the 
text that I had prepared, and I  

want to concentrate . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I want to concentrate in the remaining time on 
the justice system in Saskatchewan and bring to the attention of 
this House and to the people of this province, some of the 
problems that this system is encountering. 
 
I want to particularly address my remarks to the criminal justice 
system. I can best do that by taking a hypothetical example and 
illustrating to the House the kind of delays that are occurring in 
the system, which are causing so many problems. 
 
The hypothetical example that I want to give involves a person 
who is charged with a serious criminal offence, a criminal 
offence in which there is a fair amount of evidence to be heard. 
That person would appear before the courts with his lawyer and 
would enter a plea of not guilty. Then the judge hearing that 
plea would set a date for a preliminary inquiry. The purpose of 
a preliminary inquiry is simply to hear the Crown evidence to 
find out whether the Crown has enough evidence to justify 
putting that accused through the trouble and expense of a trial. 
 
Now the way the system is working today, Mr. Speaker, the 
earliest date on which that preliminary inquiry would be 
scheduled would be a date eight or nine months from today — 
eight or nine months from today. Now then, on that day, on that 
day the accused would go through a preliminary inquiry and in 
the overwhelming majority of cases, the presiding judge would 
find, as they most frequently do, that there was enough 
evidence to justify sending the accused on for trial. 
 
Under the present system, the way it’s working today, that 
accused would wait for a period of from six to eight months for 
the transcript for that trial. Now at the end of that time, when 
the transcript is ready, the matter then is set down by the Court 
of Queen’s Bench for a pre-trial hearing, and various matters 
are discussed, including a trial date, which we would find 
would occur probably within about two months. 
 
Now this is a problem in the case of any kind of an accused, or 
at least a problem in the case of any kind of a trial of a major 
offence. There are problems because we’re talking about a 
delay of between 16 and 19 months between the day the 
accused appears in court for the first time and the day on which 
the accused is charged. 
 
Now that is particularly a problem, that is particularly a 
problem where the accused can’t raise bail. Some accused can’t 
get bail because of their particular record. Other accused people 
can’t get bail because they simply can’t put up the kind of cash 
or the kind of sureties that are required by the system in order to 
be freed on bail. 
 
What happens to those people, Mr. Speaker? Well what 
happens to them is that they spend that period of 16 to 19 
months in the remand section of the correction centre, and these 
are people who are presumed by our system to be innocent. 
They’re presumed innocent until the day of their trial, and on 
that day they may be found guilty. But  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

716 
 

until that day, they are presumed to be innocent. And these 
people in Saskatchewan now are serving 16 to 19 months in a 
correctional centre without having been convicted of a thing. 
And I think that’s a shame, and it just shouldn’t be allowed. 
 
Now what are the problems? This is a problem of some years 
standing, and it gets worse and worse and worse. And 
successive ministers of Justice, from the man who is now the 
Minister of Finance, through the former minister, Mr. Dutchak, 
to the present minister, have said they’re going to do something 
about it. 
 
Indeed, in March of last year Mr. Dutchak announced to the 
press that he was setting up a special study, the purpose of 
which was to find out what the problems were and to come up 
with solutions to get rid of this backlog. And we find ourselves 
now some 15 months later with the backlog being significantly 
greater and with no study having produced a report that 
anybody has ever seen. And the backlog continues to get worse, 
and these injustices continue to be done. 
 
Not only is it a problem for the poor unfortunate who is in jail, 
unable to get bail, but it’s a problem for the police and for the 
community because the hardened criminal out there understands 
what is happening in the system all too well. And the hardened 
criminal who is accused of a crime knows that by pleading not 
guilty and by playing the system, he can stay on the street for 
up to 19 months without any danger of being incarcerated. Now 
imagine the effect of that situation, Mr. Speaker, on the police, 
on the prosecutors, and on the people, the people of 
Saskatchewan who look to the police and the court systems for 
protection from criminal elements, for protection from crimes 
being committed against them. Seeing a system like this 
operate, for them it is the cause of a great deal of insecurity and 
for a considerable amount of cynicism. 
 
Now what do we see the government doing in this budget? Well 
what we see are cuts that go in exactly the opposite direction. 
Rather than introducing reforms that would clear up this 
backlog and start to make the system work the way it should, 
what we’re seeing is cuts of a judge . . . a judge’s position cut in 
Saskatoon; four prosecutors cut; six workers in the court 
system, six office workers; 11 lawyers in the rest of the 
Department of Justice that could come in and help in some of 
these cases and help clean up the backlogs — they’re being laid 
off. 
 
So my point, Mr. Speaker, is simply that the government has to 
do something about it. And it has, up to this point, indicated no 
intention whatever of doing something about it. As a matter of 
fact, it is heading in the wrong direction, in exactly the wrong 
direction. 
 
I want to go back to those poor people who are on remand, 
because while our society is generally not very sympathetic to 
the plight of criminals, we are at least sympathetic to people 
who are presumed innocent and haven’t been proven guilty of 
anything. These people who, as I’ve said earlier, are spending 
up to 19 months in the remand centre of our correctional 
centres, are in a particularly unfortunate position. Because 
they’re not convicted of any crime, they are not allowed to take 
part  

in any of the regular programs at the correctional centre. For 
example, they are not allowed to take any of the vocational or 
technical training courses. They are not allowed to take any of 
the other courses that are available to the general prison 
population. The amount of time that they get out of their cells is 
also extremely limited. These people are in effect being locked 
up for about 23 hours a day and they haven’t been convicted of 
anything. 
 
Furthermore, it’s my understanding that their right to receive 
visitors is limited, and indeed, if my information is correct, their 
rights to receive visitors are more limited than the convicted 
criminals. What a travesty, what an outrageous situation that is? 
And finally, their right to take telephone calls is limited even 
more so than the regular inmates at the correctional centre. Now 
that, as I say, is a situation that has to be addressed, and as far 
as I can tell in this budget, is not being addressed. 
 
The matter also has to be looked at from the perspective of the 
police. All members in this Assembly will recognize the 
important role, the critical pivotal role of the police in detecting 
and in fighting crime. 
 
But how do the police forces in this province feel when they’ve 
finally done their work? They’ve detected a crime; they’ve 
reached the point where they can lay a charge. And then it goes 
into the hopper that’s being maintained by the Minister of 
Justice in this province. He sees a not guilty plea. An eight- or 
nine-month delay before the preliminary hearing; another six or 
eight months waiting for the transcript; another two months 
before there’s a trial. Well by that time, there’s a the police 
trying to prove their case. They’ve got witnesses who are trying 
to remember something that happened 19 months before. 
They’ve got witnesses who have died, witnesses who have left 
the province, witnesses who can’t be located. And every week 
in our province, important cases are being dismissed because of 
the lack of evidence as a result of witnesses just not being there 
when the trial finally, finally comes on. 
 
I want to also ask the Assembly to look at this problem from the 
point of view of prison guards, particularly in the remand areas 
of the correctional centre. In Saskatoon there is in the remand 
centre a total of 180 prisoners on remand in the facility that was 
designed and built for a maximum of 120 people. Now that’s a 
50 per cent overrun. 
 
Those prisoners on remand are sleeping in the woodworking 
shop. In the relatively recent past they’re also sleeping on cots 
on the floor of the gymnasium. They’ve even been known to be 
sleeping in a converted kitchen. And these people are locked 
up, as I say, for 23 hours a day for 19 months of the year, and 
they haven’t been proven guilty of a thing. Indeed, indeed, a 
relatively significant portion of them are in the end acquitted. 
And these people are locked up, Mr. Speaker, and you can 
imagine the frustration and the anger they feel at a system that 
treats them like that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And the correctional centre workers, the 
prison guards of this province, are upset and worried  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

717 
 

about that situation because they’re the people at risk. They’re 
the people who are walking through the corridors and walking 
through the prisoners in the remand section. And they’re scared. 
They’re worried. They’re insecure and they fear the worst. And 
I fear that no one over there is paying proper attention to this 
problem with a view to resolving it. 
 
Now I want to also talk about some of the other cut-backs that 
we’ve seen in the system that directly impacts on criminal 
justice system. For some strange reason the government 
opposite saw fit to cut its grant to the John Howard Society. 
This is a society which has done wonderful work in this 
province over the past period of something like 30 years. A lot 
of this work has been done for years, that is the re-integration of 
prisoners into society and all of those services that all of us 
know so well. 
 
But in recent years, we’ve loaded additional responsibilities 
onto them. For example, the fine option program is being 
administered by the John Howard Society. Now that’s a 
program that sees that first offenders who could otherwise go to 
jail, get he option of doing community work. And I’m informed 
that as a result of this cut, of their grant of $193,000, the 
existence of that program is in doubt and indeed is in jeopardy. 
 
Take a look at this budget of theirs with a projected deficit of 
$570 million and ask yourself in that context why the John 
Howard Society at $193,000, doing such an important work in 
such an important field, helping people that obviously need help 
so badly and delivering a program that the community needs so 
much . . . I would really like to hear someone on the other side, 
someone like the member from Rosthern who talked to us for 
50 or 55 minutes without mentioning anything as substantial as 
that, explain to the House and to the people of Saskatchewan 
why it makes sense to cut a program like the John Howard 
Society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Another example is the native court workers. 
Now the native court workers was a program funded jointly by 
the provincial and federal governments. And it involved a 
person being present in the court rooms of Saskatchewan to 
assist native people in dealing with the system that they don’t 
understand and don’t function in nearly as well as a lot of other 
accused people Now this program seemed to be one of the most 
advanced programs of its kind in the country. And this year, the 
minister pulled the rug on that program — pulled Saskatchewan 
out of it. And as a result, I think it’s quite clear that the whole 
program is collapsing. My information is that by July 17 of this 
year, there will not be one native court worker left in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now why, why would they do this? I mean, I can understand 
saving a few million dollars here and a few million dollars 
there, but we’re talking about a relatively small amount of 
money to deliver a program which everyone in the system 
agrees is a good program, performing an excellent service, a 
service that is absolutely necessary if our justice system in 
Saskatchewan is to work properly. And again, I would  

invite any member on the other side of the House to try and 
explain to us why it was necessary to cut that program. 
 
Now we have seen the four prosecutors being cut, as I said 
earlier, and we have seen a steadily increasing contracting out 
of prosecution services to the private bar in Saskatchewan. Now 
I’ve no objection to the private bar in Saskatchewan doing legal 
work, and I think it’s admirable that the government uses the 
private bar for a lot of its services. But I really question the 
rationale, and I sincerely question the wisdom of contracting 
out prosecutions to the private bar. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that the prosecution of a 
criminal case is a difficult, complicated task, a highly 
specialized task that requires a great deal of study and a great 
deal of experience. it’s not the sort of thing that the average 
lawyer can just pick up and do. And what we’ve seen in 
Saskatchewan, as well as in other provinces, is the development 
in departments of Justice of an expert staff of prosecutors who 
can take a case brought to them by the police forces of this 
country, present it properly to a judge or properly to a jury, and 
convict people who have committed criminal offences. There’s 
absolutely no percentage in hiring a prosecutor that doesn’t 
know how to prosecute a case. Too many guilty people walk 
away with acquittals if your prosecutor can’t do the job. 
 
What we’ve seen in Saskatchewan, in the last few months, are 
four very experienced prosecutors being fired — four of them 
— one with something like 30 years of experience in the 
prosecution field, one of the best prosecutors on the 
government’s staff. And that is not as a result of the workload 
of the department having been lessened, that is not as a result of 
the number of prosecutions having dropped. Indeed, I believe 
the contrary to be true. And what will happen is that the 
department will have to contract out more and more of its 
prosecutions to the private bar. 
 
First of all, as I say, that’s a silly mistake because you send in 
people to do prosecutions who aren’t nearly as good as the 
people that you fired. Secondly, it costs you a lot more money. 
The private bar, is I’m afraid, an expensive proposition when it 
comes to handling a file like a criminal prosecution. There is no 
question that it is a great deal more expensive than to pay the 
salary of a full-time prosecutor. False economy is exactly the 
right term. It is a money loser, and for a government that is 
trying to cut costs and save money, there is another example of 
you heading in the wrong directions. And your minister knows 
it. 
 
This situation, Mr. Speaker, has led to cases that are comical, or 
at least would be comical if they weren’t so sad. You know that 
there are actually trials being scheduled for the same time, in 
the same court-house, on the same days, before the same judges 
in our province. They’re double-booking trials. 
 
They’re also double-booking prosecutors in the sense that a 
prosecutor will be scheduled to appear in more than one court 
room at the same time. Indeed, there is a situation in Saskatoon 
where the same prosecutor was scheduled into three separate 
court rooms at exactly the  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

718 
 

same hour. And the judge in the third court room that that 
prosecutor arrived at, looked at him and said: look, I’ll let it go 
this time, but if this happens one more time. I’m just going to 
close this court room down and I won’t open it up again until 
Regina does something to make this situation work. 
 
I’m also aware that the prosecutors are under instructions from 
their department that if their particular case gets finished early, 
or if their particular case falls through, they should go through 
the court-house and check the other court rooms. And if there’s 
more than one trial scheduled there for the same time, they 
should try and get the accused and the accused’s lawyer and all 
the witnesses and all the police together, and go down and see if 
you can find another court room, and go back and see if you can 
find another judge, and run that trial. 
 
Now what an instruction that is. I mean, if that’s true, that just 
has to be a joke. You have a prosecutor picking up a file, 
opening it for the first time and trying to prosecute a case that 
may reflect months of police investigation, a large number of 
witnesses, and — I’ll almost guarantee you — an acquittal. 
 
I sound, for all the world, like a Tory making this speech, 
because what I’m asking you for, what I’m pleading for, is 
some moves toward law and order in this province. I’m asking 
that the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I’m asking that the justice system be more 
properly supported. We don’t want to see criminals running 
around unpunished. We don’t want to see guilty people 
acquitted. We want guilty people to be brought to justice. We 
want people to be treated justly and fairly and expeditiously. 
We want a justice system that works efficiently and speedily. 
 
None of these things are happening. You can make a joke about 
it if you like, but it’s no joke; it is a serious problem. If you 
won’t accept the word of an opposition member on this, then 
just ask anybody in the court system. Ask any provincial court 
judge, any prosecutor, any defence lawyer, any policeman, and 
he’ll tell you many of the things that I’ve told you this 
afternoon. I put it before you as sincerely as I can, and I ask 
you, indeed I challenge you, to try and do something about it 
and do it quickly. 
 
All parts of this justice system are just shaking their heads, are 
just shaking their heads at the situation with which they’re 
confronted. Not only do they find no one doing anything about 
it, but they find that your budget is heading in exactly the wrong 
direction. And frankly, they wonder what in the world is going 
on. What do you expect of them? 
 
Finally, the Saskatchewan people deserve a justice system that 
works better than this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — They deserve the security of knowing that 
their system is being properly administered. They deserve the 
security of knowing that people can be  

brought to trial quickly and speedily and efficiently. They 
deserve to feel safe and protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be voting in favour of the amendment and 
against the budget motion. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank you for your 
indulgence in allowing me to speak to the budget at this late 
hour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last few months the PC government has 
released to the province, day after day, on a piecemeal basis, 
one cut-back after another. This PC piecemeal budget 
culminated on June 17 in the budget speech. 
 
This PC piecemeal budget, which bombarded the people of 
Saskatchewan day after day in the last three months, left men 
and women across the province numb — numb from fear, numb 
from apprehension and helplessness. Who would be next to lose 
their job and source of livelihood? Who would be next on 
unemployment insurance and perhaps on welfare? Some 3,000 
people through firing and early retirements lost their jobs as the 
Tory knife cut its swath across Saskatchewan. 
 
And this PC government is very sly, very sly indeed, Mr. 
Speaker. They saw to it that the Legislative Assembly was not 
sitting — not sitting so that the people that they were attacking 
would not have a forum. They are so sly, Mr. Speaker, so 
machiavellian and so arrogant, that at the risk of committing an 
illegal act by not calling the legislature, they avoided 
accounting to the people. They arrogantly avoided facing the 
people. They left the people feeling helpless, depressed, and 
numb. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I was talking to the people in my 
constituency of Regina Lakeview, the one comment I heard 
over and over was: is there some way we can force an election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — When a government which is only seven 
months into its mandate is so widely distrusted and so widely 
disliked, that should send a clear message to the government 
that it’s bent on a path of self destruction. It should, Mr. 
Speaker, but it doesn’t. Not with this government. It doesn’t, 
because this government doesn’t care. It doesn’t care about the 
families it’s destroyed. You don’t care about the families 
you’ve destroyed. Instead of compassion, we find the 
government members belittling concerns we’ve raised on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan, and the vindictive Tory knife 
continues to strike out against working men and women, against 
cities, towns, and communities. 
 
In their ivory tower, Mr. Speaker, in their world of bankers and 
money-lenders, in their world of Peter Pocklingtons, in their 
world of big interest rates and big give-aways to big business, 
in their fantasy world of cooked books and misleading budgets, 
this government did not care to think that it was dealing with 
real people — real men and women that they so callously dealt 
with in the last three or  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

719 
 

four months. Real people. Real men and women. 
 
They isolated themselves from reality and accountability. 
Behind closed cabinet doors while they sipped tea and listened 
to Wagner, the Tory knife cut its swath across the province. No 
words can describe the dismay and the hurt many men and 
women have felt as a result of this government’s Draconian 
measures. 
 
Cut-backs against seniors. Cut-backs against young men and 
women. And I might say, especially women, because my 
preliminary information tells me that by far the majority of 
people fired by this government are women— a substantial 
majority. Cut-backs against women and children feeling violent 
situations. And the list goes on. Cut-backs against those who 
can least afford to pay. 
 
And it’s very interesting to note the cut-backs that haven’t been 
made. Cut-backs in your high-priced political staff; cut-backs in 
salaries of $200,000 or more for patronage appointments like 
George Hill, cut-backs to give-aways to large out-of-province 
corporations, and these are the cut-backs, Mr. Speaker, that 
have not been made. And I say to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, and 
to the Minister of Finance, and to the members of the Tory 
caucus, your priorities are all wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — The people of Saskatchewan will sit in 
judgement of you at the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the PC members of this House may think this 
slaughter of public services is popular with their constituents, 
but I say that’s unwise. Farmers and workers alike believe in 
fairness. Farmers and workers alike do not want their 
government to be vindictive, cruel, and arrogant, as it has been 
over the last few months. Farmers and workers alike realize that 
Saskatchewan will prosper when we all prosper. Taking from 
the poor and giving to the rich, attacking cities, attacking 
working men and women, attacking young people, attacking 
seniors, some 3,000 people losing jobs — it’s not going to solve 
the financial crisis that this PC government has created in this 
province by their mismanagement and their deceit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1715) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Farmers and workers alike know that 
Saskatchewan society will prosper when we all prosper, when 
we care enough about our neighbours and care enough to make 
sure that they too have the opportunities to succeed in life. 
 
The activities of the government over the last three or four 
months are very short-sighted — short-sighted and cruel. To 
give you an example of this twisted Tory thinking, Mr. Speaker, 
to give you an example of the illogical thinking of the PC 
government, let’s look at the decimation of the dental plan in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The other day the Premier talked about bringing dentists  

to rural Saskatchewan. But in order to do this he eliminates 
dental therapists in rural communities. He eliminates the dental 
program for young adolescents. He makes dental care less 
accessible for children in rural Saskatchewan. This is 
ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. It’s illogical and a betrayal of people 
living in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but in terms of actual cost the 
privatization of children’s dental care is likely to cost taxpayers 
and parents even more money in the long-term than did the 
dental plan which is now being eroded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — To further illustrate this warped, illogical 
thinking, the PC government has put some 400 men and women 
— 400 dental workers — out of work to perhaps save $500,000. 
But they give away hundreds of millions to oil companies to 
create jobs, they said. But today the oil is gone. The provincial 
revenues are gone, and many of these jobs are gone. This makes 
no sense, Mr. Speaker, it makes no business sense at all. 
 
What’s happening in our province today, Mr. Speaker, reminds 
me of an incident that occurred a few years ago in a small town 
in a poor country. That people lived in a town, in an area that 
was subject to drought. They had been looking for a pump in 
the hope of irrigating some land so they could be self-sufficient. 
At first they couldn’t afford to buy a pump. Finally, after saving 
for a long time, they could buy one, and they started looking for 
one but it was not easy to find. Pumps were scarce. 
 
It was only after several months of searching that they finally 
did find one. So they bought it and for the next few years their 
town prospered. But then hard times cane and the drought was 
too severe. One simple pump could not solve their problems. 
The towns’ coffers were depleted and the townsfolk were once 
again poor and didn’t know what to do. Then the solution came 
to them. They saw a quick solution, Mr. Speaker, some quick 
cash. They sold the pump. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this 
government is doing today, it’s selling the pump. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, are not 
sellers, but their government is selling the pump, and they’re 
selling it at fire-sale prices. This short-sighted PC policy is 
resulting in Saskatchewan becoming a have-not province, Mr. 
Speaker — a have-not province. 
 
And because of the PC policy, there were 41,000 people, 
41,000 people unemployed in Saskatchewan in January. That 
meant an unemployment rate of 8.5 per cent. The number of 
people working in Saskatchewan in January was actually 1,000 
less than it was January a year ago. And while the number of 
people working has dropped, so have the number of people 
looking for work. Because, Mr. Speaker, because of PC 
policies, people are leaving Saskatchewan in search of jobs and 
opportunities elsewhere. The number of people in the labour 
force this January was 4,000 fewer than a year ago. 
 
As is too often the case, the unemployment picture for  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

720 
 

young people last year was even worse than it was for the 
population as a whole. Figures with respect to youth 
unemployment for January 1987 are devastating. There were 
15,000 people, young people, officially listed as unemployed in 
Saskatchewan in that month. That’s a youth unemployment rate 
of 14.7 per cent — nearly double the provincial rate. the 
number of young people working in Saskatchewan in January 
was actually 5,000 less than in January a year ago. 
Saskatchewan lost 5,000 jobs for young people from January to 
January. 
 
The number of young men and women looking for work in our 
province also dropped dramatically in the last year by 9,000. In 
other words, some 9,000 young people left Saskatchewan 
during 1986 in search of jobs and opportunities elsewhere. Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t see that kind of job record as something the 
government should be bragging about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — In fact, in 1986 Saskatchewan had the worst 
job creation record of any province in Canada. But wait, but 
wait, you might say, 1986 was a tough year; surely the 
government’s done better over its full term. Wrong, wrong, Mr. 
Speaker. Let’s take a look at the government’s job creation 
record for young men and women between 1981 and this 
January 1987. The figures are quite startling, quite startling. In 
1981 the youth unemployment rate was 8.9 per cent — high 
even then. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What is it now? 
 
Ms. Simard: — Now it is 14.7 per cent. In 1981 the number of 
young people employed in Saskatchewan was 110,000, now it’s 
89,000. That’s a loss of 21,000 jobs for young men and women. 
In 1981 the number of young people in the labour force was 
120,000, now it’s down to 104,000. Sixteen thousand young 
people have left Saskatchewan in search of work and 
opportunities elsewhere. 
 
Current job creation policies have failed. They’ve failed to 
create enough new jobs and opportunities for young people. 
They have driven thousands of young men and women out of 
Saskatchewan to find work. Yet the PC government brags about 
its policies. They say their policies are for the common good. 
They’re prepared to wipe out families and write off young 
people for the common good. But let’s not be mistaken, their 
policies have nothing to do with the common good. Their 
policies represent misguided ideology, to put capital in the 
hands of a few and to make it better for the rich people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — When it comes to young men and women and 
unemployment, I want our party’s philosophy to be very clear. 
We are of the view that unemployment is an evil, an evil in two 
respects. First, it’s a soul-destroying experience for those who 
are unable to earn a livelihood for themselves. 
 
Secondly, it’s a terrible waste of human resources, of people 
who could be working to produce goods and services to 
improve the material well-being of Canadians.  

That is why our institutions and government policies must be 
changed to deal with unemployment as society’s number one 
evil. 
 
Some political parties argue that high unemployment was the 
price Canada had to pay in order to ring inflation out of the 
economy. New Democrats disagree. New Democrats say that 
the use of economic waste and human misery, as instruments to 
deal with inflation and deficits, are wrong and should be 
unequivocally rejected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Let’s talk about some ways to turn the 
unemployment record around. One important way is to begin 
using all the tools available to help stimulate our economy, 
create new jobs, and provide a more prosperous life for 
everyone in Saskatchewan, not just for a few. 
 
And one important tool, Mr. Speaker, which hasn’t been used 
properly in recent years, and which is again being neglected and 
decimated in this budget, is the public sector. 
 
In recent years some politicians have tried to make government 
a dirty word. They’ve tried to discredit government as an 
important tool to help ordinary people achieve some measure of 
economic prosperity. They’ve done this successfully in the past 
because they’ve been able to attack government as something 
big and impersonal, and that’s government at its worst. But we 
are talking about people working together to build a better 
future for themselves, and their neighbours. That’s government 
at its best. 
 
Government is people — people joining forces to improve their 
neighbourhoods, their communities, and their province. Good 
government is your servant, fuelled by your aspirations, and 
answerable to your concerns. There is a positive, important role 
for government to play in our economy, especially an economy 
as isolated from major markets as is Saskatchewan. We have to 
do things for ourselves. We can’t rely on huge corporations 
from outside the province unless we’re prepared to dish out 
generous incentives, as has been done recently. Generous 
incentives, which are often too rich and cannot be justified 
because the spin-off activity created isn’t adequate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — To deal with unemployment requires 
government action. It requires government to be a leader, an 
innovator, and a lot more support for Saskatchewan-based small 
business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — It’s small business that creates jobs, not big 
business. 
 
And for all these reason, Mr. Speaker, because of senseless and 
cruel cut-backs, because of the failure of this government to 
offer positive solutions to young men and women, to seniors, 
working men and women, to  
  



 
June 24, 1987 

721 
 

farmers, and to all the people of Saskatchewan, I cannot support 
this Draconian PC budget, this budget of betrayal, but I 
wholeheartedly support the motion for amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1730) 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

St. Jean Baptiste Day 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, before the House adjourns. 
Today is June 24, St. Jean Baptiste day, and in some parts of 
our country — those with large French speaking populations — 
this day is a formal holiday. In our nation’s capital, for 
example, the House of Commons is adjourned today in 
recognition of this special day. While this is not formally 
recognized as a full Saskatchewan holiday, I believe, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Excuse me, what’s your point of order? Is it 
dealing with some rules of the House, or what’s your point? Do 
you have one? 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, if you will bear with me for 
about 30 seconds, I think that’ll become clear, and it will not 
take me any longer . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Point of orders really aren’t meant to be short 
speeches, so I’d like you to get to your point of order if you 
have one. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, in that case, sensing the mood of 
the House, might I have the leave of the Assembly to address 
this matter for just a very few moments. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
thank the hon. members for their indulgence. While this is not 
formally recognized as a full Saskatchewan holiday, I do 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that all hon. members of this House 
would not want June 24 to pass without the appropriate 
acknowledgement. And so, Mr. Speaker, may I invite all 
members to join with me on this St. Jean Baptiste day in 
recognizing Saskatchewan’s francophone community and in 
extending our good wishes on this occasion to the Fransaskois 
in communities like many of those in my constituency and in 
many others throughout this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I too would ask for leave of 
the Assembly to make a few comments. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I join with the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg in sending best wishes to the 
many francophone residents of our province. This day was 
founded as a way to stimulate interest in the language and the 
cultural heritage of the French in Canada. And my  

party, as you will know, has taken a stand to support the 
preservation of this heritage. We believe that it is important to 
the cultural mosaic of this province, and we appreciate the 
support of the cultural and the linguistic heritage of many of its 
parts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying 
that all members of the House, I think, send their best to all 
francophones in all of Canada, particularly those in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And now if I could beg leave to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker, 
while I’m on my feet, I will do just that. I beg leave to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:35 p.m. 
 
 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	ORAL QUESTIONS

