













































November 5, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 November 5, 1987 

 

4003 

 

AFTERNOON SITTING 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce some 50 grade 7 and 8 students from Argyle School in 

Regina in my constituency. They are here to watch the 

proceedings for a bit this afternoon. They are accompanied by 

their teachers, Heather Hewson and Elizabeth Paul. And Shelley 

Howard, an intern, is also with them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to ask the members of the Legislative Assembly to give 

them the appropriate welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 

you, and through you, three people seated in your gallery, sir: Rick 

Parsons and Blanche MacDonald from Toronto with the Beat the 

Street program, and as well Marion Gracey, who is the executive 

director of Youth Unlimited here in Regina. 

 

For the information of the members of the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, Beat the Street is a literacy program for street people — 

those people who often live in the cores of our cities, homeless, 

unemployed. It’s a program to help those people, Mr. Speaker, to 

teach these people how to read and write. Mr. Parsons has been 

very successful in Toronto and was recently looking for a second 

city, a city in western Canada, for his program, and they have 

selected the city of Regina. 

 

I would ask that our guests stand in your gallery, sir, and be 

acknowledged, and I would ask all members to join with me and 

welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to introduce to you and to members of this Assembly, 53 students, 

grade 7 and 8 students, in the east gallery, from St. Bernadette 

School in Walsh Acres. I’d like to, on behalf of my colleagues, 

extend a very warm welcome. 

 

I hope you enjoy the question period today, and I’ll be looking 

forward to meeting with you after question period for some 

conversation, to answer your questions, and to have some 

refreshments and get your pictures taken. 

 

As well, with the students, Mr. Speaker, are two teachers and an 

intern: Don Zaharia, Pat Lederhouse, and Fred Curts. So I would 

ask all members to join with me in welcoming the students from 

St. Bernadette School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 

two introductions to make. I know all members of the Assembly 

will want to join with me in welcoming someone who has made 

an enormous contribution to this Assembly and to this province 

over the years, and received very little recognition. I refer to Anne 

Blakeney, who’s seated in the opposition gallery, quite 

comfortable among the school children up there. I know you’ll 

want to join with me in welcoming her. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I know members opposite will applaud just as 

enthusiastically for my next introduction. I’d like to introduce to 

members of the Assembly the president of the Saskatchewan New 

Democratic Party, Dwain Lingenfelter, and a former member of 

this Assembly; and as well, Reg Gross, a former member for 

Gravelbourg. So I’d ask you to join in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Dispensing Fee Charges at Pasqua Hospital 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier or, in the alternative, to the Acting Minister of Health, and 

it concerns a hospital owned by the government in the 

constituency of Elphinstone, which I have the honour to represent. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Premier, or Mr. Minister: are you aware that 

chronic care patients at the Pasqua Hospital are being asked to pay 

a dispensing fee for drugs which are administered in that hospital; 

and if so, is this part of a policy of having specific charges for 

specific services — bandages, dressings, soaps, and the like — 

which we see operating in many other hospitals in other 

less-favoured lands? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I would have to take notice of 

the member’s question. I’m not aware of that taking place in the 

Pasqua Hospital. I will certainly investigate that and report back to 

the member. Should the proceedings of this House end today and 

we don’t have an opportunity in question period, he has my 

assurance that at my earliest convenience I will reply to him the 

correct responses regarding this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, while you’re taking notice of that question, would you 

also check to see whether the Pasqua Hospital has been forced to 

operate a lottery in order to meet a budget deficit, and would you 

find out whether or not that staff have been asked to donate one 

day’s pay back to the institution in order to deal with some of the 

deficit problems of that institution. Mr. Minister, these stories 

reach me. I would ask you whether you could confirm them, and 

whether, if you cannot confirm them, you would take notice and 

advise me. 

 

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4004 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, as the member correctly 

indicates, there are stories that have come to his attention, and I 

will investigate if there’s any authenticity to these stories, because 

they may be nothing more than stories. 

 

However, as the member well knows, the hospitals in 

Saskatchewan do have foundation activities in which they raise 

money from a number of sources. I don’t think any hospital is 

forced to have a lottery. I don’t think that’s the correct 

terminology. But I will take notice of the stories that have come to 

you and investigate these and get back to you as quickly as 

possible. 

 

Call for Restoration of School-based Dental Program 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the Premier. Over the last 

several months, Mr. Premier, you and your government has spent 

a lot of time in this legislature trying to convince the people of 

Saskatchewan that your $18.6 million worth of health care cuts 

have been well received by the Saskatchewan public. I think, Mr. 

Premier, it’s quite clear not that you’ve been dreaming in 

Technicolor, and the evidence that is mounting each day is 

contrary to what you’ve been trying to lead the people of this 

province to believe. 

 

This week the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association voted 

unanimously to ask your government to restore the children’s 

dental program which was school-based. My question is this: will 

you now restore the children’s school-based dental program to its 

former self? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to the 

member as I did yesterday and to the members of this Assembly, 

that I think we in Saskatchewan can truthfully say that we have 

perhaps the best medical care and health care services of anywhere 

in Canada. I am aware of the motion that came forward at the 

SHA (Saskatchewan Health-Care Association) convention. I’m 

also aware that there are a number of dentists starting to have 

satellite practices in various parts of this province, which they did 

not have before, which I believe is an extended benefit to many of 

the population of this province. 

 

So I would say to the member, no, the adolescent dental plan will 

not be reinstated. But again, I caution her not to try and exaggerate 

and build this case in a scenario that may soon prove to be false, 

because I feel strongly that with the dispersal of the equipment to 

some of the communities in this province we’re going to see an 

expansion of dental services not only to the children but to the 

population as a whole. 

 

Again I want to, before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, indicate that the 

member opposite is always trying to insinuate that under the 

adolescent program there were therapists in the school for some 

long period of time. I spent 15 years in the school when the 

program was there, and I know that they were there for a short 

period of time, and the rest of the time those students did not have 

coverage. With professional dentists serving a satellite, that 

coverage will  

be there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I do not think you can accuse the 

Saskatchewan Health-Care Association of being a bunch of New 

Democrats, and you cannot accuse these people of not being close 

to the situation, because I suspect that they know a lot more about 

health care than you do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Are you trying to tell these people — people 

who know what they’re talking about — that they are wrong and 

that children are receiving better access to dental care in this 

province? Is that what you’re trying to tell us here today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly I’m not questioning the members 

of the SHA, and I’m certainly not saying that they’re all New 

Democrats. I don’t know where she got that idea from, but if that’s 

what you want to think, then you go right ahead and say that. 

 

I am not saying that the change in the dental plan, that there will 

not be better coverage to some areas of rural Saskatchewan that 

did not have dentists before. I want to remind you and the member 

opposite, I spent almost five years in the position of the Minister 

of Health and have a fair grasp of the medical services that are 

available to the population of Saskatchewan as a whole. And I 

stand by the statement that taking and looking across this country, 

across the western world, we in Saskatchewan today have the 

greatest health care services of anywhere on this continent or in 

the free world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question. The amount of baloney that 

comes from that members’ mouth could fill a thousand deli’s, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Last month . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I don’t think that’s 

the type of language that is customary. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Baloney and deli? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. I don’t believe that those types of 

remarks are the type of language that should be used in these 

Chambers, and I bring that to the member’s attention. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Last month in this legislature we presented over 

60,000 signatures opposing your health care cuts. Those 

signatures, along with the others that we presented this past 

summer, represent close to 100,000 people voicing opposition to 

your health care cuts. We now have the Saskatchewan 

Health-Care Association voicing opposition to your health care 

cuts. My question  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4005 

 

is this: in view of all of the evidence and all of the concerns that 

have mounted over the last several months, will you, as Acting 

Minister of Health on behalf of your government, stop hacking 

and slashing away at our health care system. Will you do that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess hacking and 

slashing are the terms that the member wants to use. But if she 

believes, if she believes for one moment that building a state of the 

art Rehab Centre, right here within a short distance of this 

building, and I can assure you the state of the art Rehab Centre, to 

serve southern Saskatchewan is hacking and slashing, then I differ 

with her terms. If she thinks, if she thinks building one of the 

world-class cancer facilities in Saskatoon, hooked to the 

University Hospital, is slashing and cutting, I differ with her terms. 

If she looks at a new hospital plan for St. Paul’s, additions to the 

General Hospital, the Pasqua Hospital, just being completed in the 

last term of government, if that is cutting and slashing — added to 

a new chiropody program that was promised four times by them 

and never introduced — if that is slashing and cutting, I think 

you’d better re-examine your terms. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Call for Saskatoon Eastview By-election 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question. Eighteen point six million 

dollars worth of cuts to the health care budget; children’s dental 

plan, school-based, gone; public health nurses, 16 positions, gone; 

three audiology positions in this province, and long waiting lists at 

the Saskatchewan hearing aid program, gone; 11,000 on hospital 

waiting lists in this province, waiting to get into hospital, and no 

money. 

 

My question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, if you’re so proud 

about your health record in this province, and if you agree with the 

minister, the Acting Minister of Health, if you are so convinced 

that your record is steady and sturdy, why not call the by-election 

in Saskatoon Eastview? Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me once again 

indicate that if you look at the expenditures of this government 

since 1982 . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The minister can’t answer his 

question if he is constantly interrupted. I ask for the co-operation 

of the House to allow him to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know they don’t 

like to hear the truth of the expenditures in health care by this 

government. But if you go back, and I ask any person in this 

province to go back and look at the expenditures since 1982 on 

nursing homes, on hospital construction, on staffing, on the whole 

myriad of things that make up the excellent health care in this 

province,  

that the Devine government and Saskatchewan stands head and 

shoulders above the expenditures of any other government in 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I realize sometimes members use 

another member’s name by force of habit, but I’d just like to draw 

the attention to the member that that’s not permissible. 

 

Deficiency Payments to Farmers 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan farmers need 

a deficiency payment. I realize there is no impending election . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — But surely if the Prime Minister intends to put 

out a deficiency payment, you and other western premiers will 

know some of the details. Farmers, Mr. Minister, are sick and tired 

of you dodging these questions, and so am I, so can you tell us: 

when can farmers of this province expect some money in their 

hands from a federal deficiency payments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said to the hon. 

member during estimates and several times during question 

period, this year the farmers have received in the month of June 

about $10,000 apiece from the deficiency payment in the western 

grain stabilization program — that’s $10,000 in cash that they 

don’t have to repay. 

 

Now our request, from meeting with the western premiers and the 

premiers across Canada and the ministers of Agriculture, is the 

same kind of payment be made, only one that’s larger, from 1.6 to 

$3 billion dollars, and to be announced when they are looking at 

the size of the final payments, when they’re looking at what the 

grain stabilization payment swill be, and when they look at the 

crops that are being harvested and finished, not only in western 

Canada, but indeed across the rest of the nation. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I suspect, as I’ve said to the hon. member in 

the past, the deficiency payment was made in June of this year, 

and I suspect about the same time period in June — May, June of 

1988 — the next deficiency payment will be made. It’s not likely 

that you’ll have two deficiency payments in one year, and he’s 

aware of that. 

 

So I would say to the hon. member that the payments have been 

very helpful. We’ve asked for that and more, and all the premiers 

and the Prime Minister agree that in fact a deficiency payment 

should be made, and I suspect the 1988 payment will be in much 

the same fashion as the ’87 payment. In fact, we hope that it’s 

higher. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, the grain price deficiency payment 

should be keyed around the drop in the price of grain, not around 

the drop in Tory popularity. And I say to  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4006 

 

you, the farmers . . . the only thing they can use your speeches for 

is fertilizing their land. They can’t feed their kids, and they can’t 

pay the bank with them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me what possible 

reasons, what are the concrete reasons, other than politics, political 

gain, and public relations, that we are being played around with by 

the provincial and federal governments on this deficiency 

payment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, the hon. 

member has to raise politics rather than his sincere concern for 

farmers. And he deserves to be slapped around a little bit. If the 

farmers . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. order. order, please. Order. Order, 

please. Order. Order. order. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, a little verbal lesson with 

respect to looking after the farmers and politics would do the 

member a little bit of good. How long did they wait to get some 

help from 21 per cent interest rates? How long did they wait for 

deficiency payments from the NDP? How long did they wait to 

get some sort of land tenure other than just the government 

owning the land? 

 

All over Saskatchewan people said, finally we have an 

administration that will make deficiency payments, protect them 

against high interest rates, and go to the wall for farmers. And this 

young fellow stands up and says, well, Mr. Premier, the farmers 

are going to have to wait for another deficiency payment. Who 

gave them the first one? Who protected their interest rates? Who 

goes to the wall for farmers and ranchers to give them cash 

advances? it isn’t the NDP. 

 

And if you want to look at the records of the NDP, and you want 

to look at the record of this government versus the federal 

government, you’ve never seen so much money in the hands of 

farmers as you have in this administration or this federal 

administration, and it’s about time you figured that out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Let me tell you, Mr. 

Minister, you don’t intimidate me one bit. And that is just the 

attitude you have to the Saskatchewan farmers; you’re going to 

slap them around, and that’s what you’re doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — You, yourself, have even said this deficiency 

payment is needed. You put a motion on the order paper. When? 

July 2. And not only have we not seen or heard when we’re going 

to get the payment, you haven’t even brought the motion forward 

for debate. 

 

So I ask you, Mr. Minister: what happened? Did Brian  

Mulroney tell you to cool it, or is it the fact that the issue isn’t 

important to you now that there’s no election around? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I can say, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. 

member always talks about an election when he’s in opposition. 

And when we make payments to farmers, and when we protect 

their farms, when we provide interest rate protection, or deficiency 

payments, or improve their drought payments during dry land 

periods, or we provide flood payments to those in the north-east, 

the NDP says, well that’s fine, but we would have done it better. 

And then when they come back in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, all 

they can say is: well, we should have an election. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The Premier cannot 

answer the question if he’s constantly interrupted by hon. 

members. And I ask hon. members to please allow the Premier to 

answer the question without constant interruption. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, when we do answer a 

question with respect to agriculture, normally the NDP talks from 

their seat. And every time we have guests, we hear of it. They do it 

again and again, and the children that come in here always listen 

to the NDP bark from their seat . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. order. Now the member from Quill Lake 

realizes that he can’t be for ever interrupting. And I’d like to draw 

to his attention the fact that I have just warned the hon. members 

not to interrupt when the Premier is speaking, and he immediately 

began. I ask him now to cease and desist. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I just add, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

you for providing some discipline and order to this Assembly so 

that the opposition can listen to the response. The response clearly 

is that the size and the amount of money going to farmers under 

the current Prime Minister through the deficiency payments, and 

western grain stabilization, and cash advances, and many other 

programs, Mr. Speaker, is the largest any farmers have seen 

anywhere in Saskatchewan or, indeed, across Canada. 

 

And I agree with the hon. member, we would like to have more 

money. And we will be asking for more money, and we expect 

continued support form the federal government and from the 

provincial government. And I just say to the hon. member, please 

remember, when you had the opportunity to help farmers and put 

them in this big trouble, you didn’t do anything for them. So 

before you stand up a little bit self-righteous and sanctimonious, 

please remember your record which wasn’t one dime in the face of 

21 per cent interest rates, not one dime. 

 

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4007 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rail Car Shortage for Transporting Grain 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

“slap ‘em around” Minister of Agriculture. It’s reported in The 

Globe and Mail today that the chief commissioner of the Canadian 

Wheat Board says that difficulties with rail car shortages have 

forced the Canadian What Board to say no to some sales this fall. 

 

Now when workers are out on strike or locked out, your 

government is very anxious to force them back to work; when 

there’s no grain sales lost, you like to slap them around. Will you 

be contacting the federal government today to make sure they 

clear up the railcar shortage problem and get farmers’ grain 

moving again in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll point out to the hon. 

member that the Canadian Wheat Board is making record grain 

sales and using the cars to the fullest capacity. And to maintain the 

record sales, we’re finding now we may even have to have 

additional boxcar capacity because of the large amount of volume 

that’s going out. 

 

Secondly, people are now forecasting, at the rate of the demand 

for the high quality wheat, we may in fact have a shortage of 

high-quality wheat to meet some of these markets. 

 

So in essence you’re giving a bouquet to the Canadian Wheat 

Board for marketing, one, a great deal of volume; and secondly, 

very high quality wheat world-wide, and it’s putting tremendous 

pressure on the system. 

 

Now that’s good news for the farmers, and we may have to look at 

increasing the capacity with respect to grain handling and the 

rolling stock so in fact we can meet the commitments and the 

demand world-wide, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, thank you. A new question to the Minister 

of Agriculture. I don’t think he heard the question. But we’ll go on 

to boxcars. We’ll talk about boxcars for a minute, and that’s my 

new question to you. 

 

As you well know, neither of the two main rail companies have 

purchased any hopper cars. In fact they’ve purchased no grain cars 

whatsoever, hopper or otherwise, in about the past 30 years. They 

rely on hopper cards purchased by the provincial governments or 

through the public through the federal government. 

 

When are you going to make sure that that grain moves? We 

should be proud of those record grain sales, that farmers are able 

to sell their grain, but if they can’t move it to the market, that’s 

your responsibility. Where are the boxcars going to come from? 

When will you make representation to the federal government? 

Will you do it today to make sure the grain moves? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. 

member has answered his own question. They are record sales, 

and the wheat board should be congratulated for record sales. We 

are marketing them world-wide. In fact the capacity is such now 

that we find that we may in fact need additional rolling stock to 

increase the record beyond that being set to date. 

 

So it’s a rather envious position. I’m sure that Americans and 

Australians and others who market grain in competition with us 

don’t like to see a record in terms of the Canadians marketing 

grain internationally and having that stock used to full capacity. So 

if indeed we are going to increase the record beyond this year’s, 

we may have to look at additional rolling stock. That’s a nice kind 

of problem to have in terms of record production and record sales, 

particularly for high quality grain. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Fuel Rebates 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

Premier and has to do with the draft of a free trade agreement 

between Canada and the United States, particularly the energy 

provisions of any such agreement and the prohibition against 

discriminatory pricing as between Canadian and American 

consumers of Canadian energy. 

 

I’d like to know, Mr. Premier, specifically with respect to farm 

fuel rebates, either federal or provincial rebates, do we yet have in 

the legal drafting that is going on, a firm definition of what 

precisely constitutes discriminatory pricing, and will rebates 

provided by either the federal government other provincial 

government to farmers be exempt from any such definition? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well from my recollection of the discussion 

I don’t recall anything regarding farm fuel rebates in the 

conversations, and I haven’t seen anything in draft. We do know 

that American farm subsidies are much higher than Canadian farm 

subsidies. The indication is to harmonize those over time and in 

fact move them closer and closer to some common denominator 

which is much less. 

 

So my initial reaction would be that they would not be included, 

but I would want to go back and examine anything that’s being 

looked at that I am not familiar with. So I’d say, my initial reaction 

is that there’s nothing that I’ve seen that would say it would be of 

any impact on the pricing of farm fuel here in Saskatchewan or 

indeed in Canada. 

 

MOTION 

 

Tribute to the Leader of the Opposition 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day — I 

wasn’t sure whether you were going to call orders of the day or 

not, but I’ll take this opportunity to say before orders of the day — 

I would like to take this opportunity to put forward what I believe 

to be a matter of pressing necessity and of some urgency in the 

form of a motion. And I’ll read the motion, Mr. Speaker, so the 

members  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4008 

 

may acquaint themselves of the fact so that I may obtain leave, if 

possible. 

 

The motion is as follows: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan hereby pays 

tribute to the Hon. Allan Blakeney for his 27 years of 

distinguished service to the people of Saskatchewan as a 

member of this Assembly; for his leadership, statesmanship 

and dedication to the public interest; for having exemplified 

throughout his public life the qualities on which a free, 

democratic and civilized society are based; and for his 

contributions to the better and brighter future for all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

It’s moved by myself, Mr. Speaker, and seconded by the member 

from Estevan, the Premier. And if I get leave, I’d like to say a few 

words on it. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to thank the members for granting 

leave to this motion which is before us, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very 

useful parliamentary practice to permit discussion on matters of 

urgent and pressing necessity, which is contained in this particular 

motion. Mr. Speaker, you will recognize that this item is equally 

as urgent as it is pressing. 

 

When I came to this House, Mr. Speaker, in 1964, I found the hon. 

member for Elphinstone had arrived before me — that wasn’t in 

my plan, but however he did arrive before me. By 1964, and I 

repeat, by the year 1964 his accomplishments and recognition 

were firmly established through his contribution as an outstanding 

public servant and an accomplished cabinet minister. Over the 

next 17 years, Mr. Speaker, it was an honour and a truly 

educational experience to have had such an ally and a leader as the 

most hon. member from Regina Elphinstone. He led by example, 

his word was his bond. 

 

On a personal note, leaving aside family, I cannot think of anyone 

who would have been better and given me more pleasure to sit 

with in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

What about the future, Mr. Speaker? Some time, perhaps 20 or 30 

years from now, when the member for Elphinstone’s mental 

abilities start to slow down somewhat, I believe that this member 

should be declared an historic national treasure. And I want to say 

to the Premier that this may give us an opportunity to access 

federal grants whereby we can preserve and maintain him into the 

future. 

 

I assure hon. members that my comments are not meant to hasten 

the departure from this legislature in any way, unless of course I 

can get an agreement from the Premier that his departure will 

bring two immediate by-elections. 

 

On the other hand, comments from a subject such as this are a 

delicate . . . there is a delicate balance that is required. To begin 

with, Mr. Speaker, it’s necessary that the words convey some 

social credit to the member, without being so liberal as to offend 

his conservative nature. It must all be delivered with a new and  

democratic eye to the future, to which we may all subscribe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first draft of my remarks, which I prepared 

earlier, were so complimentary to this person that it would have 

obligated him to stay on indefinitely in this Chamber. Now that 

member has earned a change of pace, a look at some other new 

fields, and I have therefore reduced the complimentary level of my 

remarks by 50 per cent, at least, so that the member may leave in 

due course, but feel free to Tory awhile — I mean, tarry awhile. In 

any case, I don’t feel I could be too generous in my remarks at any 

time. 

 

As I conclude my remarks on this important motion, Mr. Speaker, 

it is my sincere wish that you may be able to conclude this debate 

with a phrase we hardly ever seek, and seldom see, that being 

nemine contradicente. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured to 

second the motion by the member from Saskatoon Westmount. I 

wish to take a few moments in this legislature to make note of a 

milestone in Saskatchewan history, and particularly in 

Saskatchewan’s legislative history. 

 

For 17 years the member of the legislature for Regina Elphinstone 

has served as leader of his party in the Saskatchewan legislature. 

During those 17 years as leader, the member for Regina 

Elphinstone served the people of Saskatchewan as both Leader of 

the Opposition and indeed as Premier. 

 

This weekend at a convention here in Regina the member from 

Regina Elphinstone will step down as leader of his party. Today I 

wish to pay special recognition to the member from Regina 

Elphinstone and mark this milestone in the history of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The member for Regina Elphinstone and I are, as they say, 

political adversaries, and I am sure he would be the first to agree. 

Yet there are times in the cut and thrust of political affairs, Mr. 

Speaker, when those of us in the political arena put aside our 

partisan differences to pay recognition to those who have served 

with honour and respect in politics. Today is such a day. 

 

I am sure all members of this legislative Assembly would concur 

that the member for Regina Elphinstone has served his party and 

province with honour. Since 1960 — over 27 years — the member 

for Regina Elphinstone has been an active participant in politics as 

a member of the Saskatchewan legislature, as an MLA, cabinet 

minister, Leader of the Opposition, premier, and political leader on 

the national scene. 

 

The member for Regina Elphinstone is respected for his 

commitment to service in public life. Eight consecutive elections 

to this legislature have made him one of the longest-serving 

politicians in the nation. For 17 of his 27 years in public life the 

member for Regina Elphinstone has been the leader of a political 

party. He has been at the front row centre of the political stage in a 

very political  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4009 

 

province. 

 

And all of us who are politicians recognize — yes we recognize 

— the dedication and the commitment and indeed the effort that 

goes into leading a political party. Mr. Speaker, anyone who has 

led a political party for 17 years in victory and defeat deserves the 

praise and tribute of his colleagues in public life. I wish to 

commend the member for his years of service as the leader of his 

party and as a political leader in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

When the member from Regina Elphinstone came to 

Saskatchewan in 1950 from Nova Scotia, I am sure he did not 

expect that some 37 years later he would be part of history and 

such a party of the political history of the province of 

Saskatchewan. All of us recognize that he earned national 

recognition for his role in the patriation of the Canadian 

constitution. We recognize his years of service as a premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And on a personal note we recognize 

his wit, his solid commitment to his political philosophy, and his 

dedication to his wife and to his family. 

 

The member from Regina Elphinstone is proud of his personal 

beliefs, and though from time to time we may disagree, I respect 

his lifelong loyalty to the cause, and I want him to know that 

today. 

 

I want to extend to the member from Regina Elphinstone much 

joy and happiness in his retirement. You have been as they say, 

sir, a happy warrior of Saskatchewan politics, and we wish you 

many good years ahead to spend with your family and, indeed, 

your friends. 

 

On a day like this, I will leave it to the historians to judge the 

record of the member for Regina Elphinstone. But I am sure all 

members would agree that in his years of being a politician, he fits 

the description by Theodore Roosevelt, who once said, and I 

quote: 

 

Far better it is to dare mighty things, to win glorious 

triumphs, even though chequered by failures, than to rank 

with those poor spirits who neither enjoy much nor suffer 

much because they live in the grey twilight that knows not 

victory nor defeat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Elphinstone knows both 

victory and defeat, but I’m sure his life will be one of victory. 

 

And today we salute him for his 17 years in this legislature as the 

leader of an important political party in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Congratulations, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to say a few words 

on this motion. 

 

I want to say that I first knew of the hon. member of Elphinstone 

for many years before I actually met him, which was around 1970, 

when I was a young person articling in the law firm of 

MacPherson Leslie & Tyreman in Regina. And I’m sure the hon. 

member from Elphinstone remembers nothing about this first 

meeting  

because there was nothing significant about it. But it made an 

impression on me, Mr. Speaker, because it gave me the 

opportunity to meet a man of reputation and someone with 

respect, for whom I’ve had a great deal of respect. 

 

Later in ’73 to ’77 I worked for this Assembly as Law Clerk and 

Legislative Counsel, and at that time I observed very closely the 

hon. member of Elphinstone and his government, and I admired 

the fair and competent manner in which he governed this 

province. 

 

And I watched and I was inspired by his fairness, his competence, 

and his keen sense of justice. And now, as a colleague of his in 

this legislature, and observing him firsthand as Leader of the 

Opposition, I’ve developed even a greater respect for him, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I’m awed by his vast knowledge of government. A 15-minute 

or half-hour conversation with the member from Regina 

Elphinstone is worth three days of research, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

inspired by what many people have described as his academic 

brilliance, and that is a very important part of his personality. 

 

But there’s one thing, above all else, that inspires me, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is that the hon. member from Regina 

Elphinstone has defined in his own person an exemplary standard 

of public life. His honesty, his tolerance, his fairness, his keen 

sense of justice, and his abiding commitment to democracy — 

these are all values, Mr. Speaker, that I hold very dear, and I see 

them personified in the member for Regina Elphinstone. 

 

And I consider myself a very lucky person to have rubbed 

shoulders with a man of his stature and his integrity. It has 

enriched my life, as I know it has done for many others, and what 

I want to say today to Al is thank you. Thank you, Al. 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with other 

members here today to pay a special tribute to our leader, and to 

say at the outset that my relationship with Mr. Blakeney goes back 

a large number of years — almost more than what he and I want to 

remember, almost 25 years. 

 

When I came out of law school, I first association with Mr. 

Blakeney . . . I had known him politically before, but I had the 

privilege of articling in the law firm of Griffin, Blakeney, Beke, 

and later, Koskie. And later in the association in 1971-1974 I 

worked in the then premier’s office as a special assistant, and more 

recently, from 1975 to the present, served in his caucus and his 

cabinet, and in the caucus in opposition. 

 

I want to say that there are many ups and downs in the political 

career. And I can say that in 1982 the then premier showed, I 

think, the strength of his character in receiving a defeat. And out 

of that defeat the strength of his character was shown that he was 

not a quitter, nor was he bitter. But with his little band of seven we 

came in  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4010 

 

here, led by him, to challenge the enthusiastic 56 members of the 

government side who had, by the way, been out of power for 50 

years. And I must say indeed, Mr. Speaker, they were hungry. and 

they were enthusiastic. 

 

But Mr. Blakeney joined with us, and we were able to survive the 

onslaught. And what he has been able to do with his determination 

to serve his party and this province is to rebuild the party. And 

today we sit in opposition with a strengthened opposition of 25 

members. 

 

As others will have said, Mr. Blakeney is a distinguished scholar, 

a Rhodes scholar, and a man of great integrity. He served in a way 

that distinguished himself both as a civil servant, as a lawyer, and 

as a politician. And I think all of the people of Saskatchewan, 

whether he was winning elections or losing elections, still admired 

and trusted the man, and I say that it’s a great tribute to his 

character and dedication. 

 

And I think he was respected as premier of this province for his 

outstanding knowledge of the area of finance and administration. 

And I can well recall the indications of the financial community 

saying that under his stewardship Saskatchewan was the 

best-managed area in North American — what a tribute! 

 

I say that no doubt Mr. Blakeney could well have excelled in the 

corporate and business world, but he chose — and fortunately for 

Saskatchewan — to take on the arduous task, as the Premier 

indicated, of the job of politics. 

 

And so I want to join with all of you here today to pay a tribute to 

a long-time leader and a friend. And I say that the annals of 

history, I am sure, will speak well of the contribution that he has 

made. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am more than happy 

to bring a few words to this motion and, Mr. Speaker, I bring them 

to this motion as a member of a generation of Saskatchewan 

people who have been influenced by this member from 

Elphinstone, this current Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Now I don’t want to compare our ages today, Mr. Speaker, but I 

would observe to some of the children in the galleries and to other 

members that when this member was entering this House, I was 

entering grade 3. Mr. Speaker, through my years at university this 

member was my Premier, and frankly there is a generation of us in 

this province who do not know public life or politics in this 

province apart from this man. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve often said to family and friends and in public 

forums that I will treasure for a lifetime the opportunity to have 

served with this man. For more than one reason I would have 

wished that opportunity could have been extended to a number of 

others. I will treasure it for a lifetime. And I believe that I can 

speak for all of us on this side of the House who make up the class 

of ’86, who came here for the first time in October 1986 — we 

have considered it our good fortune to serve under the leadership 

of this man. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this man has been our teacher. He has been, we, the 

class of ’86, he has been our teacher in the workings of this House. 

He has been our tutor in understanding the functions of 

government. He has spent many an hour with us, helping us to 

understand the complexities and the intricacies of public policy. 

For those of us who are new to this House, Mr. Speaker, and new 

to this caucus, this member has been more than our leader. He has 

been our teacher, our tutor, our mentor, and we could not have 

asked for any wiser or any better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but this member from Elphinstone has been more 

than our teacher. He has also been, frankly, an inspiration to us. 

Not by word alone, but by his every act he has inspired in us a 

love for this legislature, a love for this parliamentary process, a 

love for parliamentary democracy, a deep respect for this 

institution. And rarely, Mr. Speaker, have I or have we known an 

individual whose deeply-held commitments were so reflected and 

matched by his action. 

 

We have been inspired by the courage of this man’s convictions. 

We have been inspired by his commitment to service. We have 

been inspired by his humility in service. We have been inspired by 

his commitment to social democracy. Rarely, Mr. Speaker, have 

we seen a man whose deeply held convictions were so matched by 

action. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think I can be excused if I wrap up with a verse 

of scripture. Mr. Speaker, I close with this little thought from the 

scriptures by saying, that in all things, this member, this former 

minister, this former premier, this leader, has fought the good 

fight. But I do not complete the scripture, Mr. Speaker, for this 

man’s course is far from finished — far from finished, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It has 

been my pleasure to have served with the member from 

Elphinstone since 1975 in this Legislative Assembly. I think the 

member from Elphinstone has had a career which is unique, 

without precedent, and I doubt very much it will ever be repeated. 

It is truly spectacular. 

 

I think there are two or three members who have served longer in 

the Assembly than the member from Elphinstone. What I think is 

unique about the member from Elphinstone’s career is, the entire 

27 years were spent at centre stage. He has been in the centre of 

every pivotal event in this province’s history since he was first 

elected. 

 

I entirely agree with all of the comments which were made by my 

colleagues. I don’t wish to repeat them, but I do want to refer to 

one quality in the member from Elphinstone which I think has had 

the most profound importance, and which isn’t always seen, 

because it’s not exercised in the public platform. He has 

demonstrated an ability, in difficult times, to find a compromise 

that everybody can live with, while never abandoning his 

principles. 

 

He was first elected in 1960; if my recollection of events  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4011 

 

were correct, was made Minister of Education — never did serve 

as a back-bencher. Members will recall that the Douglas 

government had promised to bring in medicare. The opposition 

provided to be ferocious, and anything that could go wrong, did go 

wrong. The minister of Health, Walter Erb, resigned — crossed 

the floor. Again, as would happen time and time again, the 

member from Elphinstone was asked to fill the void. 

 

It would be going to far to credit the eventual outcome of that 

entirely to the member from Elphinstone, but he and others with 

him exhibited that same quality; they stuck to their principles and 

yet found a compromise which got this province out of what was 

undoubtedly one of its more dangerous events that could well have 

ended in bloodshed. It didn’t, and that it didn’t is a credit, I think, 

not to the cool tempers on the other side, but it was a credit to the 

diplomatic skills of the member form Elphinstone. 

 

Going forward a bit —I don’t want to take too long — that same 

quality of judgement and balance was exhibited after the 

leadership convention in 1970, in what I thought was a 

master-stroke. The convention was only over by a couple of 

months, and he appointed his former rival, the member from 

Riversdale, as the deputy leader. I had not theretofore known there 

was a position of deputy leader, and I’m not sure there was on the 

opposition, but it was a masterful stroke and not always easy to do. 

 

I wonder if the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who might 

contemplate how much better off the federal Liberal party would 

have been if Mr. Turner could have made similar use of Mr. 

Chrétien’s skills . . . that’s often difficult to do. Again a spirit of 

compromise and judgement and balance. 

 

The same skills were exhibited again in the take-over of the potash 

mine. This was the largest take-over in the province’s history, an 

undertaking of enormous risk and enormous complexity; as it 

turned out, all done without expropriating a single mine. 

 

The same qualities of compromise without losing sight of your 

essential principles were in evidence. The goals were achieved, no 

expropriations took place, and everybody in the end result felt they 

had been fairly treated. 

 

Those same skills — compromise, diplomacy, and striking a 

balance — were again evident in the discussions leading up to the 

constitution, in which the member from Elphinstone was one of 

the lead players. 

 

I was asked by a reporter, what was his finest hour? It’s an 

impossible question to ask, but the comment that came to mind 

was the period after the defeat of the government in ’82. 

 

It was an extremely difficult period, I think, for many of us — 

totally unexpected. We watched our friends, people whom we had 

lived with and worked with for years, unemployed, going through 

a difficult period, somehow or other feeling some responsibility 

for that, feeling as if we didn’t deserve to be so badly treated. 

None of those emotions which I suspect presented themselves to 

the  

member from Elphinstone were ever in evidence. 

 

Took over an opposition, none of whom had ever been in 

opposition before. Apart from the member from Elphinstone, none 

of us had served previous to ’75 — there were none of the 

veterans. Turned it into what I think would fairly be . . . I think 

everyone would fairly agree it was a competent opposition. Came 

back from a devastating defeat to near victory in ’86. The 

distribution of seats don’t show it, but the vote was extremely 

close. 

 

Before sitting down, I want to mention Anne Blakeney. As is 

often the case, I think our spouses are not always accorded credit 

for the role they play. I don’t wish to embarrass the visitor in the 

gallery, but suffice it to say that the two complemented each other. 

Their personalities and skills complement each other, and they 

made an extremely effective political team, one that I think most 

of us would envy. With those I will, of course, be joining others in 

voting for this motion. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

honoured to have the opportunity to speak in tribute to the member 

from Elphinstone here today and support this resolution. 

 

I recollect when I first met this man, it was in 1970 when there 

was then a leadership campaign. And I remember the member 

from Elphinstone coming to the constituency of Humboldt to meet 

the delegates and the executive. And I remember after he left how 

all of those delegates and that executive worked so hard to explain 

to me why this would be the best choice as the leader of the New 

Democratic Party at that time. And as the years have passed, they 

have proven to be correct. 

 

He has distinguished himself in the tasks that have been put before 

him, and deserves very much the honour and the tribute that not 

only that we are giving today, but I think all the people in 

Saskatchewan give. 

 

(1500) 

 

When I was elected in 1971, I came to Regina for the first time in 

my life. That may sound strange to some people. And I came into 

this Chamber and I felt, as I think a lot of new members usually 

do, somewhat intimidated by all of what is here. And then the 

premier came to me and said, will you second the motion on the 

Speech from the Throne. And I can tell you that that was the 

beginning for me of losing this sense of intimidation. And I’ve 

appreciated that opportunity ever since. 

 

The member from Elphinstone, as has been said, has provided 27 

years of distinguished service in a wide range of capacities as a 

leader of the New Democratic Party, and the Leader of the 

Opposition, and the premier, and the member from his 

constituency. And he has also, in doing that, achieved national 

prominence and contributed immensely to the growth and the 

maturity of Canada as a nation. And this province and this country 

of ours is better off for this man’s willingness to serve with 

statesmanship and dedication in public life. 

 

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4012 

 

And although the member will be stepping down from his present 

role in public life in the near future, I somehow don’t believe that 

his continuing contribution will stop. It may be made in different 

capacities, but many will continue to benefit from his passionate 

beliefs, his commitment to serve, and his vast experience and 

knowledge. 

 

In a personal sense I want to say, and if I may use the member’s 

name at this one occasion, to Allan Blakeney: thank you for the 

opportunities you made available to me; for the advice given when 

needed; for the time I was fortunate to have had to be a colleague 

of yours. To have had the opportunity to be associated with you 

has made a big and positive impact on my life, as it has on the life 

of many people, if not all the people of Saskatchewan. And I know 

that as we say thank you to you today, that those sentiments which 

have been expressed here today are shared by everyone in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I salute as well, Anne Blakeney, who is in the gallery. She has, 

too, made a major contribution. And I join with members of this 

Assembly in wishing you both well, and happiness and all of those 

things that should come in a positive way as you take the next 

steps in your life together. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to speak in 

support of this motion and associate myself with the tributes that 

have been paid today to the hon. member for Elphinstone. This 

may be his final day in the sitting of this Assembly as he turns 

over the reins of leadership in his party to someone else later on 

this weekend. 

 

He arrived on the political scene, particularly in this legislature, of 

course, long before I did. Indeed, as a young news reporter 17 

years ago I covered that convention which selected him as the 

leader of his party. But for a few years we have been contestants 

and competitors in Saskatchewan’s political arena. His reputation 

has, of course, been well established, as an orator and a debater, as 

a fighter, as a believer in democracy, a man of deep conviction, 

and a man of very significant leadership skill and acumen. 

 

While there are many of us, of course, Mr. Speaker, who take a 

different political view on the issues, there are none who would 

doubt this man’s sincerity, his ability, or his commitment to 

Saskatchewan. He has served Saskatchewan long and well, with 

wit and with wisdom — oh yes, with lots of controversy took, 

along the way — but certainly with the respect of both his political 

allies and foes alike. 

 

We thank him for those years of service. We congratulate him 

upon his contribution to Saskatchewan and to Canada, and we 

wish him well in what the future may bring for him and his wife 

and his family. 

 

And before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be remiss if I 

did not convey a message to the hon. member for Elphinstone 

from one who sat across the way from him for quite some years, a 

message from Senator Dave Steuart, who wishes to be 

remembered to Mr. Blakeney  

on this occasion, to congratulate him, to pay tribute to his record 

of service, to say that if circumstances present themselves, Senator 

Steuart will prepared a place in the Senate, if that becomes . . . and 

to remind Mr. Blakeney, of course, of each and every point, in 

detail, upon which they disagreed over the years, and I won’t 

review that record. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I suspect this motion to going to pass 

unanimously. It’s an appropriate, democratic demonstration of 

respect and admiration for a man, the member for Elphinstone, 

who has served this institution — the legislature — and 

Saskatchewan with distinction. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the House, 

I have felt my pulse and it is still beating, and I was reassured by 

feeling that pulse, because I was beginning to fear that I’d 

somehow posthumously stumbled upon the consideration of a 

condolence motion. I want to assure hon. members that I . . . at 

least I believe I’m still alive. 

 

I was particularly pleased that my wife Anne heard all this. She 

has from time to time been less impressed than you so kindly said 

you have been. 

 

I do want to thank you all for warm words, from my colleagues, 

and particularly from the Premier —not only in his capacity as 

Premier, but because he is a political adversary, and he none the 

less found some kind things to say. 

 

I want to take a little moment of the House’s time to talk about 

serving in the legislature, and to be a little serious for a minute. 

When we look around and consider the human condition 

generally, there are many things which depress us, but some things 

in which we can take some pride. 

 

And one of the things which gives us some cause for 

encouragement, as we look on the world scene, is the fact that free 

men have developed institutions to govern themselves. We’ve 

seen great advances in the world in technology and economics, but 

we’ve also, I think, appreciated that technology and economic 

achievement is not enough. We must also find some way for 

fairness and physical well-being to be available to the largest 

possible number of people, and also ways to permit the human 

spirit to soar. 

 

And so we have devised these methods of public or parliamentary 

government, and we are involved in that process. And I’m sure 

that those of us who have been involved in it think from time to 

time that it’s a pretty untidy process, and we wonder whether it’s 

all worthwhile. If I may say something to the newer members, I 

believe it is worthwhile. 

 

It is worthwhile because it is a contribution to a very important 

part of human striving, and that is to find ways where free men can 

govern themselves. From time to time the press, and sometimes 

ourselves, feel that it isn’t worthwhile because it’s a slow and 

cumbersome way to make decisions. But I say to members of the 

legislature,  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4013 

 

we’re not primarily here to make decisions — other agencies of 

government make decisions; we pass upon them. We can, on rare 

occasions, cause the executive arm of government to change their 

decision, but rarely. 

 

Our job fundamentally is to talk about them, to discuss them, to 

question, to explain them, to reply to questions, and all this is so 

that the voters and the public will understand. Because the voters, 

if our system works, are entitled to know why we’re doing things. 

They’re entitled to have a chance to contact their member to raise 

a protest if, in fact, they have one. 

 

I say to new members, and to others, in the tedium that frequently 

engulfs this House and every other chamber of parliamentary or 

popular government, don’t assume that fundamentally what you’re 

doing isn’t worthwhile, because in my judgement you’d be 

making a mistake. It is worthwhile. One only has to look at areas 

which do not have this cumbersome, untidy, tedious system to 

know that they are far poorer in the things that really count than 

are we. 

 

Having said that, I don’t think we need to take ourselves quite so 

seriously as we sometimes do. there’s no law against a little 

humour. A little levity is not illegal — this is something that the 

member for Souris-Cannington has always been aware of. And 

when I look around, when I look back, I think some of my 

happiest memories have been of some of the characters we’ve had 

in this House, the Minty Loptsons, or the Dave Steuarts, or the 

Tommy Douglases, or the Jim Snedkers, or the member for 

Souris-Cannington. And they have added something which makes 

the work of the House, the talking of the House, and the 

questioning and the replying a little more bearable and a little 

more effective. 

 

If I may just touch upon a few personal things. In personal terms, 

my years in this House and in public life have been stimulating 

and rewarding. As the Premier mentioned, I was a young man who 

came from Nova Scotia, and within 10 years and a few months of 

arriving here I was not only a member of the legislature but a 

member of the cabinet. And that demonstrated a level of tolerance 

and an open society which has characterized Saskatchewan, which 

is far rarer than we sometimes think. And I have always been 

grateful to the people of Saskatchewan in this sense: that they are 

open; they do permit people to come in and join them and to build 

the sort of society which each of us is striving for. 

 

And I look back on my years, and I won’t try to recall all of the 

events. One thinks of the medicare dispute, which was the first 

occasion which I had to be in a political and public battle where 

emotions ran very, very high. And as I’ve said the press, how do I 

illustrate the nature of the battle then? I was saying that I was 

subbing for the premier from time to time and taking news 

conferences, and we were having, during this brief period, two 

news conferences a day, at which there were never less than 60 

reporters. This gives you some idea of the nature of the political 

conflict in which we were involved. 

 

And then the battle over resources in the mid ’70s with the federal 

government and the Supreme Court and the resource companies, 

which ultimately was resolved one  

way or another, and with section 92(a) of the constitution. The 

referendum debate, and patriation — and that story is familiar. 

 

And closer to home, and not of national significance but things 

which I am proud of — and I think there’s no shame in being 

proud of some of one’s accomplishments — I think of the 

Wascana Centre park project, which has always been a favourite 

of mine; the establishment of the new University of Regina; and 

forward strides that we have made, and I know are continuing to 

make in what I regard as the greatest ongoing social problem in 

this province, and that is the relations between native and 

non-native. 

 

(1515) 

 

And I’m proud of what has been accomplished, since I came into 

public life, in giving people of native origin a feeling that they are 

full citizens, and I know that others on both sides of the House 

share my view that this continues to be an important, indeed a very 

important, issue that needs to be addressed at all times by 

governments if we are to avoid a level of social conflict that we 

see occasionally elsewhere, and which we have seen instances of 

here. So I commend all hon. members — I invite you to consider 

that problem, because it’s one that’s going to be with this 

legislature and many in the future. 

 

And so to my wife and my family, and the voters of 

Saskatchewan, and the members of this House, and to members of 

previous Houses, I say, thank you. It’s been a great experience, for 

which I will continue to be, and am, very grateful. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you all. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Legislation 

Ombudsman — Program Services 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 21 

 

Item 13 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I have, sitting on my left, Earl McKeen, 

chief investigator from the Ombudsman’s office. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. You will 

recall, Mr. Minister, that earlier on in this session the New 

Democratic opposition complained very loudly about the fact that 

your new Ombudsman was appointed without any consultation 

with the opposition; notwithstanding the fact that we had asked for 

such consultations. 

 

So I’d like to ask the minister why he did not consult with the 

opposition before he put forward a name as Acting  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4014 

 

Ombudsman? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We’ve been through this debate before as 

the hon. member has acknowledged and at some length. And you 

know, we were criticized considerably by the opposition at that 

time. I don’t think anyone in the opposition criticized the 

credentials of the appointment, or since the appointment I don’t 

think anyone has criticized the effectiveness of that particular 

Ombudsman. 

 

The fact is — and I forget the dates — but there was a letter sent 

to the Leader of the Opposition indicating that we would be, in 

accordance with the Act, recommending . . . or appointing Mr. 

McLellan as the Acting Ombudsman and we would be seeking 

confirmation for that appointment by resolution in the legislature 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The letter, she says the letter came 

after. The letter was sent to the Leader of the Opposition prior to 

the appointment of the now Ombudsman as the Ombudsman, and 

the appointment was made in accordance with the Act because the 

position cannot be vacant. 

 

Ms. Simard: — There was absolutely no notification, Mr. 

Minister, before the appointment had been made, and it’s solely a 

semantical argument on your part to suggest that there was 

notification. The appointment of Acting Ombudsman was made 

without any notifications, and at that point it is virtually a fait 

accompli. And you have to admit that, Mr. Minister. To suggest 

otherwise is not being fair to this House. 

 

The fact of the matter is there was no consultation and there was 

no all-party committee set up in spite of the fact that we had 

requested that. And you have failed to give us today any good 

reason as to why that was not done, other than the fact that your 

government chose to engage in a very anti-democratic method, 

contrary to the traditions of this House, in appointing the present 

Ombudsman. And as I understand, that appointment was not 

advertised. Now I would like you to tell me what you see the role 

of the Ombudsman to be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The Ombudsman’s role is . . . It’s not 

something that’s been a deep, dark secret in this province, or in 

other provinces where ombudsmen exist. 

 

The Ombudsman is simply to be the arbiter, if you like, to settle 

grievances or disputes between the citizens of the province and its 

government. And there are some limiting factors in that role. I 

think it’s limited to the level of deputy minister or the level below 

that, and that hasn’t changed. That’s been the case, I think, since 

the day we had the original Ombudsman in this province, Mr. 

Justice Boychuk. But — perhaps a little over-simplified — but 

that is the role of the Ombudsman. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Statements were made, Mr. Minister, by your 

government that perhaps we didn’t need an Ombudsman any 

longer, and the Office of Ombudsman could be eliminated. Could 

you tell us now how you . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who said that? 

 

Ms. Simard: — I believe the member from Melville made  

those statements. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I don’t agree with him. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Well let’s have it for the record, Mr. Minister. 

You shouted over that you don’t agree with him. Well could you 

please put in on record that you don’t agree with him, and I want 

to know whether you feel the position of Ombudsman is necessary 

and whether you will be maintaining that office in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m on record in more than 

one place. I spoke to the — this is a few years ago — I spoke to 

the ombudsmen of Canada when they gathered in Saskatoon. And 

at that time I made it very clear what my views were relative to the 

Office of the Ombudsman. And it’s a very important role that they 

have in our society and their . . . While individual members of 

either caucus may have their individual views on the Office of the 

Ombudsman, the position of me and the position of the 

government is that the Ombudsman’s office has played a very 

important role and will continue to play a very important role in 

the society of Saskatchewan.  

 

Ms. Simard: — Could you also tell me, Mr. Minister, how you 

view the independence of the Ombudsman, vis-a-vis government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There’s no doubt, and I think his 

independence is beyond question. The investigations are made by 

his own staff. He can make recommendations to government. 

Government has a certain period set out in statute that they can 

either act on the recommendation or reject the recommendation. 

 

But the decision and the recommendations of the Ombudsman are 

his, and come from his own investigations and those of his staff. 

 

Ms. Simard: — With respect to Mr. McLellan directly, Mr. 

Minister, could you please tell me what human rights experience 

he had prior to becoming Ombudsman? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I can’t today. I think I did during the 

debate when he was appointed, and I think I remember going 

through the resumé of the man at that time. And several members 

from your side in fact, on the record, have stated that they had no 

quarrel with the credentials of the individual. 

 

Ms. Simard: — You did put the credentials on record, however 

you did not refer, if I recall correctly, to any human rights 

experience. And what I’m suggesting today is, that is one of the 

requirements for an Ombudsman. And I’m wondering whether 

Mr. McLellan has had this human rights experience, because I 

don’t recall you having mentioned it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I suppose in many respects, and I don’t 

know if he’s had formal training or experience directly in the area 

of human rights, but I suppose that — and you will know better 

than I — that a man with legal training and living in the 

community of Saskatchewan for 50-odd years, as he has done, he 

will have a pretty good feel for matters relative to human rights. 

 

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4015 

 

Ms. Simard: — Would you please tell the House what the terms 

of employment are for Mr. McLellan, and I’m referring now to 

salary, benefits, holidays and any special benefits? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s set by statute under section 6: 

 

(1) The Ombudsman shall be paid: 

 

 (a) a salary equal to the salary fixed from time to time by 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council . . .  

 

and shall be equal to that paid to a provincial court judge. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Are there any other terms of employment over 

and above what’s stipulated in the statute? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — My understanding is that it is a direct 

linkage. 

 

Ms. Simard: — It’s a direct linkage. You mean that that’s the 

entire package? You’re shaking your head, yes. 

 

With respect to the former ombudsman, Mr. Speaker, you will 

recall . . . Mr. Minister, rather — you will recall that he came 

forward with a report that your government wasn’t too pleased 

with and there was a general sort of attitude by the government 

that they didn’t like this messenger so they were going to shoot the 

messenger. 

 

I’m just wondering with respect to his report on child abuse 

whether the Office of the Ombudsman has seen that this has been 

followed through on and what has taken place since the 

ombudsman came down with that special report. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — With respect to that investigation and that 

report, there were inquiries and responses from right across the 

country and so other agencies, not only in Saskatchewan but 

across the country, have more or less picked up that ball and the 

Ombudsman’s office here in Saskatchewan is monitoring what is 

going on in those other agencies or with those other agencies 

relative to that issue. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Will we be getting some sort of formal review 

and update, say a few months down the road, as to what is 

happening on the issue? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The Ombudsman may report from time to 

time, as ombudsmen do from time to time, but I can’t speak for the 

Ombudsman. And as you have already stated, the independence of 

the office is paramount, so I think I’ll just leave that decision with 

him. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I have here a list of the staff 

cut-backs in three of our major public watchdogs in the province 

. . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — Three of the what? 

 

Ms. Simard: — Three of the major public watchdogs: the  

provincial Ombudsman, the Provincial Auditor, and the Human 

Rights Commission. Now I don’t know how up to date these are; I 

think I got the statistics in April or May of this year. 

 

The provincial Ombudsman in ’81-82 had 16.1 people on staff, 

and there’s been . . . it went up to 16.8 in ’82-83 and then started 

sliding downwards, and in ’87-88 the staff is 13.4. 

 

The Provincial Auditor has gone down from 72 to 63 in the same 

sort of time period, and the Human Rights Commission down 21.1 

to 15.4 in the same time period. 

 

And the point I wish to make, Mr. Minister, is the fact that, in spite 

of the fact these agencies particularly — and I can speak from 

knowledge with respect to the Ombudsman and the Human Rights 

Commission — have had an increasing work-load over the years, 

and it has been very, very difficult for them to do all the work that 

is required of them, but what we’ve seen under the PC government 

is a slow cut-back of the staff, notwithstanding the fact that the 

work-load has been decreasing. 

 

And I wish to make the point that the effect of decreasing the 

amount of staff that’s available for an agency like this is to muzzle 

the agency, to make it very difficult for the agency to perform the 

duties and responsibilities that are prescribed in legislation. 

 

And so I’d like to know from the minister whether this trend is 

going to quit, and whether we will actually see the staff 

requirements of the provincial Ombudsman in particular here, 

because that’s what we’re dealing with, being met properly by 

your government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, I can’t speak for the Human Rights 

Commission; you’re going to have to talk to the Minister of 

Justice there. I have some familiarity with what has gone on in the 

Provincial Auditor’s office and, you know, the Minister of Finance 

has put those arguments forth on more than one occasion. 

 

There were two positions vacant in the Ombudsman’s office at the 

end of April, or beginning of April . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — April 1. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — April 1. And they were, in the case of the 

one at least, was a gentleman that retired, having reached 

retirement age. I’m not familiar with the other one, but the only 

cut-back that has . . . or reduced staffing that has happened in the 

Ombudsman’s office is that those two positions that became 

vacant at that time were not refilled. 

 

And the case-load, I’m told, this year is down, year to date, 

slightly from what it was last year. And if that trend continues, it, 

you know, will be down even more by year end. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Are those two positions going to be filled? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, because of the restraint mode that 

we’re in across government, those two positions have been 

deleted. 

 

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4016 

 

Ms. Simard; That’s two positions from ’86-87, as I understand. 

When you look at ’82 down to ’87 you’re talking about almost 

three positions, I believe. So is the Ombudsman going outside of 

Regina and Saskatoon, and going into rural Saskatchewan and 

small towns around Saskatchewan to make the services of the 

Ombudsman more accessible, more available, to rural 

Saskatchewan?  

 

And I’m wondering if the Ombudsman is also engaging in an 

education program vis-a-vis the Ombudsman’s role and 

government with people living outside of the two major centres. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, the question of travelling outside of 

Regina or Saskatoon . . . I’m told that one of the reasons the travel 

budget is relatively high in the Ombudsman’s office is that they do 

get out into other parts of Saskatchewan, and last year there were 

20 communities visited. And what they do is they go into the 

community with two people and have a temporary office for one 

day or two days, depending on anticipated load or perhaps actual 

load, and that itinerary as well is being advanced for the balance of 

this year. 

 

Ms. Simard: — You just said it was an annual thing, and they do 

it every year. And the Ombudsman will be continuing to do that in 

the future, I take it. And the answer is affirmative. 

 

Well, I’m pleased to hear that because I think that outreach is 

absolutely essential to the proper functioning of the office. It’s 

very important to get out to rural Saskatchewan because people in 

rural Saskatchewan have difficulty coming into the cities or may 

simply not be aware that the service is there and they are having 

difficulty with something or other. They don’t know where to turn, 

and they’re not aware that the Ombudsman is there to help them. 

 

So I am very pleased to see that that service to the public is still 

continuing. And I would urge the minister and the Ombudsman to 

continue with that service, expand it if the budget allows, but I see 

it as a very vital and important part of the role of Ombudsman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Part of the travel budget that I’ve talked 

about, getting out into rural Saskatchewan . . . I’m not talking 

about just Carlyle and Maple Creek and Tisdale. The travel budget 

relative to CVA (central vehicle agency) or charter aircraft into the 

North, they spend a lot of time going into the small northern 

communities as well. So no corner of Saskatchewan is ignored 

relative to these outreach exercises as you called them. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Could the minister please tell me whether there 

has been any contracting out of these services of the Ombudsman, 

and if so, to whom and how much was the contract? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Now the only thing that has been 

contracted out, I understand, ever, in the Ombudsman’s office is 

from time to time if there’s a clerical vacancy or for some reason 

an unanticipated backlog, they will contract a position or two of 

clerical. 

 

Ms. Simard: — I referred earlier to a staff overload in this, and 

. . . you know, to the staff being overworked. For example, out of 

the 1985 annual report of the Ombudsman, it states: 

 

Faced with further workload increases in 1985 and no 

additional staff or other resources, there is again, a special 

need to express my appreciation . . . for an effort above and 

beyond the call of the duty. 

 

My appreciation to my staff is what was said. 

 

And then in the most recent annual report, 1986, at page 6, 

referring to the budget, the Ombudsman says: 

 

. . . I would ask the members to note that the Ombudsman’s 

budget for fiscal 1986-87 was some $20,000 less than for 

1985-86 and, indeed, less than for 1983-84. 

 

This kind of seemingly innocuous budget reduction 

necessarily and seriously limits our operational capabilities at 

a time of increasing (work-loads). 

 

And then I look at a comparison of the staff and the work-load 

from ’82 to ’86, and we see that the complaints against agencies, 

government agencies, from ’82 to ’86 increased by some 18 per 

cent. And then there were other complaints which increased by 

approximately 13 per cent over the same period, making an 

average of 15 per cent. 

 

But there was a staff reduction of some 8 per cent, and that, I 

believe, is what the Ombudsman was referring to in the 1986 

report, and the fact that there had been in effect a budget reduction 

in that period of time. 

 

Now you made a statement earlier today that the work-load was 

slightly decreasing this year. I’m wondering if you could explain 

to me whether that’s a temporary thing, whether that’s a trend, 

what the reason for that is — if you can. And I’m wondering 

whether you will take into consideration the comments of the 

Ombudsman in the most recent report that was taken forth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, I think it’s too early to say whether 

we have a trend established as it relates to declining numbers. I 

hope that it’s a trend. 

 

And as to the question relative to the comments of the 

Ombudsman, budget and staffing comments, I would like to add 

my words to those of the Ombudsman, both old and new, in 

complimenting the staff over there for the fine work that they do, 

recognizing that they have a significant work-load and do put in 

lengthy hours in all kinds of different locations right across 

Saskatchewan, not just in Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

I would hope that when this restraint exercise is over, that we will 

be in a position to give the kind of budget attention to the 

Ombudsman’s office that is necessary to give some relief to the 

staff people that are there. 

 

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4017 

 

Ms. Simard: — There was an increase, Mr. Minister, from ’86-87 

to ’87-88, but it didn’t got to staff. Could you please explain to me 

what categories that increase fell under. Like how much to, for 

example, materials, supplies and equipment, other contractual 

services, investigator, and travel expenses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The most significant bump there is 

because of the changes relative to property management. In the old 

scheme of things, Supply and Services used to pick up the bill for 

the rent. Now the Ombudsman’s office pays property management 

corporation for their own space. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Has there been any out-of-province travel? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Six people attended the Canadian 

conference in Edmonton, and less than $2,000 was the cost of 

those six people attending in Edmonton I’m told. That’s the only 

out-of-province travel. 

 

(1545) 

 

Ms. Simard: — I’m sorry, six people attending, what was that, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The Canadian Conference of 

Ombudsman in Edmonton. 

 

Ms. Simard: — The other point that I would like to make with 

you: you had spoken about two positions being eliminated, and 

one of them was the sort of deputy ombudsman or the Assistant 

Ombudsman. You had said that you weren’t going to fill that 

position in times of restraint. I would like to know whether the 

minister might reconsider that because I understand that that is a 

very key position and a very important position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There has been an application made to the 

Public Service Commission to eliminate a position of investigator 

and maintain the position of Assistant Ombudsman. It was the 

Assistant Ombudsman’s position that was vacated, because that 

position — or was eliminated, because it was vacant at the time. In 

fact, Mr. McKeen is acting as the Assistant Ombudsman today, 

and when this application is dealt with, hopefully he will be, not 

only acting, but the Assistant Ombudsman. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you. I understand there were some 71 

written recommendations made by the Ombudsman in 1986. 

Could you please tell me if that’s correct. I also understand that 

there were approximately 67 outstanding at the year end, and I am 

wondering how many are still outstanding. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We’ll give you an undertaking. We don’t 

have that here, but we’ll get it for you. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Could I please have an undertaking to be advised 

exactly what the written recommendations were, and which ones 

are outstanding. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We can give you the number, the nature 

and the department, etc., but we can’t give you the  

substance of the recommendation. There may be a point that we 

could give it to you, but we would be very reluctant to give that, or 

to make those public until . . . or at least until we see them 

ourselves or know what they are. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Okay. Is there a further answer to that question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Just that it’s a kind of a rolling number, if 

you like, because some are dealt with, and we can give you current 

numbers as opposed to year end, as is in the annual report, and 

some of them have been dealt with already. new ones have come 

up, so we can give you current numbers, and we can give you the 

nature of each recommendation, but we wouldn’t be prepared to 

give you the substance of those recommendations. 

 

Ms. Simard: — When can I get that information, Mr. Minister? 

 

An Hon. Member: — I would say within a few days. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Within the next week you said, is that correct? 

Within the next week? Okay, well we’ll be waiting for it then. 

Thank you. 

 

Item 13 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Legislation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 21 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Legislation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 21 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 21 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

Vote 152 

 

Item 1 — Statutory 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, can 

you please tell me what this amount of money . . . whether you can 

break down specifically what this amount of money was borrowed 

for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I will give you an undertaking to have my 

officials prepare an explanation and send it to you. I obviously 

don’t have that at my fingertips. 

 

Ms. Simard: — When will that be sent, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — If I get out of here before 5 o’clock, I’ll 

have it to you within a matter of a couple of days — very quickly. 

 

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4018 

 

Ms. Simard: — I’m not so sure you’ll get out of here by 4 or 5 

o’clock. 

 

Mr. Minister, we haven’t dealt with all the issues in Sask Power 

Corporation in Crown Corporations Committee at this point. And 

one that I’ve asked you about repeatedly in the legislature, but I 

haven’t had an opportunity, or haven’t done so yet in the Crown 

corporations meeting, so I’m going to do here today, and that’s the 

amount of George Hill’s salary and benefits that is being paid. 

And I mean the entire package. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, my answer . . . And the 

hon. member is right — she has raised this on more than one 

occasion. And my answer has been consistently the same, and that 

is that in keeping with the long-standing practice of this 

government and previous governments, both NDP and Liberal and 

before, that we will provide that information only in the form of 

the aggregate sum of the management group, whether it’s Sask 

Power or SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development 

Corporation), or whatever. That’s been the way that it’s been 

handled in the past, and that’s the way that we will continue to 

handle it. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, does that mean that you will not 

give us Mr. Hill’s salary, in specific amounts, his salary and 

benefits pertaining to him? Is that what you’re saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That’s a fair interpretation of what I’ve 

just said. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the appointment of George Hill, as 

you very well know, is a highly political appointment, and 

everybody in this . . . many people in this province look at it in that 

fashion. We all know that he’s being paid a very handsome sum of 

money — very handsome sum of money. We have been advised 

that it’s probably in the area of $200,000 a year when you look at 

all the benefits. Maybe that’s an underestimation; I don’t know. 

 

I think you have an obligation, Mr. Minister, to come forward with 

that information to the public. When we’re talking those sums of 

money, you have an obligation to come forward. Now we know 

. . . having some idea what the other presidents of SPC were being 

paid. And I want to know why we don’t know what Mr. Hill’s 

being paid, because I think you have that obligation to come 

forward. I want to know whether you’ll reconsider that decision, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, the position of president 

of Sask Power was filled by one Bruce Campbell for several years. 

He retired about a year ago, perhaps a little more than a year ago, 

and prior to his retirement the position was advertised and there 

was a . . . I forget the nice word for head-hunter, but there was a 

head-hunter research consultant, executive search consultant . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you, member for Rosemont. 

 

There was an executive search consultant from Toronto who had a 

lot of experience with electrical utilities. The person who 

conducted the electrical search, I’m told,  

himself was once a senior manager in Ontario Hydro. And so this 

search was conducted. 

 

I believe, and I’m going from memory, but I believe there were 

140 applicants. And at the end of the day, George Hill— after the 

interviews were all conducted this man who had experience as 

chairman of the board with Sask Power previously, who has an 

excellent reputation as a business man and a lawyer and an 

administrator, and nobody would question his credentials — some 

people, most of them in this House, feel that it somehow takes 

from the real credentials of a person if you happen to affiliate 

yourself with a political party, particularly, in this case, if it 

happens to be the Tory party. 

 

I can remember in the olden days when we used to accuse you of 

offering huge sums, obscene sums to your political hacks when 

David Dombowsky was president of Sask potash corporation. And 

you people, particularly the member from Riversdale, would stand 

here, in this very chair as a matter of fact, and far more eloquently 

than I ever could, far more eloquently than I ever could, advance 

the arguments as to why they would only give the aggregate sums 

of the management team for the various Crowns. 

 

And my position has not changed. I will not reconsider. I’ve 

answered the question — I don’t know — dozens of times, and the 

answer has been consistently the same. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, there’s one credential that Mr. Hill 

had that the other 130 applicants didn’t, and that is that he was the 

past president of the PC Party. What then, Mr. Minister, is the 

aggregate sum that you referred to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t have it here. I mean, count the 

officials. This is a statutory vote, and normally it’s voted on. You 

ask me that question in Crown Corporations Committee, and I 

would be very pleased to give you the aggregate sum of the 

management group at that time. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Would you be willing to give me that sum within 

the next week, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I answered a question a while ago, and I 

even forget what it was, but I . . . oh, it was a breakdown of this 

statutory vote. I can include it in that. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now you also indicated . . . rather, what I would like to know is 

how the Shand-Rafferty project — Shand from the point of view 

of SPC, primarily Shand although there is some money being paid 

towards Rafferty — is going to affect the amount that has to be 

borrowed by SPC in the next few months, and how does it affect 

this figure in here that we’re dealing with today, the 206 billion? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t mind dealing with these, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re normally dealt with in Crown corporations 

where I have staff. Normally where the statutory vote, you know, 

it’s just that. You vote it. But if  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4019 

 

the member persists in going along this route, I’m afraid I’m going 

to have to get my officials in to get that kind of detail. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Are you going to provide me with that 

information, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, Mr. Speaker. I will provide that kind 

of information in Crown Corporations Committee, or we can pull 

this and I can get some officials and we can do it tomorrow, here, 

if that’s your wish. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Do you really want to do it tomorrow? We will 

be asking you in Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you please describe for us, because I note that 

the corporate debt has risen from 1.1 billion to 2.5 billion, since 

1981, and that there was a $58 million increase in 1986 alone. I’m 

wondering if you could describe for us your plans to reduce the 

corporate debt. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We’ve done several things as it relates to 

reducing the corporate debt. And one of them, Mr. Speaker, is on 

the Table here today, The Power Corporation Act, and I hope we 

can get through so that we can have a better opportunity at some 

of the money markets and better plan and manage those 

opportunities as they present themselves. 

 

Another thing that we’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve taken the 

collection agencies, or the collection agents of Sask Power, and 

they were primarily in the two major centres, in Saskatoon and 

Regina. One of them was a drug store on Lorne Street, four blocks 

from the Sask Power building, that the hon. member argued long 

and hard to keep as an agent. 

 

So those kinds of things — that was a saving of about $210,000 a 

year, we estimate. And we have down-sized Sask Power about 27 

per cent since 1982. The number of people that are working at 

Sask power now would number, I would guess, approximately 

2,700 — maybe 2,650, but in that ballpark, as compared to about 

33 or 3,400 in 1982, and Sask Power is still providing an excellent 

service right across the province. 

 

So those are some of the things that we’re doing relative to getting 

a handle on the efficiencies necessary to turn Sask Power around. 

There’s no doubt that there is a horrendous debt there to deal with. 

We must get our arms around it. And further detail, I would invite 

the member to seek in Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

Ms. Simard: — With respect to down-sizing, Mr. Minister, I 

should advise you that — as I’m sure you’re well aware — there 

has been a considerable amount of contracting out. So when you 

say down-sizing, it doesn’t necessarily mean that the money isn’t 

being paid to get the work done, you’re just paying it through a 

different method; rather than having people on staff, you’re 

contracting out. 

 

I also want to make a point with respect to down-sizing and the 

safety department because I understand that there’s been a 

considerable down-sizing in the safety  

department and many of the people who were responsible for 

employee and customer safety have been let go. And I want to 

know if that’s correct. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. I’ll take that 

under advisement, or you can raise it in Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — If there are no further questions, and since it’s 

statutory when there’s no vote required, we’ll go on to the next 

order of business which is vote 166, page 106. 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 166 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Are there any questions? 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Can I ask, Mr. Chairman, who it is over on the 

other side of the House who’s going to answer questions? 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’m not going to answer any. I’ll just take 

them under advisement and ship you the information. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Okay. I would like to know the purpose for the 

amount being requested, Mr. Chairman? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll have that sent to the 

hon. member within the next few days from the officials at SMDC 

(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation). 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Can I ask the minister a different question then? 

Can the minister outline to us the state of the negotiations between 

SMDC and Eldor Resources with respect to a possible merger? 

This is something that we read about in the newspaper last 

summer and I’ve heard rumours about off and on since then, but 

nothing recently. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I will try and give you a thumb-nail — 

without offering a great deal of detail for fear of jeopardizing or 

compromising any of the discussions that may be going on. There 

has been, of course, the desire by both the federal government and 

the Government of Saskatchewan, who is a shareholder of SMDC, 

to have these two companies merge, and over time do public 

offerings to get them into the hands of the people of Saskatchewan 

and Canada. 

 

And there are some outstanding issues to be dealt with before that 

can happen, and in fact I hope that it wouldn’t turn out that the 

merger didn’t happen. It’s very possible, but I’m optimistic that 

the merger will take place and that we will have then a very, very 

large mining company, primarily uranium, headquartered here in 

Saskatchewan with all of the things that spin around a very large 

mining company headquartered here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I have another area where I planned to ask some 

questions, Minister, but perhaps I could suggest  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4020 

 

a solution, and we could let this item go. I wanted to ask about 

some aspects of the Cigar Lake development, and specifically the 

sale of shares in the project to the Korean government agency, and 

the contract for the sale of uranium to the Korean government 

agency. 

 

Now I could ask those questions in Crown corporations if you 

like. Problem is that they’re not . . . it may not be in the year under 

review. But if we could have your assurance that those questions 

could be addressed in Crown corporations this year, I wouldn’t 

have to ask them today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I can’t commit the other minister 

responsible to answering those in Crown corporations, but to the 

extent that the information can be provided without breaching 

commercial or confidentiality agreements that SMDC might have 

with Korea, I will have the officials of SMDC give you the kind of 

information that they can reasonably give you. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — All right, thank you, Mr. Minister, for the 

forthcoming way in which you were able to answer all my 

questions. I’ve no further. I’ve covered them. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 166 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 

Vote 166 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 166 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Employment Development Agency 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 65 

 

Item 2 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’ve got one 

question to the minister responsible. I wonder if the minister could 

perhaps tell me how many jobs were created through that 

expenditure of over $100 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I just happen to have in front 

of me a status report as of September 10. And at that date, based 

on the formulas that are in place across the country, we estimate 

that there was over 9,000 jobs that were either created or 

maintained as a result of that program. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I’m sorry, Mr. Minister. I didn’t get the first 

couple of numbers there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — As of September 10 we estimated slightly 

over 9,000. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Were those 9,000 permanent jobs or were they . . . 

Do you have a breakdown as to part time, permanent, and any 

demographics? And can you . . . It would be fine if you could just 

give me the paper on  

which your statistics are written so I have some idea of how the 

breakdown . . . break-out works. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the calculation of these 

employment years or jobs or whatever that you want, however you 

want to define it, is as a result of a formula that’s in existence, 

either federally or provincially, and so many dollars of activity 

equals a job and the like, and that’s what we use. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — You can’t actually go around and say that here are 

the 9,000 people that were put to work through this program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — I suppose, Mr. Chairman, that the best way 

that you could do that is point to our unemployment insurance . . . 

or our unemployment statistical rate in Saskatchewan, which for 

the last several years has been maintained at either the second or 

third or first best in Canada. And at a time when other jobs are 

falling, ours are continuing to rise. And the figures are there for 

everybody to see.  

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, without getting into a long harangue, 

because we have done it for 112 days in this legislature, you know 

very well you’re the only province and the only government in this 

country that had a negative job creation rate — negative job 

creation, i.e., you lost jobs, you lost employment — of any 

province in Canada, including Newfoundland. 

 

One final question. Do you have . . . can you provide me with the 

formula upon which you made the statement that 9,000 jobs are 

created through the $100 million expenditure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, you know, when we did 

debate Sask Housing estimate here a week or so ago, we . . . And 

I’m reading right from Hansard, page 3640: 

 

We agreed on these figures yesterday. Since July of ’86 

there’s been an increase of over 7,000 jobs in the service 

sector, with another 2,000 in construction — even the 

member . . . (could agree) to that — manufacturing was up 

over 1,000. Clearly . . . (the home program is) doing it’s job. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I noticed 

that part way through the home improvement grant, you took . . . 

withdrew the funds or decreased the funds for any investigation of 

the work done under those home improvement grants and any 

investigation of the way in which that money was used, as 

reported in the Star-Phoenix, anyway. 

 

And I would like an explanation from you as to why you had so 

little surveillance over how that money was used, when your 

government at the same time was putting in place, or has for some 

time had in place, an RCMP-type investigation of the people who 

are on social assistance. 

 

They have had very heavy surveillance of the pittance of money 

that they get to live on, and yet with the home improvement grant 

you’ve allowed it to go through with  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4021 

 

very little surveillance. Can you explain to me the thinking behind 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I don’t know the article, Mr. Chairman, 

that the member is referring to, but as it relates to a check and 

balance of the home improvement program, inspections take 

place. People that apply for the grants sign to the effect that they 

have in fact spent that money on their homes. 

 

I think that the inspectors are doing their job, and there’s been 

nothing changed. I don’t know what article you’re referring to, and 

there’s been very, very little abuse in the home program. And by 

and large I don’t think that people are out to beat it. We trust the 

people of this province. 

 

Ms. Smart: — People who are on social assistance have to fill out 

a 16-page form regarding their circumstances, and they are 

constantly under surveillance. 

 

An Hon. Member: — But they’re not people of this province. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Are they not people of this province, for one, and 

can you explain to me in more detail exactly what kind of 

inspection and surveillance you’ve had on this home improvement 

grant. It’s not enough to just and up and say you do some 

inspections from time to time. could you explain how that 

money’s been spent on investigations? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, you know, to say that money has been 

spent on an investigation is not the right way to put it, Mr. 

Chairman, and I suppose the best example that I could tell you — 

members of your benches have partaken in the home program and 

used it. Ask them how the inspections went about at their work. 

 

Item 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 65 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 50 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Does the minister want to introduce his 

officials? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, seated beside me is Vern Fowke, 

president of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, and behind me, 

Wayne Phillips, vice-president in charge of finance. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have a few 

questions this afternoon to the minister regarding the activities of 

the water corporation. And first of all, I’d like to say hello to the 

officials that we’ve met during the course of the Crown 

corporations estimates, and I don’t intend to cover the same 

ground. 

 

There’s some very specific projects I would like to ask  

about though. And the first one relates tot he activities of the water 

corporation in the Melfort area where the water corporation is one 

of a proponent for a pipeline which I understand will cost in the 

vicinity of $16 million to deliver water to the town of Melfort. 

 

At the same time, there is an experimental treatment for a water 

treatment plant, utilizing a technique which has been developed 

here in Saskatchewan. It’s a new technique to the country and in 

fact to the world. I understand that the water corporation, however, 

is opposing the use of that treatment; in fact, that the treatment 

trailer which was undergoing this treatment has now been moved 

to the city of Regina because the city of Regina is interested in this 

pre-treatment facility. 

 

Meanwhile the water corporation is pushing its proposal for a 

pipeline, despite the fact that it will cost the city of Melfort almost 

eight times as much to deliver the water to the city of Melfort as it 

does, in fact, to install the pre-treatment facility which was there 

— the pre-treatment technique which has been developed in this 

province. 

 

And I’m wondering what the rationale for the water corporation 

. . . what is the water corporation’s rationale for laying that kind of 

financial burden on the citizen of Melfort? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — To begin with, the treatment method that was 

being tested at Melfort was strictly that. It was a test program to 

see whether the method that the engineer was recommending 

would indeed make the water suitable for human consumption. 

 

To this point in history there’s been no report from that particular 

consultant to say that the project would work. And the community 

was not satisfied, and so the community have asked us to look at 

the possibility of a pipeline to bring water from a river to the town. 

 

Now there’s no money spent. It’s in the study stages at this time. 

Whether or not the project will go forward, I couldn’t tell you. It’s 

been costed at approximately $9.5 million if it should go, but 

there’s no approval for it to go at this time. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, let’s go back then and take a 

few steps back. First of all, is it true, in fact, that the pre-treatment 

trailer has been pushed out of Melfort, and that the technique has 

met with disapproval form the water corporation from the start? 

And that officials from the water corporation, as well as the 

Department of the Environment, which you’re also responsible 

for, in fact, were opposed to this pre-treatment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I can advise the member that we have not 

indicated one way or another whether we would approve of the 

treatment method that was being proposed. It’s very hard to tell 

anybody that you agree with the treatment method when we have 

not been able to get a report. We have asked many times and have 

not received a report. Whether or not the consultant has moved his 

trailer away, that’s something that I would have no knowledge of. 

That’s out in Melfort. We don’t go out every day to look to see 

where the trailers are. 

 

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4022 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Now, Mr. Minister, you know very well thought 

that there is a divisional officer of the water corporation up in that 

area and that one of the projects being monitored, and as you said 

yourself is being considered, is this whole question of supplying 

water to the city of Melfort, down from the Saskatchewan River. 

 

Let me put it this way. Is the water corporation, or has the water 

corporation involved itself with this new method of water 

treatment, and has it taken an interest in that new method, and has 

there been discussions . . . or have there been discussions between 

officials of the water corporation and the engineering firm 

involved with this new method of water, or the city of Melfort, in 

regards to the new method? And secondly, if there has been, what 

is the water corporation doing to evaluate . . . and I’m not saying 

that it’s . . . because I’m not a water quality engineer and don’t 

pretend to be, but it seems to me if we have a new technique 

developed here in Saskatchewan that in fact has implications on a 

world-wide basis for a marketing of anew technology, it seems to 

me that the Government of Saskatchewan, if they’re sincere about 

diversifying the economy, would be in fact trying to promote, or 

trying to evaluate, and trying to give that kind of technology the 

best evaluation possible. 

 

Given that it’s water treatment, given that it’s within your sphere 

of competence, is in fact the water corporation involved in some 

kind of evaluating of this new technique? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s very difficult to say that we have a new 

technique. We have a consulting firm who are suggesting that they 

may have a method of dealing with the type of water that Melfort 

has. They went in and did initial types of tests. Our department, or 

the water corporation rather, put in approximately $100,000 into 

that test. The Department of Science and Technology also put 

some money in. So yes, we did have an interest, and we showed 

the interest by putting money forward. 

 

But after the tests had been run by the consultant, we were not able 

to get any final reports. We don’t to this day have a final report 

from that consultant. The city of Melfort indicated to us that they 

had waited long enough and they were now wanting to proceed 

with something different, and they’ve asked us to give a cost 

figure on what the cost would be to bring water in from the 

Saskatchewan River, and that’s the process that has taken place up 

to this time. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I’m glad, Mr. Minister, to hear that in fact that the 

water corporation has been involved to that extent. That’s good. 

Now you say there has been no final test, no final report, pardon 

me . . . excuse me, there was no final consultant’s report given to 

the water corporation. When were the tests completed, and over 

what period of time were those tests to be evaluated so that in fact 

the consultant’s report could be drawn up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — They’ve been ongoing tests over a period of 

several months — like six, eight, nine months. I don’t know the 

exact date that he started. Up to this point we’ve had no report, and 

we’ve asked numerous times for a report and haven’t been able to 

receive it. I guess the best I can tell you is that the relationship 

between the consultant and the water corporation have not been  

satisfactory. You can’t continually deal with a person who will not 

give you any report of whether the project is successful or not. 

 

So the city of Melfort are the ones that have asked for the change 

in direction and asked us to give a cost study of what the cost 

might be to bring water in from the Saskatchewan River. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, perhaps you didn’t hear my 

question. My question was: when was the test period completed 

upon which the report would be based? That’s the first question. 

 

Secondly, you just said that you’ve asked the consultants 

numerous times for this report. I don’t know if you did; I don’t 

know if you didn’t. How did you ask the consultants? Was it by 

form of letter from the water corporation formally requesting the 

consultant’s report? Have you received a reply from the 

consultant? 

 

It seems to me when you put that much money into a test like this, 

you’d surely want to develop at least some kind of formal 

relationship with what potentially could be a boon for the 

province. Can you answer those questions? When was test section 

completed? And when were the requests made in terms of 

completing the reports? And who made those requests. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s very difficult for me to give you a date 

when the tests were completed, because when the consulting firm 

goes to a city like Melfort and does its own tests and then doesn’t 

give you any report back of what the tests said or whether they’re 

finished, I don’t know whether he ever did finish the tests. I have 

no way of knowing. 

 

As far as who asked — the city of Melfort has asked, the 

Department of Environment has asked, the water corporation has 

asked, and I personally have asked. And to this point, we’ve had 

no report with all of those people involved. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Now, Mr. Minister, when you say you’ve asked, I 

assume you’re talking about written letters and written 

correspondence with the consultant firm. How have you asked for 

it if you haven’t . . . first of all, did you make a written request? 

And secondly, if you didn’t make a written request, how did you 

ask? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — From the department . . . from the water 

corporation there have been letters. I don’t have the letters, so I 

couldn’t give you the dates of those letters. 

 

Personally I did not write and ask; I sat across the table in my 

office and asked, directly to the consultant responsible, and still 

was not able to get a final report. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Were you given any indication at all, Mr. Minister, 

of when you could expect a final report form the consulting firm? 

Did the consultant say to you that he would get it at a future date? 

Did he say that you’re never going to get a report? I mean, what 

did he say to you in terms of expectation of a report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I could not get from the consultant any  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4023 

 

commitment of time frame. I would simply have to say that he did 

not promise to give a report. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — That’s a double negative — that’s a double 

negative. Did he say, did the consultant — I assume it was a he, it 

may have been a she; I don’t know the consultant — did the 

consulting firm indicate to you that you would receive a final 

report on this matter? Did they say would get it after a certain 

event took place, or after a certain . . .If you didn’t say time frame, 

how about an event frame? 

 

(1630) 

 

Let me put it this way, Mr. Minister, without beating around the 

bush. I was told via the grape-vine that in fact that final report was 

sent away for independent evaluation by water quality experts 

outside the country — independent laboratories that in fact are 

going to look at the results of that report — and that that report 

was sent way precisely because of the water corporation and the 

Department of the Environment’s problems, let’s say, problems of 

official interference into both the process and also problems of 

official interference in terms of the report; that the consulting firm 

sent the report away in order to have it independently evaluated by 

water quality experts. 

 

Isn’t it true that you were promised that report after that 

independent evaluation took place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, that’s not true. I don’t know what kind of 

grape-vines you’re listening to, but we usually use telephones and 

other methods of communication. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, given some of the monkeys on 

the other side, and given some of the swinging and back . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. I think that our language 

should be watched a little bit better, and I don’t think that the 

analogy is necessarily appropriate. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Given the sapiens simians on the other side, Mr. 

Chairman, and the some kind of to and fro answers we get here, I 

think the description of a grape-vine is not out of order. 

 

Be that as it may, can I get, Mr. Minister . . . If in fact you receive 

the consultant’s report and those independent evaluations, will you 

do two things: first of all make them public; secondly, will you 

make public the technical comments from the water corporation as 

to those reports. And thirdly, will you also make the commitment 

not to go ahead with the pipeline which is going to cost the city of 

Melfort eight times more than a pre-treatment plant according to 

the calculations that have been bandied about. Will you make the 

commitment that the pipeline will not go ahead until you have had 

an independent evaluation of those reports studied? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that the member draws a lot of 

conclusions that may or may not happen when he asks his 

question. To begin with, we have no commitment that we will 

ever get a report. In all the times that I’ve asked, I’ve had no 

commitment that there would be a report  

forthcoming. 

 

I can’t guarantee to wait to infinity because the city of Melfort 

does have a water problem, and a very serious one. The flavour of 

that water is worse than anything that Regina had, and Regina felt 

they had a problem. The quantity of water is also a very serious 

problem in the city of Melfort, so the city is looking at a more 

permanent solution that would guarantee both quality and quantity 

of water. 

 

I believe that as a water corporation we can’t go out and dictate to 

the people of Melfort which method they might like to use. They 

come forward and they make a proposal, and if they want to 

proceed to draw water from the river and the water is there and it’s 

a feasible project and they’re prepared to put some money into it, I 

believe that we have a responsibility as a water corporation to deal 

fairly with that city. And that’s exactly what we intend to do. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, nobody’s denying the following 

facts. First of all, Melfort does have a water quality problem. 

Secondly, no one will deny that the quality of water from the 

source that a pipeline intended to draw on, i.e., the Saskatchewan 

River, that the water quality is no different between Melfort and 

the Saskatchewan River, and that piping water in through a 

pipeline would not solve the water quality problem. The water 

quality problem will only be solved through treatment of the water 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman, as much as I enjoy the humorous wit and wisdom 

of the member from Souris-Cannington, it seems to me when 

we’re talking about a potential problem for the city of Melfort 

which will cost them eight times — eight times, sir, — what they 

could possibly get their problem solved for, that we should be 

dealing with the issue here, is would ask him to please maintain a 

little order and decorum. And, you know, we’ve had enough 

monkey business here. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, the water quality will be the same. Let’s not 

beat around . . . The water quality from the river and of Melfort 

will be the same . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well we can 

disagree . . . you and I can disagree on that, but I can probably 

bring you an engineering report which will say that the water 

quality is the same. But let’s leave that aside for a moment —let’s 

leave that aside for a moment. 

 

The fact is, and the question I asked you is this: will you, first of 

all, make a commitment that — say within a reasonable time 

frame; I’ll say two months, and that’s quite reasonable when we’re 

talking about the kind of money you’re talking bout — will you 

make a commitment that in fact there will be no promises of a 

pipeline to Melfort until you have received the consultant’s report, 

and/or any independent evaluation of the consultant’s report, in 

order to save the municipality of Melfort, potentially save them 

water costs eight times greater than could possibly be achieved 

through the introduction of the new technique. Will you make that 

commitment? 

 

All I’m saying is, don’t spend any of the taxpayers’ money  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4024 

 

on what could be a useless pipeline until at least the end of 

January. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member is throwing around figures like 

“eight times.” I believe that that is pure conjecture because we 

have no idea what a water treatment method might cost, even if 

one was available. We have no idea what could produce the 

volume of water that Melfort is going to need, and for you to stand 

here and say that the water quality from the Saskatchewan River 

and the water quality from Melfort’s present supply are the same, 

is pure foolishness. 

 

The water quality that they have now comes from a place with a 

lot of algae, and the algae is causing the problem. You go to the 

Saskatchewan River and they don’t have the algae, so you have 

clear water . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Not where they’re 

going to draw their water; they’re pretty much algae-free. 

 

So there are two entirely different systems, and my staff tell me 

that the difference in the quality of water would be just night and 

day difference. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well I’m not going to get into an argument with 

that, Mr. Minister. We obviously are getting different advice from 

different professional and qualified people. 

 

But it’s obvious from your last answer, it’s obvious that you have 

made the decision, in fact, to go ahead and build that pipeline and 

to cost the people, the good folk of Melfort, an increase in their 

mill rate, because you use the phrase “from where they’re going to 

draw their water” — from the river. So you obviously have a site 

in mind, and you obviously have the pipeline fairly well firmed up 

in your own mind. So I’ll drop this issue for the time being. I’ll 

drop this issue. 

 

But you did mention the city of Regina and its water quality 

problems. And I’m wondering whether the water corporation 

undertakes any long-term monitoring of Regina city and the city 

of Saskatoon and also the other major urban areas such as Moose 

Jaw, monitoring of water quality, particularly for viral and viral 

infestations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would advise the hon. member that water 

quality is taken care of through the Department of the 

Environment, not through the water corporation. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, does the Department of the 

Environment work with the Saskatchewan Water Corporation on 

questions of water quality, and of water and the management of 

water, and of monitoring of water quality? Is it not true that, in 

fact, that many of the projects undertaken for urban areas for water 

treatment by the water corporation are precisely because of 

concerns raised as a result of concerns about water quality? Isn’t 

that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, of course, the Department of the 

Environment does the water quality studies, and the delivery of a 

project to deal with that quality would be done by the water 

corporation, but the actual studies of water quality are done by the 

Department of Environment, not by water corporation. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, would I be remiss, for 

example, in talking about the city of Regina and its new treatment 

facility and the development of the pipeline and the carbon 

filtration treatment, that the water corporation . . . Would I be 

remiss in saying that the water corporation had a hand in 

developing that system? Isn’t it true that you did have a hand in 

developing that system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that in the case of the Regina 

water treatment situation the water corporation was not even 

started at that point when this project was brought on stream, the 

beginnings of it. Later on they were very modestly involved. The 

Department of Environment, the city of Regina, the federal 

government, and the provincial government worked very closely 

together. And the water corporation came in during the tag-end of 

the delivery of that, but they were not in existence at the planning 

stage. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — But you will admit that they . . . in fact you did 

admit that they were involved, to some extent. 

 

The reason I asked you that question was this: when there is a 

major water management undertaking, does the water corporation 

monitor the results? For example, we have vast amounts of money 

expended in Regina on a carbon filtration plant that deals with 

water management from the Buffalo Pound water reservoir. Does 

the water corporation take into account things like water quality, 

and the success of the construction of that treatment plant, and the 

success of, in fact, whether the actual quality, in terms of the 

health component particularly, of that treatment plan was 

successful? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — For the most part, cities the size of Regina do 

their own control, but the Department of Environment would still 

keep track of the water quality that’s being produced through that 

particular treatment plant. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — That may very well be true, but doesn’t the water 

corporation . . . Well let’s put it this way: if you don’t, don’t you 

think you should be? don’t you think that the water corporation 

should show some concern as to whether or not the construction of 

waterworks in a particular community achieve the desired end; 

that is, to improve the water quality for the citizens of that 

community? 

 

Isn’t there some kind of mechanism inside the water corporation 

that says, well, the water quality in Regina, or the water quality in 

Saskatoon, or the water quality in Estevan or Melfort or North 

Battleford, or wherever, has deteriorated? Isn’t there some kind of 

mechanism within the water corporation that makes that 

evaluation? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’d like to advise the hon. member that the 

Health department and the Environment department monitor the 

quality of the water — one for health reasons, the other one for 

taste and odour and that sort of things. 

 

If they were to identify the need for construction correction in the 

plant itself, then our engineers would be involved. But we are not 

the monitoring agent; it is  

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4025 

 

Environment or the Department of Health. And if there’s need for 

structural types of work that require engineering and things, then 

our people would come and work along with them. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well I understand that, Mr. Minister. What I’m 

asking you is, in fact, is there any kind of mechanism set up within 

the department to interface with Environment or public health or 

the city of Regina, that says, there are water quality problems here 

in this particular city or town or through particular waterworks; 

what can you do to solve the problem? 

 

Isn’t there somebody to go to in the water corporation that says, 

we’ve got this problem; here’s what it is; what do you know about 

how to solve the problem; what can you help us with? 

 

Isn’t there some kind of mechanism within the water corporation 

to deal with that kind of problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Any time that there is a problem with the 

mechanical delivery of water to a community, the first stop most 

communities would make would be the water corporation. But if 

there’s a water quality problem, then Environment or the 

Department of Health would be the first to identify it. 

 

We do have internal mechanisms whereby they relate back and 

forth. If Environment identifies a water quality problem, they 

immediately notify the water corporation. If Health notified us that 

there was a problem, if there’s something that we could do to 

correct it, of course we’d get involved. 

 

I might use as an example for you: there was a very serious 

problem identified in Jans Bay in northern Saskatchewan, where 

the water was being polluted because of the lack of a sewage 

system. Our water corporation acted immediately to design a 

sewer and water system for that town. It’s actually being installed 

right at this very time. But it was because the identification came 

through the Health department that people were getting sick 

because of the water quality being damaged, that we were called 

in to be involved in that action. And of course, we would go in and 

do what we can. And that would be the same in Regina or any 

other community. I only use that as one example. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I’m not talking about the question of identifying 

the problem. I know there’s agencies that are out there that will 

identify the problem. 

 

Very simply, there was a problem identified in Regina with its 

water quality. A certain system was put into place to fix that water 

quality. There’s a monitoring being done by somebody — 

Department of the Environment, department of public health. Are 

the results, are the results of that monitoring transmitted to the 

water corporation? And if so, if you’re receiving those results, are 

you putting it into the engineering hopper to say, well the plant’s 

got to be modified by this, or is that solely done, just solely on 

request? 

 

After the problem is identified, after the problem is identified, 

does the water corporation make  

recommendations, or do they make recommendations only on 

request? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised in the case of the city of Regina, 

it’s a large city, they have their own engineering staff that deal 

with the water system. so our department wouldn’t be making 

recommendations to the city of Regina on the changes they should 

make. They are quite capable of making those decisions. If for 

some reason they’re needing to consult and come to the water 

corporation, of course we’re willing to provide any expertise we 

have. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — The final question on this line is: has the city of 

Regina approached the water corporation or asked the water 

corporation to deal with any water quality problems? Has it made 

any requests in the last year, and are you or are you presently 

working on any requests made by the city of Regina to improve its 

water quality? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the only involvement we’ve 

had with the city of Regina in the past year was discussions with 

them where they’ve asked us to look at helping them to deliver a 

larger volume of water — they need larger pipeline. And so that 

kind of discussion has gone on, but that’s the only discussion that 

has been taking place in the last year or the last short while. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I guess there hasn’t been any . . .judging from your 

answer, there hasn’t been any questions raised or any proposals 

put forward, vis-a-vis the water treatment plant and the new 

carbon filtration water treatment plant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — There have been discussions back and forth, 

but as far as the water corporation is concerned the city of Regina 

is quite satisfied. The plant is working well and for the most part 

they’ve had good success with producing good quality water for 

the residents of this city. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I won’t go any further on that at this time. I have 

one more series of questions I’d like to ask and that’s regarding 

the situation at Old Wives Lake. 

 

Now we’ve all read in the . . . It doesn’t have any water. And 

that’s what I want to ask you about, Mr. Minister, because I think 

when your chief engineer of the water corporation says, as he has 

done within the past year, that we’re reaching the limits of usable 

ground water and we start to see that water tables in the southern 

part of the province dropping, as they have, for example, around 

the border areas — Poplar and Coronach, in those areas, in that 

particular area. And we see signs like Old Wives Lake drying up 

which hasn’t been dry, from my understanding, from the ’30s. I 

see the member from Souris-Cannington’s gone. He could 

probably tell me whether or not in fact it was dry in the ’30s. But 

be that as it may, I’m told that the lake has not been dry since the 

days of the ’30s. 

 

I’m wondering, sir, what kind of long-range planning is the water 

corporation engaged in to deal with what is becoming more and 

more apparent to, I believe, more and more people, and that is the 

whole question of water scarcity in our province. What is the 

water corporation doing to address what can become a major, 

major problem for the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

  



 

November 5, 1987 

 

4026 

 

Particularly in light of . . . when we see things like the Brundtland 

Report from the United Nations, identifying our province as a 

danger area for desertification; that the amount . . . the climatic 

changes and the amount of anticipated rainfall and the amount of 

moisture coming to us: what long-range planning are you doing to 

ensure that those areas of the province which are becoming more 

and more prone to drought, in fact, develop some kind of 

infrastructure to deal with that problem. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that we are doing one very major 

study now that involves the federal government and the provincial 

and the water corporation. The study is going to cost about $1.6 

million and it’s anticipated to take approximately three years to 

study the South Saskatchewan River Basin, which is the largest 

water body and water supply that southern Saskatchewan has. 

That study is under way, but as you can appreciate, isn’t very far 

into its initial stages. I believe this spring was the beginning, so it’s 

basically a year old, I’m advised — the current study. But that is 

the first of a number of things that we intend to do. 

 

You realize the water corporation is three years old, so to get a 

major study like this under way in the third year of its operation, I 

think they’ve done extremely well. 

 

It’s not new for somebody to say that southern Saskatchewan is a 

desert. You know, I think if you go back to the time that Palliser 

first came here he saw it as a desert, and I think it’s a cycle of 

time, it’s just repetition. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — We’ve all read the same book, Mr. Minister, on 

that one. The problem is is that it is becoming increasingly 

apparent to geographers, to climatologists and meteorologists that 

there is something going on in regards to water in this part of the 

country and that’s identified, like I say, in the Brundtland 

commission and other studies, as you well know. 

 

I also want to say that, you know, I support the setting up of the 

water corporation. I think it’s a good idea precisely because of our 

geography in this province, but I support it in terms of if its aims 

are to develop some kind of long-range policy and planning and 

some new initiatives and new techniques into dealing with water 

and the problems of water in this province. 

 

If it’s turned into a pork-barrel operation, which it very easily 

could be in terms of defining who gets this project and who gets 

that project — and I’m not here accusing you of that by the way, 

but I’m saying it could very easily could be, given the amount of 

money, given the amount of money that goes through the water 

corporation’s hands — for example, the money that flowed 

through under the Canada-Saskatchewan agreement for irrigation. 

I’m not going to deal with that here. We dealt with it in Crown 

corporations. 

 

I want to say that I hope that water corporation will, as they have 

on some projects in the past, continue to ask for local and 

provincial involvement in the developing of a water policy. 

Because I think that there is some expertise around this province 

and around this country that can be drawn upon and, while it may 

take some political debate  

or what are some of the best methods to use — as for example the 

debate we’ve been having over Rafferty — that the answers to 

those questions are going to be critical for the future water needs 

for the people of this province. After all, if there’s no water here 

then there’s nothing here. And I know you and I will both agree on 

that. 

 

Having said that, I’ve got no more questions. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 50 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 50 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 140 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 140 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank my officials 

for their assistance here and the hon. member for his questions. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I, too, would like to join in 

thanking the officials for their time today. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


