


















































November 2, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 November 2, 1987 
 
 
 

3819 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to Provide for the Imposition of Taxes  
on and the Collection of Taxes from Certain Purchasers of 

Certain Fuels and to Provide for Rebates of Taxes to Certain 
Purchasers 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before 5 o’clock, 
when we adjourned for supper, we confirmed in this committee 
that the Minister of Finance has been making up this gas tax rebate 
program as he goes along. We confirmed that it’s a scam. It’s a bit 
of a shell game, that it’s wide open to abuse. 
 
The government really doesn’t know how it’s going to work. We 
couldn’t confirm from the minister whether a private firm will 
handle the administration of the gas tax, or whether the 
government will, and whether confidential information — the 
SHSP (Saskatchewan hospital services plan) records — will be 
available to this private firm. 
 
The government clearly has not thought out the red tape, the red 
tape nightmare of this program. In our estimation this is another 
opportunity for the Conservative government to offer a prime 
political plum to one of its Tory friends. 
 
School boards, we know, will be affected, because their taxes will 
increase as a result of this unfair tax. Rural municipalities will 
have an additional burden of about $2.5 million as a result of this 
tax, and who will pay for that? We know that. It will be the low 
income and other people who use the transportation services. 
 
We know that the school boards are going to have to increase their 
taxes as a result of this tax increase, so that school board 
supporters will be forced to kick in towards this red tape 
nightmare. And we’ve confirmed that urban municipalities will be 
paying $3 million more. We confirmed, Mr. Chairman, that the 
Conservative advertising agency of Dome Advertising received 
$250,000 to advertise this fuel tax program, which nobody can 
explain, including the minister — $250,000 wasted, dust; 
taxpayers’ money gone. 
 
And what we could have done with $250,000, Mr. Chairman, is 
support the dental program for another six months. We could have 
had the dental program going for six more months as a result of 
that $250,000, if we’d spent it on children and children’s health 
instead of the Tory advertising firm of Dome Advertising. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — He confirms that the minister is not sure 
whether they will keep, the government will keep, one-third of 
one-half or the taxes paid by licensed vehicle operators in this 
province. We don’t know that; they don’t know that. And we 
don’t know who’s going to be issuing the cheques of this rebate 
program. 

And maybe I’ll start this evening by asking the Minister of 
Finance, once he’s resolved who’s going to be doing what — and 
we haven’t done that — who’ll be issuing the rebate cheques? 
Will it be a private agency or will it be the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Government. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well thank you very much. Will that be a 
service that will be contracted out, or will it be done by the 
existing computer service program that we have in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It will be done by government. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So we don’t know if that’s going to be 
contracted out or whether it will be done by existing civil 
servants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s not the question you asked. It will be 
done by the Department of Revenue and Financial Services. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — We also confirmed, Mr. Chairman, prior to 
supper that the minister had not consulted with the gas station 
operators in this province about all the red tape that’s created. And 
what I’d like to ask you now is with regard to these receipts. I have 
here a file of somebody who’s collected gas receipts for a period 
of June 21 till the end of October, and there are about 70, 75 gas 
receipts — and they are from pretty well all over the province — 
and we see here almost all of them come in different forms. We 
see one that looks like a cash register receipt with no opportunity 
to write your name and licence plate number on. We see hand 
written receipts from Kenosee Gardens, for example, with no 
names and licence plate number; Pips Confectionery and Gas Bar 
from the district of Watrous. We see on and on, the co-op, and all 
sorts of roadside services. 
 
I want to ask the minister whether . . . you know, how he sees 
individuals that have these receipts, how he sees them submitting 
these receipts. Would he accept and his department accept the 
recipient of these receipts filling in their own name and licence 
plate number because the gas station operators have not had the 
time or perhaps the instruction from your department to do so? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, we believe that the people of 
Saskatchewan will be honest and will be submitting receipts 
which indicate their gasoline purchases within the province for the 
year. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — My question, minister, was neglected. My 
question is, these receipts are legitimate; they’ve been received by 
an individual but they have not been filled out according to the 
regulations, or at least what is required through Bill 51. And my 
question to you is: recipients of these receipts, that are duly 
registered and duly provided as a result of a gasoline purchase in 
this province, if they are to finish filling out the receipts — 
because somebody has to do it to claim their rebate — is this 
going to be allowed or not? 
 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3820 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Okay, that’s very good. Now I want to know 
what the minister . . . I can’t understand whether that’s going to be 
accurate or not because he hasn’t been too accurate on his 
estimates, but we have the assurance of the Minister of Finance 
this evening that if you have a legitimate gas receipt and some of 
the information is missing, that you, as an individual, can proceed 
to fill out the basic information that’s required and there’ll be no 
implications, no repercussions, if it’s deemed that those receipts 
are legitimate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What I want to know now is whether you’ve 
had any calls, or letters, or concerns about individuals who have 
been purchasing other products, like cigarettes, by the litre, and so 
on, and issuing those receipts, and receipting those receipts, and 
whether or not you have some system on how to keep those 
separate and apart from legitimate gas receipts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’m not going to tell you how we’re 
going to do audits, but we have considered most possible ways to 
abuse it if that was . . . if anybody was going to try to do that. And 
we have devised, we think, systems which will make sure that the 
system is handled, that abuses . . . although we don’t and I don’t 
think we do in any taxation system, eliminate abuses 100 per cent. 
 
We don’t do it in sales tax. We know, for example, in sales tax, 
somebody may divide a purchase up and bring it down — instead 
of $350 or $300 in clothing, for a purchase, will mark it down as 
two. And we know we’re going to get some of that; we’re not 
unrealistic in that. But we think that we have devised systems 
which will allow us to identify the bulk of the abuses that could 
come forward. We know it can’t be perfect. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — There’s other suggestions, Mr. Minister, that 
friends and relatives of Saskatchewan residents will come into this 
province and they’ll have the gas purchase for their vehicles on a 
casual from time-to-time basis. What prevents Saskatchewan 
residents from keeping those receipts or going, you know, abusing 
that sort of system? Is there something in place that you have in 
that one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We have some indicators that we will use as 
to average consumption and what not. Again, I could probably . . . 
although it wouldn’t do the taxation system any good to list 
potential abuses. We have had meetings to identify those and to 
pick them up as much as possible, certainly in terms of casual use 
in the province from someone out of province. We may not get 
them all but we do have an upside in that people are buying here, 
as opposed to elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Is there a system that you have in place to 
prevent the abuses that we’ve heard of, for example, a buyer going 
to the retailer and saying, I’ve purchased $9 in gas; he gets the 
receipt and puts down a one or a two in front of the nine, and the 
slips were left vacant or blank because the purchaser asked that to 
remain so? Have you got a way to cover that abuse? 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — We have some pretty good indictors of what 
usages would be by individuals, by vehicles and that sort of thing, 
which would give us an indication. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Could you please share with us what those 
indicators are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, I will not. I will not, and I don’t think it 
would be proper to indicate what the abusers are. We don’t want 
to telegraph out there what our audit procedures and audit 
activities will be to stop abuse. We don’t do it for other tax forms. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well here you’re saying . . . What you were 
saying prior to supper, you have a plan, but you really don’t have a 
plan. You think it’s going to work one way, but it may work 
another way. Certainly you have to have some indication as to 
how you’re going to minimize these abuses. And I think it’s your 
responsibility, as the Minister of Finance and the tax man of this 
province, to share that information so that the word can go forth 
from this Assembly that there is some kind of control, that it’s not 
out of control, and the moneys, the gas tax rebate system will not 
be abused. Surely you must have some indicators to share with us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well again, we don’t put out for publication 
what we try and look for in terms of review of sales tax. We do 
have a system that’s worked well in terms of flagging, you know, 
fraudulent returns in terms of sales tax. We tend to have an audit 
. . . We do have an audit system in place, and I don’t think it 
would be wise to give comfort to those — which we believe to be 
very few — who would deliberately try and abuse the system. But 
we are comfortable that we can deal with abuses that would be 
tried. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well I must remind the tax man that the fuel tax 
rebate system is an awful lot different than the sales tax system. 
There’s no general refund or rebate to 641,000 licensed vehicle 
operators under the sales tax system, the E&H on a regular basis. 
But on the fuel tax, there is a system. And surely you must have 
some sort of indicators which would provide gas station operators 
and others —not only the government, but others — with some 
guide-lines as to how these abuses can be minimized or 
eliminated. Could you please share that with us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well there are some analogies to be made 
with the sales tax system with exemptions and watching 
exemptions. And from time to time, someone who may classify 
jewellery, for example, as being an article of clothing and 
therefore exempt from tax. And we can move on those. 
 
I think that an obvious situation . . . I would suspect that if we got 
an indication from someone with driving a Honda that gets 40 
miles to the gallon —I don’t know how many kilometres to the 
litre, but I think the hon. member can calculate that — and sends 
in and says that, you know, he bought $75,000 worth of gas during 
the year for his Honda, I mean some of these things become very 
obvious to the hon. member. But I’m not going to stand up here 
and give you all of the items that we’ve identified  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3821 

 

and the predictions in there, or the items that we can flag and pull 
out of the system. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well I would accuse the minister of intellectual 
dishonesty, but it seems there is no intellect coming from the 
minister tonight. You keep talking about these checks and 
balances, and these indicators which will prevent people from 
abusing the system. I have mentioned four or five possible abuses 
because I’ve heard of them firsthand from individuals that have 
told me that they’ve seen this happen, or they know somebody 
that’s undertaken it to happen. I can’t stop it by myself. It’s not my 
duty and my obligation as an MLA to stop it. The Minister of 
Finance, introducing a program like this, must have some kind of 
checks and balances in place before they announce the program or 
there’s a real serious problem here. It’s as serious as we’ve all 
been saying over the last four months. There’s a severe case of 
mismanagement, Mr. Minister. 
 
And what do you Have to say to the fact, with your checks and 
balances . . . Before supper you said 340 or 350,000 of the 
741,000 licensed vehicle operators — or 641,000 licensed vehicle 
operators — might apply for the rebate. What happens if 670,000 
apply and they apply for more than you’ve taken in? What do you 
do then? What do you do to resolve that through your checks and 
balances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well that’s highly speculative and not likely 
that that would happen and it kind of . . . contrary to the argument 
you’ve been making so many times that all the efforts so far have 
been to discourage people from applying. 
 
I have some difficulty with the inconsistency of your position, but 
we’ve done our estimates. We’ve indicated what our expectations 
are, and as yet. I have not heard of one possible way of defrauding 
the system that hadn’t been thought of when they designed the 
program. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well I could be at this all evening, and I think I 
should just pass on to another topic because I don’t think you have 
a grip on what you’re doing. I don’t think your department 
understands what it’s doing, and as a result, there’s going to be a 
lot of problems, and I predict . . . and they’re going to be harsh 
problems for both the government and the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
I want to turn finally to one last item, and we’ve talked about this 
on two occasions or three occasions in the past now, and it has to 
do with the inefficient red tape, bureaucratic system of now 
charging fuel tax, 7 cents a litre fuel tax on the use of propane. 
 
You indicated on Friday night that the Propane Gas Association of 
Canada, Saskatchewan section, said to you that this is the way it 
should be done. Can you tell us whether it was on their initiative 
that they came to you saying, please tax us, tax us, tax us, or did 
you go to them and say, we’re going to tax you; here’s how we’re 
going to do it? Explain that for us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — From June 22 till October 31, retail propane 
dealers were allowed to purchase propane  

tax-free and remit the tax collected on their taxable sales to 
suppliers. However, during the course of that procedure several 
propane dealers complained that some of their competitors were 
not collecting the tax on their taxable, automotive propane sales in 
a consistent manner. As a result, discussions were held with the 
Saskatchewan committee of the Propane Gas Association of 
Canada and they supported the changes that we’d made that came 
into effect November 1, 1987. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Why were the retailers not paying the taxes? 
Could you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well some weren’t collecting it. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Pardon me? I didn’t quite catch that, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I said that some were collecting it and some 
were not collecting it and so we worked out a new system with the 
Propane Gas Association of Canada, in conjunction with them, to 
collect the tax. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Did the department check into these retailers to 
find out whether they were selling any propane that was taxable? 
Was it not possible that they were selling their propane for the 
uses which are tax-free, for example, lighting, heating, and 
cooking? Maybe that was the reason. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — What we found — and I think it indicates our 
view that the vast majority of Saskatchewan people are honest — 
that it was either individuals notifying us that the tax was not 
being collected, or other dealers, that tax was not being collected, 
or the association itself indicating that there was some 
inconsistency. And as a consequence, we determined that over the 
course of the couple of months that we went through this, that bout 
80 per cent in rural Saskatchewan was non-taxable, 20 per cent 
taxable, and the reverse in the urban areas. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well I think your figures for the rural area is 
probably close. I’ve spoken to a couple of propane distributors in 
this city, the retailers — and I’m talking about the private 
operators, not the large, national corporations — and they tell me 
that it’s anywhere between 50 and 80 per cent of their propane is 
sold for non-taxable purposes. What we’ve seen now is this 
government not consulting with the independent small retailers but 
talking to the national corporations and levying a tax on a 
non-taxable time. On what legal foundation can you apply a 
provincial sales tax on a non-taxable item? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I would ask the hon. member to 
understand that the association, I’m advised, represents all retailers 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if there are some that are not, 
they’ve got to be very few because the advice I have is that they 
do represent them all. If you have, as I’ve made the offer before, if 
you’ve got some that don’t and they have a specific problem, then 
we’re quite prepared to sit down and talk to them, and I’ve made 
that offer as we’ve done with some of the bulk dealers that, in 
some cases, don’t buy bulk from the major refiners. We’ve met 
with them to make some adjustments to make sure that they’re not 
harmed in any way. 
 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3822 

 

So if you’ve got some specifically, we’re more than pleased to sit 
down and to talk to them. I had been assured, I tell the hon. 
member, that the association had represented all of the retailers. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well I appreciate your offer of co-operation and 
I’d like to take you up on it. But just for your information, the 
retailers that I’ve spoken to are independents. They’re not part of 
ICG (Inter-City Gas Corporation) or the other corporations that 
you’ve mentioned, Calgary gas and so on. They’re independents 
and they tell me that they are not members of the association. Just 
a little information here. These retailers purchase propane up to 
three or four times a week in their heavy season. They have to pay, 
in almost every case, either the day following their receipt or at 
most on a weekly basis. 
 
So here you are setting a precedent to collect tax on a non-taxable 
item from these independents, and that tax is going to the 
producers who are then remitting the tax on a monthly basis. 
We’ve got the retailers supporting the nationals and the large 
corporations in terms of a tax credit and then we’ve got the 
corporations feeding the government before the credit system is 
resolved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, I’m going to ask the hon. member to 
give us the names because we have dealt, specifically, and we’ve 
had a very informal licensing system in terms of the bulk fuel 
dealers that are not buying from major refiners so that they are not 
out of pocket as a result of the program. So if you’ve got some 
specific propane retailers, please let us know so that we can work 
with them to get a system so that they’re not out of pocket. 
 
I’m passing on to you the assurance I’ve had . . . I would like to 
indicate to the hon. member that I’m advised as well that a lot of 
the independent retailers — and I gather from what you’re telling 
us, not all — still will buy from Calgary gas, ICG, or whatever. So 
they still may be buying from the major suppliers. But if you do 
have some, specifically, I make the offer to you that we would be 
more than pleased to work out some arrangements with them so 
that they’re not out of pocket. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well if that’s the co-operation you’re extending, 
why don’t you just meet with them and terminate this lousy 
program? Because they’re paying taxes . . . Well what’s the 
purpose of meeting with them and saying, oh well, we’ll make 
sure you’re not out of pocket? 
 
The way to make sure they’re not out of pocket is to say, don’t 
worry about this memo we’ve sent out with respect to paying tax 
on non-taxable propane; we’ll go back to the system the way it 
was — that you purchase your propane wholesale, you sell it 
retail, you collect the taxes on that which is taxable, and then on a 
monthly basis, through your regular E & H licence, submit the tax 
to the government. Why can’t you do it that way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’ve indicated to the hon. member we’re 
prepared . . . We have not had one independent retailer bring their 
concerns to the Department of Finance, but other retailers had 
through  

the association. We’ve had meetings with them to work out an 
acceptable solution. So if the others have not brought them 
forward . . . And I’m advised that none have been brought 
forward. So if there are some independents out there that do have 
the problem, we have met, and my officials have had many 
meetings with the association and what not to try and rectify it, but 
none came to our attention. So if some were missed, we will sit 
down with them if you will give us the names. But I had been 
assured as well, and I caution the hon. member, that the 
association had covered all, well over 400 retailers of propane in 
the province. So they were speaking . . . If any got missed, we will 
be prepared to deal with them. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I’ll get those names to you in confidence later 
on the assurance from the minister that there is no implication or 
recourse on them. But once . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Just in confidence that we can talk to them or 
in confidence that we can’t talk to them? 
 
Mr. Solomon: — In confidence there is no political backlash, I 
guess is what I am getting at. I’ll talk to them. They tried to get a 
hold of your department, one of them that I know. 
 
But one final question. Could you please tell me under what legal 
authority you are able to collect this tax on non-taxable items? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll give you the various sections that apply: 
clause 2(q): propane is a taxable fuel since it may be used for 
propelling a motor vehicle. Okay. Then there are exemptions from 
that . . . 
 
(1930) 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s the taxable. What about the heating, 
lighting . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, it’s defined as a taxable fuel and then 
exemptions back from that. Now remember the individual, the 
retailer, should not be charging tax on the heating component. 
Under section 3(1), a purchaser of taxable fuel pays tax subject to 
the provisions of section 4 to 6. 
 
Now I will just take you through this rather than detailing the 
various sections . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Will you table it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Pardon? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Will you table it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll table you this outline which indicates that 
we are not imposing a tax on non-taxable products, so I’ll forward 
that over to you. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — If the document shows that you’re taxing 
taxable items, that’s understandable because you would probably 
have that support in legislation. But if you’re taxing non-taxable 
items, I’d like to know how you get that authority. It says here 
you’re purchasing . . . You can levy a tax on taxable fuel but 
propane used for  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3823 

 

heating, lighting, and cooking is tax exempt. So how can you 
collect the tax on the exempt fuel? I know you can collect the tax 
on the taxable fuel. That’s pretty straightforward. But this doesn’t 
seem to resolve the question that I have and that is, where do you 
get the authority to tax the non-taxable items? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well again, if you would take a look at the . . . 
if you look at section 6. First of all, you have a broad definition of 
taxable fuel. So everything’s included in taxable fuel and then 
exemptions are taken back from that broad definition, which is 
how it works so that then a purchaser of propane under section 6 
used exclusively for heating, lighting, and cooking will be 
prescribed as exempt. So you have the broad . . . It’s all taxable 
but then you make exemptions back from that. That’s how it 
operates. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So what you’re saying now is that rather than 
letting the retailer make the decision on the basis of sales, you’re 
saying to the retailer, pay everything that you purchase on the 
wholesale bulk you pay tax on, and we’ll give you a rebate. Why 
do you want to do that? What gives you, what legal authority? I 
can read this and then you say here, a purchaser of propane used 
exclusively for heating, lighting, and cooking will be prescribed as 
being exempt under the regulations. And that’s my point — it’s 
exempt. So how can you collect — under what authority — tax 
from this tax exempt item? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Keep in mind that under this, the individual 
does not pay the tax — I mean, when he’s buying. The retailer 
would pay the tax and, as I had indicated earlier, either in question 
period or the other evening, the Saskatchewan committee of the 
Propane Gas Association of Canada advised us that retail propane 
dealers have 30-day credit terms for which to pay for the propane. 
Now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, again, I make the same 
offer because we have done this with some of the bulk fuel dealers 
and if they have a . . . What we’ve done with some of the bulk fuel 
dealers is a separate licence so we can deal with them, and it’s 
quite an informal procedure. but if you’ve got some specifically 
. . . The Association had advised us that certainly their members 
are on 30-day terms, so that they are not out of pocket the way the 
procedures operate. But if you do have, again, independents, we’re 
prepared to sit down with them so that they’re not out of pocket. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Okay, I will get the names. You still haven’t 
answered what is the section of the Act which provides you with 
the authority to collect tax on a non-taxable item. Now we can 
stand around here for the next hour or two hours or three hours, 
but that wouldn’t add any light to the arguments that you’re 
putting forward. It wouldn’t add any positive information or any 
concrete plans to the administration of the fuel tax rebate program. 
 
What we have seen, Minister, in today’s Committee of Finance, 
Committee of the Whole, we have seen a Minister of Finance who 
can’t provide information as to how the program will work, 
whether it be an opportunity for information so that people can 
figure out how they can apply for this rebate. It doesn’t matter 
whether we asked  

you questions about the timing, or the amount of rebate, or the 
amount of dollars you’re saving as a result of this tax-free loan 
from taxpayers. It doesn’t matter, because you don’t seem to have 
the answers. 
 
And I think that from my perspective, Mr. Minister, this is another 
indication of your government, in its mismanagement of our 
economy . . . It’s no wonder we have a $3.4 billion deficit and 
rising faster than any other deficit on a percentage basis in North 
American. It’s no wonder we have a patronage-riddled 
government, second to none in the country. I think it’s symbolic, 
this Act, of your performance as Minister of Finance. 
 
I said at the outset that I would declare it intellectual dishonesty, 
but there’s no intellect coming from the cabinet. And I contend, 
Mr. Minister, that as a result of this performance tonight, I think 
you’re in deep trouble as Minister of Finance, and I think the 
Premier’s going to be calling for your resignation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I appreciate the political debate and the 
rhetoric of the hon. member. I just appreciate very much that 
underneath the rhetoric he has confidence in the system, because 
he indicated he’s keeping his receipts and is going to apply for the 
rebate. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, just a question on clause 19 with 
regard to subsection (8). Is there any appeal procedure outlined, 
either in your regulations or through some other format, with 
respect to submitting these receipts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, the appeal procedures for, I believe, all 
revenue statutes are under the department of revenue Act of an 
appeal to the Board of Revenue Commissioners which has been a 
long-standing procedure in the province. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Is it possible to, in view of perhaps all of the red 
tape involved, to refine that procedure and publicize it when 
necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If the hon. member is asking for a total review 
of the activities and procedures of the Board of Revenue 
Commissioners, then I would be hard pressed to justify it at this 
time. But if there are problems, I would certainly be prepared to 
undertake with the minister, that we can take a look at the 
activities of the Board of Revenue Commissioners. 
 
Clause 19 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 20 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 23 
 
Mr. Solomon: — One final question, Mr. Chairman, with  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3824 

 

regard to section 23. What are your plans to publicize the penalties 
for any offence under this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I believe some, if not all, retail dealers 
have already been advised of the penalty provisions. We are 
considering putting it on the forms; it may well be placed in some 
bold print if it’s deemed necessary. 
 
Clause 23 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 24 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend the Department of  
Revenue and Financial Services Act 

 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’ve taken up enough 
time in exposing this government’s incompetence and 
mismanagement with respect to the fuel tax that they’ve put on. 
Bill 52 is a Act which is consequential to that and as a result we 
will not only be opposing Bill 51 but we will be opposing Bill 52 
as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting Veterinarians 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right 
is Stuart Kramer, assistant deputy minister of Agriculture; and to 
his right, Dr. Peter Rempel who’s the director of the veterinary 
branch; and behind the deputy minister is Mr. Mike McAvoy, 
legislative officer from the admin. services branch of Agriculture. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. chairman. I just have a few 
questions on this Bill. 
 
First of all, with regard to the scope of the practice. As you’ll 
know the medical Act, for example, does not outline specific 
duties, and this Bill goes much further than the dental profession, 
than that of the dental profession. The scope of the practice of the 
veterinarians Bill is much broader. I was wondering what the 
explanation of that was. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think it’s . . . I’m not just really certain. 
I understand what the member means by scope. What I can tell 
you, albeit that this is a new Act, it’s a rewrite of previous 
legislation, and in so far as what’s defined as the practice of 
veterinary medicine, if you like, and the species — essentially 
unchanged, as I understand it. 

Mr. Upshall: — Well, it just being like . . . The medical 
profession, for example, does not outline the specific duties of a 
physician nor the boundaries of what constitute medical practice. 
But this Bill goes very specific, as it includes, you know, in 
section 2, many of the specific duties, which is much, much tighter 
than what the medical or dental profession is. I was wondering if 
there was a reason for that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I think the analogy you make with 
the human health sciences is not necessarily a good one. The 
difference in veterinary practice is: there are some procedures, for 
example, dehorning, immunization, vaccination, that have 
historically and traditionally been done by the farmer or the 
rancher himself. And I suppose that’s why we have some 
definitions in here that you wouldn’t find in other legislation 
relative to other health sciences. 
 
As well, this Act, I think, attempts to define more clearly some of 
the new technology that was not clearly defined in the past 
legislation. I think of things like embryo transfer, whether it’s 
surgical or non-surgical. Does it fall in the same category as 
artificial insemination, or is it strictly a veterinary surgical practice 
— those kinds of things. Maybe that’s the kinds of issues you’re 
referring to. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, does this Bill in any way prevent 
farmers from administering drugs to their own animals — 
vaccinations — or to those animals of their neighbours, as is the 
common practice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, is the short answer. And the 
exemptions, if you like, are in section 17 of the Act. Previously, I 
think there was three subsections that outlined what the farmer 
might be considered . . . what a part of the historical practice of the 
farmer, if you like — whether it’s immunizations or dehorning — 
and now there are eight, and addresses things like non-surgical 
embryo transfer, those kinds of things. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, does this Bill give any new powers 
to the veterinarians in the area of animal reproduction? I refer to 
management of estrus synchronization and superovulation and the 
collection and the evaluation process of embryos. Does it give any 
new powers to veterinarians in the whole area of reproductive 
management? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. You mention, you know, the 
reproductive side. That’s one of the areas where there’s been a fair 
amount of technology developed since the last time this Act was 
updated, and it’s more clearly spelled out as it relates to, for 
example, surgical transfers of embryos versus non-surgical. 
 
But specifically, if you look at the other side of the reproductive 
physiology where there’s been a fair number of changes and some 
new technology come forward, that’s in some of the 
pharmacology, some of the drugs that are used. I mean a drug that 
Food and Drug in Ottawa determines as a controlled substance is 
still a controlled substance or a prescription substance and that 
hasn’t changed, and for some good reason because these drugs are 
— as is any drug — not without side effects. I think one has to 
understand what they can do and, as  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3825 

 

well, know their limitations. And in the wrong hands I think it 
could cause some problems if they’re not under the prescription of 
a veterinarian. 
 
That’s as it’s always been and nothing has changed in that regard, 
particularly, except that there are some new drugs in that area that 
have come along that fall under those categories. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So this Bill will . . . Will this Bill give 
veterinarians exclusive control over these new developing areas of 
embryo transplants and collection and processing of embryos? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, this Bill doesn’t determine that. 
That’s — I mean if Food and Drug administration determines 
whether a drug is a narcotic or a controlled substance or a 
prescription drug — and I forget the various schedule and what 
each of them defines, but that’s done by somebody other than the 
veterinary association, certainly, and they have to abide by Food 
and Drug’s determinations in that regard. And although you may 
point to the example of, you know, are we somehow, you know, 
putting in the hands of only the veterinarians some of these drugs, 
as I mentioned earlier, some of them do have . . . some of those are 
very complex drugs and subject to abuse, and some dangerous 
abuse. 
 
But similarly the same case could be made for, you know, 
prescription antibiotics and those drugs not finding their way into 
the food chain, and that also falls under the jurisdiction of the 
Food and Drug administration in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, who will have control regarding 
regulating and monitoring of the whole process of embryo 
transplants? And that whether it be the administration, or whether 
it be the collection, or whether it be the development, what will the 
monitoring body be with regards to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The break point on this . . . and this Act 
in large measure parallels, for example, what they did in Alberta, 
and I think what they did in Manitoba as well. The distinguishing 
feature tends to be whether it’s a surgical procedure or a 
non-surgical procedure, and I think the non-surgical tends to fall, 
in many people’s minds, albeit that it’s sophisticated, but it tends 
to fall into that category, not unlike artificial insemination fell into 
that category 20 years ago, sort of thing. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — But the point I was getting at was that there’s no 
fear of losing control over the genetics . . . of animal genetics with 
regard to reproduction, and that there will be a monitoring body to 
ensure that the selection of these and collection of embryo 
transplants is done by people other than veterinarians? And there’s 
no fear that we’re going to lose some of our genetic diversity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, and I think because everyone 
recognizes that this has been a grey area, that this Bill spells it out 
clearly and sensibly, and as well the industry, if you like, has made 
some steps forward here. I’m advised that veterinarians and 
non-veterinarians, those in the industry who aren’t veterinarians, if 
you like, have banded together to form a Canadian or national  

organization to look and to deal with many of the issues around 
the embryo transfer business, if you like. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, when 
you went through the procedures of drafting this Bill, were any of 
the rural farm groups notified of exactly what was going on with 
the Bill — the wheat pool, the SARM (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities), the NFU (National Farmers Union), or 
any of the other groups that may be interested in what The 
Veterinarians Act being changed will mean to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To give you a bit of the history, in so far 
as if I stand back and I look at the entire area of the delivery of 
veterinary services across Saskatchewan, of which obviously the 
professional Act or The Veterinarians Act would be part of it, it’s 
been for the most part a two-stage process. 
 
Probably a year and a half or two years ago now, there was a 
veterinary services review committee struck and it had people like 
Dr. Ed McCall, who’s currently with the health of animals branch 
here in Regina of the federal government, formerly a practising 
veterinarian who was the chairman of it; Connie Blacklock, a 
farmer from Saskatoon; Amel Wallen from Foam Lake who, as 
well, has brought the veterinary service district or the rural 
municipality perspective, if you like; Ken McDonald, president — 
maybe today a past president, I’m not sure — at one time or 
another, he’s been the president of the cattle feeders association; 
Dr. Ken Armstrong, who’s a professor at the Western College of 
Veterinary Medicine; and Dr. Don Pulfer, immediate past 
president of the Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association sat 
on this committee, this veterinary service review committee, as 
part of their review process, although not targeted strictly at this 
Act. But to stand back and to look at the entire delivery of 
veterinary services, along with a parallel committee that was 
examining extension service across the province, they came 
forward with a number of recommendations, some of which we’ve 
seen manifested in this last budget. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I would congratulate all of those 
individuals for the effort that they put into this and the 
thoughtfulness they put in to it. I know all of them took time out 
from running busy farms and practices to serve the public in this 
regard. 
 
As part of their committee deliberations, if you like, they met with 
— and I couldn’t tell you who and individuals and/or the groups 
they met — but I think the ones that you mentioned, stock growers 
for example, the association of rural municipalities, would be a 
couple for sure that they consulted along with several others in 
terms of drafting the report. 
 
As well the veterinarians have a legislative committee. Two of the 
members that sat on the veterinary services review committee, sit 
on that legislative review committee — Dr. Ed McCall and Dr. 
Ken Armstrong. As well they had the association lawyer, Bob 
Kennedy, and Dean Gavin Hamilton, from the Western College of 
Veterinary Medicine, and as well, Bryan Wurtz who is a past 
president of the Canadian Veterinary Medical Association. So you 
had that continuity there with the two  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3826 

 

of them. 
 
Thirdly, and I myself know that the association has had some 
chance, as I suppose others have, to look at this legislation. As you 
know, I think, it had first reading on August 19, I think it was. So 
they’ve had two, two and a half months to make commentary if 
they so wished. And I’m advised that we haven’t had any 
feedback particularly, or a limited amount if we have had. I guess 
there was some feedback because we’ve got some House 
amendments to address a couple of the points. 
 
But I guess I’m fairly comfortable especially with, you know, the 
mandate and the process that the veterinary services review 
committee went through in terms of getting to their report, albeit 
that it was only part of the larger process, and we’re only dealing 
with a part of it here tonight. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Chairman: — We have a House amendment of the printed 
Bill: 
 

Amend clause 2(1) of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) by striking out subclause (i); 
 
(b) by renumbering subclauses (ii) to (vii) as subclauses (i) to 
(vi) respectively; and 
 
(c) by striking out subclause (viii). 

 
Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment on Clause 8, and because it 
involves a money provision, I would ask the minister to have an 
introductory clause. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and members of the 
committee, I beg to inform the Assembly that his Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of the subject matter 
of the Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. 
 
I move to amend section 8 of the printed Bill as is before the 
House in terms of the House amendments. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The amendment to the printed Bill on section 
8 is: 
 

(a) by striking out all the words in subsection (5) after 
“determined” in the third line and substituting “by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council”; and 
 
(b) by striking out “by the association” in subsection (6) and 
substituting “out of moneys appropriated by the Legislature 
for the purpose.” 

 

Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 9 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment of the printed Bill: 
 
Amend section 12 of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) by striking out subsection (6); and 
 
(b) by renumbering subsections (7) and (8) as subsections (6) 
and (7) respectively. 

 
Clause 12 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend section 13 of the printed Bill by adding, “other than 
the member appointed pursuant to section 8” after “council” 
in Clause (1)(i). 

 
Clause 13 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 14 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(2000) 
 
Clause 18 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment of the printed Bill: 

 
Strike out section 18 of the printed Bill and substitute the 
following: 
 
Veterinarians employed in public service 
 
“18 No person other than a member is eligible to be 
appointed as a veterinarian in any branch of the public 
service of Saskatchewan.” 

 
Clause 18 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 19 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 26 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 26, House amendment of the printed 
Bill: 
 

Amend section 26 of the printed Bill by striking out 
“indicatable” and substituting “indictable.” 

 
Okay, a spelling error. Amendment agreed? 
 
Clause 26 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 27 to 49 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I, and members of committee, I thank 
my officials; as well, the members of the public and the 
veterinarians who helped draw up the legislation. 



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3827 

 

 
And finally, Mr. Chairman, I would move the committee report 
the Bill. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 57 — An Act to repeal The Scrap Vehicles Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Beside me is Peter van Es, the deputy 
minister; and behind me, Larry Lechner, director of the division. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll ask my 
colleague here from Rosemont to say a few words. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, one question to start this portion of 
the review of the legislation off. What is the main purpose of the 
Bill, and why have you introduced it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The main purpose is to discontinue the 
government’s operation of the scrap vehicle collection and to 
move that into private hands. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — What studies have you done, first of all, Mr. 
Minister, to indicate that it would result in an overall saving to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and do you have any documentation as to 
those studies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In the past year, the actual shortfall between 
the amount of money that we received for scrap vehicles and the 
cost of the program to the government amounted to about 350,000, 
and that’s how much we’ll save. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, do you have any documents to 
prove the assertion that you’re making that it saved $350,000, and 
if so, have you got the last year and, say, the last five years in 
terms of the overall cost of the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s been a fairly steady cost figure on the 
program, year after year, at approximately $350,000 cost. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well it seems to me a rather small sum given the 
overall operations of government, Mr. Minister. You’ve decided 
to turn it to the private sector. Could you tell us what economic 
advantage it will be for the private sector? Will they be running 
the program at a $350,000 loss as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I really don’t know whether the private sector 
will operate at a loss or not. At the time that we negotiated with 
interprovincial steel company to take over the operation, they 
indicated that they felt that they could operate it and turn a profit. 
If they can do that, that’s a good operation for them, and they 
indicate also that they need more scrap vehicles than 
Saskatchewan can even supply, so they’re very anxious to take 
over the program and to operate it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now, Mr. Minister, you say that you’ve run 
$350,000 a year loss. Would it be fair to say that that $350,000 
was paid out to Saskatchewan residents or small businesses which 
either collected those scrap  

vehicles or, in fact, had those scrap vehicles on their land and were 
going to get rid of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — yes, it would have been paid to contractors 
who are gathering the scrap, and it would also, some of it, be paid 
to rural municipalities for collection sites. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, $350,000 then really wasn’t a loss to 
Saskatchewan people, in the sense that it got turned directly back 
into their pockets. Wouldn’t you say that the $350,000 that you’re 
pulling out of the pockets of the contractors and the municipalities 
of the province, wouldn’t you say that that’s really the loss that the 
. . . the monetary loss that the people of this province are going to 
feel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, I wouldn’t agree with the hon. member. 
The program is going to continue. They’re still going to be 
collecting the scrap vehicles. It’s going to take contractors to do 
that work. And as they collect the vehicles, they will be paid 
through the private company and therefore the money should still 
go out into society the same as it would have from government. If 
they can do it at a more economical cost than government, that’s 
where the saving would be. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well let’s just suppose, Mr. Minister, that they 
can’t, and that in fact it’s going to cost them more money for 
increased fuel costs, for example, given that their gas taxes have 
been increased, and they decide that, in fact, it’s not profitable to 
do it. What arrangements have your department made? What 
arrangements have your department made to ensure that scrap 
vehicles are picked up or, in fact, are they just going to be littering 
the landscape as they used to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, interprovincial steel company advise us 
that they need all of the scrap vehicles that they normally have 
received from the province, and even more. They’ve entered into a 
contract with the provincial contractor to bring in a certain tonnage 
of steel and if he’s going to bring that, he has to pick the cars up. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Could you please tell us who the provincial 
contractor is, then, that would be picking up these vehicles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — At this point in time, they’re using the same 
contractor that the government used and his name is . . . The name 
of the company is Curtis Construction. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And this was the contractor that the provincial 
government used. Was he required to post any performance bonds 
or to give any guarantee that the work would be carried out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — At the time that he worked for our 
department, yes, he posted a performance bond. I’m not certain 
what the contract arrangements are with another company. You 
would have to ask that company. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well you predicted, Mr. Minister, that the 
collection of scrap vehicles in the province . . . and you’ve 
outlined fairly clearly that it is solely dependent on market 
conditions from Ipsco. If Ipsco needs scrap  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3828 

 

vehicles, then this contractor, Curtis Construction, will go out and 
collect the scrap vehicles. 
 
What provisions have you made if there’s a downturn in the steel 
industry and Ipsco does not require the scrap vehicles? What then 
happens to these scrap vehicles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That circumstance has not occurred in this 
province for a long time. The steel has been needed. Ipsco has had 
to bring steel in, in the form of scrap cars, from as far away as 
Michigan. So as long as there is that kind of need, I would expect 
that they will continue to select the cars that are in Saskatchewan 
first. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, you’re not asking the question. Let 
us say — what I want to know — that in case Ipsco does not 
require the steel, what provisions have you, as the Minister of 
Environment, made to ensure that those scrap vehicles are 
collected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I consider that question to be very 
hypothetical at this point in time, and if the circumstance should 
arise five years down the road or 20 years down the road, the 
government of the day could deal with it at that time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well Mr. Minister, I don’t want you and your poor 
performance to burden down our government when we form it 
three or four years down the road. I don’t want to have to be 
burdened down, going out collecting scrap vehicles. I think that 
it’s incumbent upon you, as the Minister of the Environment, sir, I 
believe it’s incumbent upon you to plan ahead that, in fact, that 
you have contingency plans. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you have repealed The Scrap Vehicles Act. 
You have absolutely no jurisdiction . . . The way I read it, you 
have absolutely no more jurisdiction over the collection of scrap 
vehicles. Why have you made the decision, you, the Minister of 
Environment, made the decision to turn over environmental — 
what basically is an environmental problem — to the private 
sector? Why have you begun to privatize environmental protection 
in this province? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that the job will be done equally as 
well by the company that’s now collecting cars as it was done by 
the government. It’s going to be done at a savings of $350,000 
from the taxpayers of the province. I believe that that’s a good 
reason for us to move in the direction we have moved and that’s 
the reason the Bill is here. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, you know, Mr. Minister, you may believe 
that, but history has already proved you wrong. The reason that 
this, the original Scrap Vehicles Act, was introduced, was 
precisely because the private sector, the free enterprisers, weren’t 
picking up scrap vehicles, and that the landscape of Saskatchewan, 
as everybody well knows, was becoming nothing more than a junk 
yard for rusted out old hulks. That’s why the legislation was 
originally introduced. 
 
You know, turning back the clocks 30 and 40 years doesn’t  

qualify as a new idea when it comes to environmental protection. 
this Act was one of the forerunners — and I must say a far-sighted 
forerunner — when it came to developing environmental 
protection in the province of Saskatchewan. All of a sudden you 
want to turn the clock back 30 or 40 years and let the old free 
enterprisers try to deal with the problem that they didn’t deal with 
before. 
 
What gives you the idea, what gives you the idea that things will 
not turn out as they did before? I mean, what assurance can you 
. . . What assurances can you provide the people of the province, 
and what ultimate responsibility, will you, as the Minister of the 
Environment, take when it comes to ensuring that scrap vehicles 
are collected? If Curtis Construction doesn’t collect the scrap 
vehicles, if Ipsco says, we don’t need the scrap vehicles, what 
provisions have you, as the Minister of Environment, made to 
ensure that those scrap vehicles are collected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, as I indicated to the hon. member, the 
program has been in place for a long time. The program has 
continually cost the government a considerable amount of money 
each year, and at this it has cost approximately $4.5 million of 
government money. 
 
The provincial contractor, working for interprovincial steel, will 
continue to gather the cars because the scrap value of cars has 
risen and the steel company needs the product. That’s the best 
reason that anybody could have for going into business. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, that still doesn’t deal with the 
problem, the problem of you not taking into account the fact that it 
may not work out that way. You still haven’t answered the 
question that I’ve asked. What contingency plans have you made 
— what contingency plans, if any, have you made when it comes 
to dealing with scrap vehicles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We have let the contracts flow through Ipsco 
to other people who will do the job. I think that we have to trust 
the provincial contractors to do the job. They indicate that they 
will; Ipsco indicates they want the product. I have no reason in my 
mind that I wouldn’t trust either Ipsco or the contractor. If down 
the road at some point in history, we find that the job isn’t being 
done, then we can address it. But I don’t see it as a problem at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You made reference to the original contractor, 
which is Curtis Construction, that deals with this. Has Curtis, who 
operated . . . Or the series of subcontractors, the towing companies 
and so forth, is that system still in place or has Curtis decided to 
engage other contractors and towers and sub-collectors, if you 
like? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The program is now not under our control. 
The contractors that are being used out in the country, I couldn’t 
indicate to you whether he’s using the same ones or different ones 
or whether he uses more or less. That will be up to the 
interprovincial steel corporation and to the general contractor. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, will you table the documents  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3829 

 

that you’ve referred to here showing that in fact it did cost the 
people of Saskatchewan $350,000. Will you table the documents 
which in fact show that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would refer the hon. member to the public 
accounts of the province, and you would find the figures there. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — First of all, if the minister could indicate 
what year of public accounts, I would like to know that. Mr. 
Minister, let’s take you at your word that the private sector will in 
fact be able to do the job that you think that they will be able to do 
in terms of picking up scrap vehicles throughout the province. 
 
Let’s recognize also that the steel industry is a cyclical industry, 
and that is to say that demand for products may rise and fall, and 
even if there is a market today for scrap vehicles, there may not be 
a market tomorrow. You say that you’re prepared to address that 
when you come to it. I’m wondering whether it might not have 
been wiser, as opposed to scrapping the whole Act, to at least 
leave for yourself some discretionary powers in the event that you 
see a need for that, so that you could move quickly as opposed to 
reintroducing a new Bill at some point in the future, should that be 
warranted. 
 
I also want to know from you, sir, whether you have held 
discussions with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities and with the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association with respect to any impact that the repeal of The 
Scrap Vehicles Act may have on their operations, recognizing that 
they may have some additional burden now that they did not face 
previously. And in saying that, that’s recognized that a private 
contractor may not be willing to go the extra mile, that was the 
case previously, to pick up scrap vehicles because it may not be in 
their interests, from a profit point of view, to go as far to pick up 
isolated vehicles here and there, but it may present a charge for 
some municipalities. And I wonder if I might have your comments 
on those. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We haven’t negotiated with the 
municipalities. We have advised the municipalities, where we 
have collection sites, that The Scrap Vehicles Act was going to be 
repealed and that we would make sure that each of the sites that 
we had rented from them would be cleaned before we turned the 
site back to the rural municipalities. So that part of it is looked 
after. 
 
In your question you indicated that steel was a cyclical business 
and that it would rise and fall with the markets for steel. That’s 
always been that way with the government as well, that the steel 
industry was up and down. If Ipsco quit buying cars, I don’t know 
what Saskatchewan government would do if we continue to 
collect them. We would have no place to put them. 
 
So you only collect when you can deliver them somewhere. And if 
we come to a point in history where we can’t collect the cars and 
turn them into steel, then it would be most difficult for the 
government to continue, and I guess it would be difficult then for 
private industry to continue as well. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I wonder if you can just indicate  

again . . . In response to the previous question you mentioned that 
certain information could be found in public accounts. I wonder if 
you could indicate what year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It would be in each year from the time the 
program was introduced until now — until the end of ’86. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Chairman, I 
would like to ask for leave to also deal with The Litter Control 
Act. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Uniform Building  
and Accessibility Standards Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Chairman, I have one new official who 
has just joined us. It’s Bert Sheasby. He’s head of the department 
dealing with this subject. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, to pick up where we left off on 
Friday, I guess this Bill is really just enabling legislation. 
Everything you intend to do is in the regulations. We were told at 
the Non-Controversial Bills Committee that the regulations are 
drafted ready to go. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would table a 
copy of those regulations. If you did, I think we could proceed 
fairly smartly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The regulations are drafted. They haven’t 
gone through the committees of government yet, so to say they are 
ready to go is not quite right. They aren’t ready to go. I believe 
that we could have them ready in a few months — like maybe the 
end of December, the end of January — but they are not ready at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, that doesn’t prevent you 
from tabling them, and there is precedent for it. Regulations under 
Bills are tabled as an expression of departmental intent without in 
any sense being a commitment to take any course of action. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, why you think that it is not in the public 
interest for the legislature to know what the regulations say. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In the proper time the legislature will know 
what the regulations say. But until the government has the 
regulations in the form that they’re prepared to bring forward to 
the legislature, then I don’t think that it’s proper for me to table 
them. And I’m telling you tonight that they aren’t in that form that 
we want to bring them to the legislature yet. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What is planned with respect to accessibility 
to the buildings — I’m phrasing this very poorly. What is planned 
with respect to requiring that buildings be accessible for 
handicapped people? 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3830 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well as the hon. member knows, the Act as it 
now exists is there for that purpose, to provide access to buildings 
for handicapped people. The Bill that we have before us is to 
correct some of the errors that were in the original Bill, and I gave 
that information in my second reading comments today. 
 
This set of regulations, when they come forward, I believe, the 
hon. member will realize that they’re going to provide the kind of 
accessibility that the handicapped association of the province has 
been seeking. There have been many meetings held with the 
handicapped, with architects, with people in the building 
construction business, and we also intend to follow the national 
building code, which again, gives that kind of background 
information that will provide for accessibility. 
 
(2030) 
 
I might also tell the member that all public buildings will be 
accessible as the regulations of the Bill come into force. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — How would you define a public building, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — A building that’s used by and for the public. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Does that include privately-owned buildings 
to which the public are invited to attend? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Private buildings are private buildings. They 
may be used by the public but they would not be called public 
buildings. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Let’s pick an example. The main branch of 
the Royal Bank. It’s privately owned but a building to which the 
public are invited. Into what category would that fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that that would be classed as a 
public building. If it’s a new building, it would be accessible; if 
it’s an old building, then it may not be. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So do I take it that there is no . . . that these 
regulations do not touch upon existing buildings — that’s outside 
the purview of your efforts here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Unless there’s major renovations or change 
of occupancy or change of use, then the building would be outside 
of these . . . this Bill and the regulations. If there were changed in 
any way — say the building was a warehouse and changed to an 
apartment building — then it would have to meet the standards 
under this Act. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay, then. Do I take it then that all new 
buildings, all newly constructed buildings must be fully accessible 
to handicapped people whether they be movie theatres, 
commercial buildings, privately owned or publicly owned, so long 
as it’s a building to which the public are invited to attend. They 
must be accessible. Do I understand that? 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, if they are new buildings. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, what consultations have you 
had with handicapped groups? And in answering I would 
appreciate if you would be specific about who you or your 
officials have met with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The committee that drafted the regulations 
were made up of an architect, an engineer, a person from the 
building trade, a lawyer, and a person from the handicapped 
association, plus government people. So they’ve had input from 
the handicapped right through the whole process of the drafting 
stages of the regulations. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What outside groups have they met with, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — All of the major groups in society have had 
the opportunity to make representation, and many of them have 
taken that opportunity. They had the engineers, the architects, the 
building trades, Human Rights Commission, the SARM, and 
SUMA — oh, various others. I can’t indicate to you all of them off 
the top of my head, but they have met. 
 
As you realize, these regulations have been in the works since 
1984 and they have had probably more discussion than any set of 
regulations that have ever come forward. So I think when you see 
them, you will be completely satisfied. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if I’m completely satisfied, it 
will be a rare event in dealing with this government. Mr. Minister, 
have you . . . Were the Voice of the Handicapped invited to make 
a presentation and did they do so? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised yes, that they were given the 
opportunity. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Did they actually make a presentation, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, and they were on the committee as well. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My colleague from Regina Lakeview has 
some questions. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, there were some draft regulations 
on accessibility drawn up, I think it was 1982 — in the late spring 
or early summer of 1982 — by a provincial accessibility 
committee. On that committee there were a number of groups that 
represented the handicapped as well as other individuals. I take it 
you’re familiar with those regulations and I’m wondering why 
those regulations were not adopted because it’s my understanding 
that architects were guiding themselves by those 
recommendations, until this government came along and backed 
away from those regulations and started looking into the matter 
further. I’m wondering why those weren’t implemented and why 
an entirely new process was put into place — number one. And 
secondly, how much of a deviation is there between the ones that 
you are now proposing to put forward and the ones that  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3831 

 

were adopted in 1982 by that provincial committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, as the hon. member realizes, I was not 
the minister back in 1982. But I’m advised that at the time that 
those so-called regulations were being drafted, they were not 
really regulations, but they were guides to be used for drafting of 
regulations. They were not in the format that governments 
normally write regulations. They didn’t follow the terminology 
used in the National Building Code, and besides that, the 
legislation was not passed until 1984. So it’s pretty hard to write 
regulations until you have the legislation in place. 
 
Now many of those guides that were proposed in 1982 were used 
in the drafting of these regulations. Not all of them, but many of 
them were. And the people in society have had the opportunity to 
have input and to sit on the committee and work very closely with 
the department all through the drafting process. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you haven’t given me any specific 
indication as to how these regulations deviate from the 
recommendations or guide-lines set out in 1982. But I simply wish 
to make the observation, Mr. Minister, that these guide-lines were 
available to this government in early 1982 and it took until 1984 
before any legislation was put into place — two years. And then 
another three years before you come forward with amendments to 
this legislation, and we still haven’t seen the regulations, Mr. 
Minister. We still haven’t seen them. Is it going to take another 
three years before those actually get passed by an order in council, 
or will these regulations be forthcoming immediately? 
 
And I urge you to come forward immediately with them, because I 
think the fact there’s been a five-year delay in getting these 
regulations passed is an indication of the lack of priority that this 
government gives to accessibility for handicapped people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would like to advise the hon. member that 
this goes back much further than 1982. The former government in 
1978 was working with those regulations and never brought them 
forward. And you can consult with the member for Riversdale 
because he was one of the members that worked very closely with 
it. There is also a gentleman in the back bench here tonight that 
knows how long ago these first came forward. 
 
This is not an easy set of regulations to put in place, and I think 
that we have done a lot of homework to put it in place. Now when 
we took a look at the Bill that was passed in 1984 and tried to fit 
regulations, it just didn’t work because there were omissions in 
that Bill. That’s the reason for the amendments that we’re 
proposing today, and if this Bill passes, then we can move 
forward. I believe the regulations won’t take all that long, and I 
don’t expect it to be any two years or anything of that nature, but 
rather quickly. 
 
Ms. Simard: — How long, Mr. Minister, till the regulations are 
passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It depends on whether they pass through 
caucus, through our Regulations Committee, without a lot of 
change. Because if you change, then you  

have to go back to all of the organizations who helped draft them, 
and that could take some time. But I would anticipate that they 
would move forward in a matter of months. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Are there any major discrepancies between the 
recommendations of 1982 and the regulations that are coming 
forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — What you call regulations from 1982 were 
really just guide-lines to begin the process of drafting regulations. 
They were not regulations. 
 
Throughout the whole process, as I advised the hon. member from 
Regina Centre, these people from The Voice of The Handicapped 
have had the opportunity to sit on the committee, to have input all 
the way through the drafting process for those regulations. Now I 
don’t really have any way of telling you whether there is some 
change from that time. We don’t recall anything significant, but 
there’s bound to be something different, you know; you don’t 
write any two pieces of regulation and not have some change. But 
if they met the needs of the group that were sitting at the table at 
the time they were drafted, they have to be fairly satisfactory, I 
think, to the general public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I just want to echo the comment of my 
colleague from Regina Lakeview. These regulations have taken an 
inordinarily long time to bring forward, Mr. Minister. I recall 
asking the member from Yorkton, who was then the minister in 
charge in 1982, and he kept saying, soon, next month; soon, next 
month. And the member will recall having listened to those 
questions in question period when the minister was Speaker. Then 
after a couple of years the Bill finally passed and we began to ask 
about the regulations. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Minister, it may be complex, but if you’re a handicapped 
person who depends on these regulations so that they can function 
as ordinary people, nothing is complex enough to take five years 
to pass. Mr. Minister, there’s been a great deal of procrastination 
on this, and I say to you and to other members of government, that 
the rights of handicapped people and their ability to function as 
normal members of society have been sacrificed in too much 
procrastination. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think that the hon. member realizes that the 
National Building Code was amended with the assistance of 
people from the department. And as that building code was 
amended and put into its present form, it dealt with the 
accessibility for handicapped people. And I think if you go down 
the streets of your own home constituency here in Regina, you’ll 
find that a good percentage of those buildings are now accessible 
for handicapped people. 
 
I’m not saying we couldn’t do better, but at least we have been 
moving in the right direction and it’s improving steadily. These 
regulations, I believe, will be another step forward and when this 
Bill is passed, I will work diligently to see if we can get the 
regulations through soon. 
 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3832 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to amend The Prescription Drugs Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on my right is Ron 
Waschuk, who’s the executive director of the prescription drug 
plan. On my left is Michael Littlewood, administrative 
co-ordinator in the Department of Health; and Gerald Tegart, a 
lawyer from the Department of Justice, will be joining us 
momentarily. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, the 
other evening in Saskatoon, at a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) forum, several people in the audience had the 
opportunity to witness you in action. 
 
They particularly had the opportunity to witness your response to 
a man who has had a great deal of difficulty with the prescription 
drug plan, when he rose from his chair on the panel and went to 
the microphone and explained his situation to you. And you, Mr. 
Minister, in your typical way, tried to publicly humiliate that man. 
And that kind of heartless, cold, callous treatment is typical of 
your government and is typical of this prescription drug plan. 
 
Mr. Minister, you offended a lot of people in the audience, and I 
suspect when they put that program on television, you will offend 
a lot of people in the viewing public — the TV viewers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, when a person comes to you and 
asks you a question, is it always your response, as a cabinet 
minister representing your government, to put them down and try 
and publicly embarrass them? Is that the way you treat people in 
this province that are having difficulty with the prescription drug 
plan, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Now, Mr. Chairman, the circumstance that 
the member describes was . . . The way in which I remember it, 
and the way in which many people who were in that same hall that 
the two of us were in that night, don’t remember in the way in 
which the member from Saskatoon Nutana portrays the issue. 
Obviously, it’s not a matter of, to use your words, of being callous 
to those that are in, you know, that are in need and all the rest of 
those kinds of things. 
 
The fact is, one individual — the one individual that you 
mentioned — has, you know, come forward on several occasions 
but has more of a political agenda than a drug plan agenda. And all 
I say to the member . . . And I indicated something like that to that 
person at that day. And I just say to you that the individual that 
you  

mentioned, and I was reluctant there and I will continue to be 
reluctant to get into the specific circumstances of his case — and I 
will be and I was there — except to say that the individual in 
question was given the right to have 20 per cent for his personal 
drugs, 20 per cent up front and that’s it, and have the 80 per cent 
collected by the drug plan or by the pharmacist from the drug plan. 
 
Since that time, more information has come forward and he’s got 
— what is it? — 20 per cent for the whole family, I understand. So 
while he’s been dealt with fairly, he believes, frankly, that he 
should have drugs for nothing. He believes that he should pay 
nothing for his drugs and I’m sorry that that can’t take place. And 
all I’m saying is, you know, as I have said in the House on several 
occasions and as I said at that forum that you refer to, that we 
believe very strongly that the individual in question has been dealt 
with fairly, as we believe that people who have made their 
applications have been dealt with fairly. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, what you’ve basically said is that 
anybody that takes issue with you in a public way is raising issues 
publicly for political reasons. And I think that that’s not fair, Mr. 
Minister. That’s not fair at all. When citizen after citizen tries to 
get in touch with you, tries to contact you through your officials 
and your department, and through your political office and your 
cabinet, when they try and get in touch with you, Mr. Minister, 
they have a difficult time doing that. so this gentleman — and his 
name is Ross Reaney — was quite prepared to discuss his case 
with you, Mr. Minister, at that public forum that the CBC held last 
Thursday evening, and you, Mr. Minister, treated him in a most 
disrespectful manner. He laid out his circumstance to the viewing 
population in this province, at great cost to himself, and you 
greeted him with an attempt on your part to publicly humiliate 
him. And you had a little cheering crowd there, and they clapped 
as you were busy putting him down. 
 
And I want to say to you and all the people in this province, Mr. 
Minister, that that kind of behaviour is not acceptable. It’s not 
acceptable to put down publicly people in this province that raise 
issues of public importance with you and your government — it’s 
not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Minister, that man has over $400 worth of prescription drug 
costs each month. I’m happy to hear that his entire family is now 
being covered because that wasn’t the case last week, Mr. Minister 
— was not the case last week. He was not notified if that was the 
case. He talked at that public forum about how he and his personal 
drug costs were covered, but those drug costs associated with his 
wife and his other family members were not. But, Mr. Minister, 20 
per cent of 400-and-some-odd dollars is still a great deal of money 
for a family on a fixed income. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in response to people like Ross Reaney who 
had the courage to go public, your government introduced what 
they call a special unique circumstances program or some sort of 
review program. Can you tell the people of this province how 
many people have applied for special consideration by the 
prescription drug plan? 
 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3833 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just a quick comment as it relates to the 
case that the member persists in speaking about. I’m informed that 
the . . . It’s been two or three weeks, so it was well before that 
forum was on that the individual had coverage for the total family, 
and not just for his own individual case that he knew about. So it 
was before that, even though the suggestion at the forum by you 
and your cohorts was that it was not the case. 
 
But regardless of that, and to get to your specific question, I 
believe 498 people have applied. Of those, about 400 people have 
been responded to in a positive sort of way, in the sense that there 
are various ways in which they would have been dealt with. Some 
would have 20 per cent for all of their drugs within the family; 
others with 20 per cent for one person, if that was the one who had 
a significant bill; others would have . . . 20 per cent costs on a 
single drug, a particular drug that was causing the problem, and 
then the rest of the other drug use of that family would be no 
problem; and others would have had the priority envelope that 
we’ve discussed on other occasions. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Can you tell me how many people have gotten 
that priority envelope response from your special committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Seventy-four. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Seventy-four people have gotten the 20 per 
cent. Can you tell . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. No, the priority envelope. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Seventy-four people have gotten the priority 
envelope. Can you tell me how many people have gotten the 20 
per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Three hundred and twenty-five with some 
configuration of 20 per cent, whether it be on a single drug for the 
family or for the individual. But 325 in total. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — So 325 people have gotten the 20 per cent in 
some way, shape, or form. Can you tell me what the criteria are for 
getting 20 per cent at the drug store, Mr. Minister? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — People will make their application . . . and 
the things that are looked at and the type of criteria, or the type of 
the drug, the disease treated, the brand of the drug, the number of 
prescriptions required, the number of family members in that 
family unit that would have what we’d call chronic disease, you 
know, in other words, need of drugs. I’ll look at income, I 
suppose. But, no, there’s no threshold number that can say this is 
the number where income would be taken into effect, but 
obviously all of those things and a combination of them, and then 
the case is dealt with on its own merits — and we arrived at those 
numbers that I just gave you earlier. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Of the 325 people who are receiving 20 per 
cent at the drug store, can you tell me what their average drug bill 
would be each month? How many of  

them would have an average drug bill of $400, $300, $200? Can 
you categorize or put in categories people in terms of their drug 
bill each month? How many are paying $100? How many 200, 
300, 400, 500, up to 1,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — WE don’t have an average like what you 
ask for in terms of an average or that, and don’t have those cases, 
or a list of the cases here. I have those numbers because we 
anticipated the question on the numbers. 
 
The vast majority, though . . . and I think it would be over $200 
each and every month. And I say each and every month because it 
describes what we mean by chronic cases, where someone will 
need that drug or that kind of cost over a period of month after 
month after month, rather than you may have a month or two like 
that and then not need it. So that’s also taken into consideration. 
 
So the vast majority over $200 each and every month, and that 
will obviously vary on the individual circumstances, I suppose, to 
some extent. But I don’t have the average that you ask for and I 
don’t have anything here that would give us those now. Each case 
is an individual case, and if you deal with them on individual 
cases, we’re not . . . you know, we haven’t been lumping them 
together to develop average, and so on. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, if the vast majority are over $200 
each month — each and every month — the $200, is it in 
relationship to some income? Is it income geared at all, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — There’s nothing magic about the 200. It’s 
just that the information I get from the executive director is that as 
you look at it, is that it’s . . . the majority of them are that kind of 
cost, over the $200. I don’t have those, you know, the exact 
numbers and whatever, here. But . . . and there’s nothing magic on 
that $200 number, there’s nothing special about that if that’s what 
you’re getting at. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not trying to get at 
whether or not $200 is a magical figure. What I’m trying to get at 
is whether or not this figure of yours — that’s not magical — has 
any importance or any relationship to a person’s income. I’m 
wanting to know whether your special review committee’s 
decision to allow someone to get a 20 . . . to pay 20 per cent at the 
drug store, has any relationship to that person’s income and 
numbers of family members? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, as you will know, we don’t ask for 
detailed income statements, that kind of thing. We have a bit of a 
statement of, you know, what is your gross income, that kind of 
thing. But that’s only one aspect of the various things that will be 
asked and those are the criteria that I went through just a few 
minutes ago. so the income becomes a part of that, and obviously 
you will look at it if it’s a very, very low one or whatever, you 
would look at that. But, I mean it’s not a . . . it’s not the only 
criterion and it certainly is just one of a group. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, during Health estimates we 
brought to your attention a number of cases  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3834 

 

of individuals who were on low income and their drug costs are 
approximately 140 or $150 each month. Some of these individuals 
were . . . take-home pay, less than $700 a month, might be three 
family members, and they weren’t eligible for this 20 per cent 
consideration at the drug store. And at that time we tried to ask 
you, or I tried to ask you a number of questions about whether or 
not income had any relevance. I want to ask you again: if income 
doesn’t have much relevance, why doesn’t it, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — When I say — I did say before — we do 
ask for that income statement and we look at it, but it’s looked at 
in a much wider sort of sense. So it’s not fair to say that income 
does not have relevance. Income will have relevance but it isn’t, 
you know, the only thing. Obviously it will enter into the picture. 
 
But what enters into the picture in a major way is the, you know, 
the cost of the particular drug and the kind of . . . the nature of the 
chronic illness that’s being treated, and the number of people in 
that one family unit that will have chronic illness - that sort of 
thing where you can have something that’s really more onerous. 
And they do look at that. 
 
And frankly the committee has been very, very good. I’m quite 
satisfied that they have been very, very good at looking at this and 
understanding just what is really onerous. And they’ve done their 
thing in a very conscientious way in terms of a priority envelope, 
will work here where 20 per cent on this one drug, or 20 per cent 
for the total family, or 20 per cent for the individual person. 
They’ve looked at all of those things. They have all those various 
options, and I think they’ve been doing a good job of this exercise. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you describe a case to me of 
someone who would be eligible for the 20 per cent, using all of the 
criteria that your committee would use in deciding whether or not 
someone would be eligible? Can you describe a case so that we as 
the public have some sort of idea of how your committee 
determines whether or not someone is eligible for the 20 per cent 
at the drug store? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. Well, no, I won’t describe any 
particular case. I mean you have, and your friend that you raised 
here tonight, again, has described a case. And he was eligible for 
20 per cent for his family as it now turns out. So there’s a case; 
you have one in your own hands. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well we have one case, Mr. Minister, but there 
have been case after case after case who have gone to your 
department and they haven’t been eligible for the 20 per cent at the 
drug store. They don’t understand why and neither do we. 
 
I mean if you’re living on an income of less than $700 a month, 
and your prescription drug costs are between 140 and $150 each 
month, and you have a family of three, and you’re not eligible for 
any consideration in terms of this 20 per cent, they don’t 
understand why. And I guess I’d like to know why, Mr. Minister, 
individuals in that type of circumstance wouldn’t be eligible for 20 
per cent at the drug store. 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well let me just put it to you this way. 
There are a number of folks who will have written in because they 
have, you know, they hear this and they present the case, they 
present the costs to the best of their knowledge. And we do 
verifications; we do verifications with the physicians, verification 
with the pharmacists, which in some cases turn out to be not the 
case. 
 
I’m just giving you several of the circumstances around which 
someone may not be eligible for what they believe they should be 
eligible for. In some cases they’re using the most expensive 
brands, in other words, brand which are more expensive, and yet 
there are generic brands or other kinds of drugs which do the same 
thing. And our drug plan people, the professional people, will 
know that. Questions like, are the costs ongoing or chronic, or are 
they short-term — those kinds of things. And while people will, 
because of the change and the concern surrounding change, will 
say, no, we don’t like the fact that this changed at all, and I’ve got 
these costs, and I want payment for this because I’m a special and 
unique case — and it turns out that they aren’t special or unique in 
that sense. 
 
Are the drugs which they submit their expenses for, are they on 
the formulary? In other words, are they drugs which are in effect 
covered by the drug plan at all? Those are the kinds of questions 
that have to be done, and yet we have a . And are we dealing with 
some of the bills that come forward. Some say this is a month’s 
supply, but it turns out to be a large quantity which is far more 
than a month’s supply. There’s all kinds of factors that come into 
this, and we just . . . so what we say is — and that’s what I 
reiterate again — that the committee has done a very thorough job 
of checking all of these kinds of things to be sure that it’s done. 
And then in those cases where it is truly a unique case, they’re 
granted one of the various ways in which they get special 
coverage. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you advise me who the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association representative is on this 
committee, who the representative is from the Saskatchewan 
Pharmaceutical Association, and who the representative is from 
the prescription drug plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — There is no representative from the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association; there is a representative of the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons. And, no, I won’t say who is 
doing the work for either of the associations, both the 
pharmaceutical association and the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, because both have advised that they believe it’s the . . . 
when I asked them to come forward with appointing whoever they 
would like to appoint — I did not appoint either person — and I 
said to them, I asked the College of Physicians and Surgeons to 
appoint a person that they believed would be most appropriate for 
this. From time to time they could change that person, but as long 
as the person does have the endorsement of the college, that’s one. 
 
And the second one is the representative of the pharmaceutical 
association who will do this work under the same auspices. And, 
frankly, form my point of view as the minister, and I think from all 
of our points of view as legislators, we would like to see that sort 
of thing where  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3835 

 

they’ve put the integrity of their associations forward and said, 
we’ll put somebody there, but we’re not going to put their names 
out about who it is. And we have a representative of the . . . who is 
the executive director of the drug plan, who sits beside me. That’s 
the one person that I’ll say who it is. So the executive director, 
plus the reps of those two professional organizations. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I accept your 
explanation. Can you advise me whether or not there’s been any 
tenders on prescription drugs in this province since July 1, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m advised that tender every six months, 
in time for the formulary period. The new formulary period will 
being on January 1 of ’88 and the tender process is in process right 
now in anticipation of that January 1, ’88 date. 
 
(2115) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, when the new plan went into 
effect on July 1 — that July 1 is obviously a tendering period as 
well — and I’m wondering whether or not the plan tendered any 
contracts prior to July 1. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As the tendering is now in process for 
January 1 of ’88, the tendering for July 1, the formulary period 
was done in May and June of this year prior to the change. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Minister, there has been some 
discussion in the newspaper and we’ve also had a number of 
consumers contact us, talking about and being quite concerned 
about the different costs that are available at different drug stores 
when it comes to certain drugs. Now, Mr. Minister, I have an 
example here . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Members are not allowed to use 
displays in the House. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I have an example here of a 
prescription drug, and prior to your new plan taking effect, that 
drug cost approximately $56. And that drug is called Sulcrate, Mr. 
Minister, and this is one gram of 136 tablets. The person who 
needs this drug recently went to her pharmacist and that drug now 
costs $69. That is a $13 increase, Mr. Minister, or approximately a 
23 per cent increase in cost since your drug plan came into effect. 
And I’m wondering if you can advise the legislature and advise 
the people of this province why drug costs seem to have escalated 
since your new drug plan came into effect. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. I’m told the way the system works 
is that we set a control on the maximum amount that can be 
charged for a particular drug. 
 
The case that you raise is certainly not indicative of the trend that 
we’re told is happening out there from pharmacists and 
physicians. Both are saying to us that lower-cost brands are on the 
increase in terms of the savings to folks. The individual case that 
you have, I don’t know what the circumstance could be, but I 
would be interested in having a few more details on it, except to 
say that there is a possibility that if it was old stock and they were 
selling it at a cheaper price because it was stock that  

was around for a while . . . I don’t know. 
 
The only other things that come into play here are, once we set the 
maximum price, some pharmacies will have lower than that 
maximum price due to their ability to buy in larger volumes and 
larger volume lots and so on, or grouping of various pharmacies 
together, that sort of thing. But that’s competition at work out 
there. 
 
But as far as the individual case of this drug that you mentioned 
and the price differential, I’d be interested in, you know, in 
hearing which place an so on —if you, you know, maybe not right 
here but you can give it to me later. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you talk about competition. do 
you have any concern about the lack of competitive edge that a 
smaller pharmacy may have in relationship to a larger national or 
multinational pharmacy? Do you have any concerns about that? 
 
I’m particularly thinking of pharmacies located in rural 
communities, as well as your neighbourhood pharmacy in a 
number of urban areas. And I’m talking about the locally owned 
pharmacy, not the large national or multinational. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I say to the member that the fact is that the 
number of pharmacies in the province is on the increase. So I 
mean that’s not an indicator that small pharmacies and so on are 
not in a competitive position. The tendering for all competitive 
drugs is, we have an equalized price for all because we do 
tendering for the whole province, as was the case and is the case 
now. 
 
So for the very competitive drugs, let’s say, the drugs which are 
most widely used, we do the tendering for the whole province and 
so there’s no difference between being a pharmacy A over here 
that’s part of a chain and the ABC pharmacy on Main Street in 
wherever — Unity. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, since your new plan came into 
effect, have there been any standing offer contracts that have not 
been tendered, and so therefore the drug is no longer covered or is 
no longer tendered by the provincial government? Have there been 
any drugs that are no longer purchased through the standing offer 
contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — There are about 200 categories of drugs on 
the . . . and where brands are interchangeable, which is . . . You 
know, I guess what I’m saying is it’s the same system as it was 
before, and I know you understand how it was and it still remains. 
Where brands are interchangeable, then we issue a tender for 
which brand shall be the formulary drug in that area. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, do you plan on keeping the 
present system in terms of standing offer contracts, because I’d 
just like to point out to you that I do have a copy of the Manitoba 
Drug Standards and Therapeutic Formulary for January 1, 1987, 
and I have that formulary in comparison to the January 1, 1987 
Saskatchewan formulary. And I can tell you that the drug costs in 
Manitoba to the pharmacist and to the consumer, obviously, range 
anywhere from two, three, to four times  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3836 

 

as high. And I’m wondering if you have any plans to drop the 
standing offer contract, and if you do, Mr. Minister, are you 
concerned that that may have a negative impact upon 
locally-owned pharmacists or small, independent pharmacists? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — We plan on keeping the system that we 
now have in place as it relates to tender. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s one section of the Act that I would like you 
to give me some explanation of and that is section 6 where you 
add, “The following section is added after section 5.” Can you 
explain section 5.1 to me in your new Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — This covers what I think you will best 
understand as exception drug status where . . . And under the old 
provision it was the flexibility to pay for certain drugs where 
medical criteria, certain special medical criteria, were met. I don’t 
know what the . . . I can’t think of an example just now. But there 
would be an application from someone through their physician for 
a very special kind of a drug for a fair period of time, and what 
this does is gives us more flexibility to pay for even non-formulary 
drugs if the need arose, through the doctor, for this special drug or 
this special coverage. And it’s basically exceptional drug status 
which was in place before and which remains in place. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, what I find very curious is that 
you now are authorized to make payment to or on behalf of any 
resident. So my interpretation of the present plan is that you make 
payment to a resident that applies for a rebate. Now who could be 
applying on behalf of a resident, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — In the case of, let’s say, one who has a 20 
per cent that they pay and 80 per cent is paid to the pharmacist on 
their behalf, that’s one example, and in the case of a social welfare 
recipient where 100 per cent would be paid to the pharmacist. So 
you need that flexibility to be able to pay depending on the 
circumstance of the person that’s in need of this . . . the person 
who’s met this special medical criteria. Okay? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, in the old Act, can you 
explain what the old section of the Act meant when it said that you 
could . . . that you paid to a pharmacist, Mr. Minister? Can you 
explain the difference between the old section of the Act and this 
new section? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The old section did not allow for direct 
payment to individuals, because under our . . . And that’s why this 
has to be different wording, because under the deductible plan we 
will have, need, the provision to be able to make a direct payment 
to individuals in whatever amount. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, under the old Act, Mr. Minister, what sort 
of provisions were there to pay the social services? There must 
have been some . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — To the pharmacist. 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — To the pharmacist, okay. So now you’re not. 
You wouldn’t pay the pharmacist on behalf of a social service 
recipient? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What I’m saying: what this does is it gives 
the flexibility to be paid either directly to a beneficiary or to 
someone on their behalf. And on behalf, when you pay on their 
behalf, you would pay to the pharmacist. 
 
For example, under the old circumstance, we could always pay on 
behalf of the recipient but we could not pay directly to the 
beneficiary. Now with the deductible plan we will need to have 
some provision in there to be able to pay directly to the 
beneficiary. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, I understand that, that you would need 
some provision to pay for the beneficiary. But I don’t understand, 
because this is an addition to section 5, why you need, “on behalf 
of any resident.” I don’t understand why you need that. Can you 
explain that to me? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, there may be some residents who 
will meet this criteria who are social service recipients. You will 
need to be able to pay directly to the pharmacy on their behalf . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, that’s what I’m saying, and that’s 
there. 
 
That didn’t change. That wording hasn’t changed from the old 
section. There is a change. There is a change in the provision, but 
if you’ll notice that the — what are the words here now? — but I 
think that portion did not change. The only portion of this that’s 
changed is the one that gives us the right or the flexibility to be 
able to pay to the beneficiary directly. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have to disagree with you 
and I want to flag this, Mr. Minister. Is it possible under this 
scenario that a resident, or a consumer, could go to their 
pharmacist and receive their drugs, that the pharmacist would bill 
the insurance company, the private insurance company, and then 
the private insurance company could bill the government? Is that a 
possible scenario, under this new and improved piece of 
legislation that you have introduced? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, okay. Let me give you a scenario 
where that would be possible, is that . . . I suppose it could be 
possible if, let’s say, there was an insurance company that would 
say, you pay us a premium and we’ll cover your everything, your 
deductible, and all of that. I mean, I suppose there could be such a 
thing as that kind of insurance, and there may well be for all I 
know. But if that was the case, yes, we could pay that. But we 
would only pay what we now pay to everybody and what 
everybody is eligible for, and that is 80 per cent. And that is 80 per 
cent of what they’re eligible to, or what they have paid out up 
front. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Minister, is it possible that this 
particular section of the Act has been revised so that that scenario 
that I’ve described, where private insurance companies can come 
into this province and they now have access to public money, Mr. 
Minister, that you, Mr.  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3837 

 

Minister, and your department, could conceivably have a scenario 
now with this change to the legislation where the consumer can go 
to the pharmacist, pay no money; the pharmacist would bill the 
private insurance company; and the private insurance company 
would then bill the prescription drug plan? Is that the scenario that 
is now possible under this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. I want to say with respect to the 
member here, you’re taking this off track and I’ll . . . Just let me 
explain what this and the sole reason for this provision as I have 
said to you. 
 
The sole reason for this provision is that we must have the 
flexibility to deal with individual, exceptional circumstances 
which fall outside the categories which will be, you know, the 
very straightforward categories that will be set up in regulations. 
That’s clear. And the exceptional situations are those that I just 
described a few minutes ago — the kinds of things that could 
happen where somebody has specific medical criteria. 
 
If we could anticipate, you know, if we could sit here in this 
legislature, you and I or whoever else is dealing with this, at 
whatever time, and if we could anticipate every single 
circumstance which could arise on an individual case, where 
somebody has a special medical criteria or whatever, and we could 
put it all down in legislation, there’d be no need for this provision. 
 
But that’s impossible to do and so I’ll make it very clear and 
unequivocal here that that’s the reason that I state is the reason for 
this provision. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, just so I’m clear again; obviously 
if you’ve put this in here for the reasons that you’ve just described, 
can you give me some idea of the kind of scenarios that your 
department obviously is anticipating — the need to use this 
particular provision? Can you give us some scenarios that are not 
presently covered by the existing legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ve just given one example of a particular 
kind of drug and the kind of thing that can go on as . . . Okay. I’ll 
just give you a bit of an outline . . . and this is one that’s been used 
under the former plan and under this plan as an exceptional drug 
status — it’s a drug called Accutane. It’s covered only for certain 
types of very serious sort of skin ailments, very serious kinds of 
acne, let’s say. And it’s based on a dermatologist’s assessment, 
and it allows — because all the professionals say that you should 
allow an extra avenue for another warning to be given about the 
dangers of the drug, which . . . it has some side effects, and those 
dangers need to be flagged, once again in the considered opinion 
of both pharmacists and physicians on the committee. They 
believe that those should be flagged once again because it has 
some dangers for certain people, example, pregnant women. 
 
So that’s the kind of a circumstance if I can give you just sort of 
one example. But, you know, there are several, and I obviously 
don’t have . . . We don’t have a whole series of them here or 
anything, but I want to reiterate to the member and make it very 
clear that this provision is, as I stated it a few minutes ago, it’s just 
for the reasons that I said. So don’t search for some, you know, 
private  

insurance companies coming or not, because that provision 
certainly has no bearing on anything like that. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I don’t understand what you’re 
talking about. I want to know why you have a provision in this Act 
where you can make a payment on behalf of any resident who has 
received a drug, whether or not the drug is listed in the formulary. 
 
I have no problem with whether or not the drug is listed in the 
formulary. I want to know why and what sort of circumstance that 
you would be making payments to someone on behalf of a 
resident. Give me a scenario. In what circumstance would you 
make payment? Who would you make payment to in that 
circumstance then? The doctor? 
 
An Hon. Member: — The pharmacist. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And there’s not provisions for that in the 
existing legislation without — in the old Act? — because this is 
simply an addition to section 5. 
 
There are provision sunder the old section which haven’t been 
deleted, Mr. Minister, for you to pay to a person operating the 
pharmacy. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Section 5 of the former Act is tied directly 
to agreements with pharmacies for formulary drugs. Okay? And 
that’s why it is important for me to say there are drugs which are 
non-formulary. so in other words, the draftsmen, the people in 
Justice and whatever, said it’s questionable whether or not that 
section 5 was strong enough to do the kinds of things that have 
been done or whatever. So it’s cleaned up in that sense. Although 
that a bit of a . . . you know, I just want to explain that. 
 
Now secondly, in the regulations under the old plan for . . . the 
best way to describe it, I guess, would be to say there are various 
categories in the regulations, or will be in these regulations, and 
those categories are the various age categories, the various 
palliative care has a special sort of circumstance. There are all of 
these little boxes, and each one will be a category, let’s say. 
 
Under the old plan there was one box, and that category was all 
the formulary drugs, and the only one . . . the only other 
circumstance would be a non-formulary drug. And that’s it, cut 
and dried. 
 
In this case where we have all of the various little categories, it’s 
extremely important that we have the flexibility which this 
provision 5(1) provides, which says, if you don’t fit perfectly into 
one of those, then there is the flexibility to be able to make the 
payment to the pharmacy if it’s in the case of a welfare person, or 
the 80 per cent, or directly to a beneficiary because of the 
deductible nature of the new plan. So that’s the explanation in the 
best way I can articulate it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, if that’s the explanation, why 
can’t we . . . Is it possible to have an amendment where we would 
simply say that the minister considers appropriate to any resident, 
or to a pharmacy on behalf of any resident? Would that not do 
what your drafters want  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3838 

 

you to do with the legislation? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m informed that we’re trying to create a 
provision here which would allow us to pay in whatever the 
circumstance might be. And you know, if you were to change it in 
the way in which you described, and I know that wasn’t a 
particular amendment you had or anything, you know — we 
wouldn’t because we would pay to a parent on behalf of a child, 
for example — but that’s not what you just said, wouldn’t be the 
case. What I’m saying is that there are so many different 
circumstances there. So what we have done here is, it’s more 
flexible, it’s very straightforward in terms of what we’re trying to 
accomplish, very straightforward, and I don’t see the need for a, 
you know, a change in the way in which you’ve described. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, the problem is this: that we have 
a situation now where a private insurance company to come into 
Saskatchewan, negotiate some sort of agreement with you, and we 
could have provision with this legislation, we could have a 
scenario where an individual goes to their drug store, they get their 
drugs, same old way they used to get them. The drug store then 
sends the bill off to the private insurance company, and the private 
insurance company bills you. And I have a problem with that. We 
could have Blue Cross and all of these other private insurance 
companies coming in here, and we as taxpayers would be paying 
for private insurance. You’ve said that that scenario is possible 
under this legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As I said to you, I don’t want you to . . . 
well it’s not what I want, but I don’t believe for a moment that 
there’s no underlying sort of agenda on this thing. I want you to be 
very, very clear on that. I mean we don’t have . . . and what you 
outline as a possible scenario, I guess, and the draftsmen are 
telling me, I suppose that could be possible. I suppose it could be 
possible. It could be possible, but by making that sort of scenario 
impossible, we would be limiting our flexibility to deal with the 
very cases that you’ve raised on several occasions in the House 
and that others have raised here in terms of being able to pay those 
unique cases with chronic conditions and so on, which, you know, 
who do get the 20 per cent or the various other kinds of unique 
circumstance provisions. 
 
So while you say, well that could be possible, and I guess I would 
be wrong in saying, no, it would be impossible. It’s not impossible 
but it’s certainly is not the intent of this, and we must not cut off 
our nose to spite our face in terms of having the flexibility to do 
what is necessary to be able to make that unforeseen payment for 
that unforeseen circumstance. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, if the scenario that I’ve described 
in terms of private insurance companies does in fact happen in the 
next month or two or three or whatever, what are you prepared to 
do about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It won’t happen. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — So you are unequivocal. It will not  

happen in this province where the prescription drug plan which 
you administrate will be paying out money to private insurance 
companies. Are you saying that that will not happen in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. I just say that it’s not our intention to 
be in a circumstance where we’re paying money to a private 
insurance company. I mean that’s . . . the plan is as we have 
described it over a period of these months, and that’s the way the 
plan will be. Now it does not limit, and I said that before, is some 
insurance company says to you or to anyone else, any citizen, if 
you pay this premium, as all insurance companies will say, and 
we’ll give you this coverage for your ambulance, extra ambulance 
care, and your private hospital room, and your deductible which is 
now part of your cost, and somebody says, well I’ll pay that 
premium and have that there. And if there is such a thing — I 
don’t know that there is or that there’s likely to be, or there can be 
or whatever — but I just can tell you, that if that’s the case, there’s 
little I could do about that, and I don’t know that I would want to 
do anything about that. If some citizen said, I’ll pay a premium to 
have my deductible covered, well that’s up to the citizen, I 
suppose. But I don’t . . . that’s not in the plan, or in the works, that 
I know of. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, what I’m talking about is 
the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan paying out money to a 
private insurance company —private medical insurance company 
— such as Blue Cross, or Medicaid, or whatever. And I’m asking 
you whether or not that is possible under your government? We’ve 
just seen a piece of legislation here that allows that to happen. and 
my question is: if it begins to happen, what are you going to do 
about it? Why should the Saskatchewan taxpayers pay private 
insurance companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, there’s no . . . If you’re suggesting 
that there’s some . . . you know, a company would come in and 
would undermine portions of what is being done in the plan, that’s 
not the thing. But I would say to you that if a citizen, anybody in 
Meadow Lake, decides that they want to buy this insurance or this 
hypothetical insurance that I talked about that would cover 
whatever, and they were eligible for certain benefits, no payment 
would be made on their behalf to anybody that they were not fully 
eligible for because it constituted 80 per cent of the cost that they 
paid forward. I mean that wouldn’t happen. So in terms of . . . I 
mean what can I . . . And I can’t limit this provision to put that out 
of the way, but I do say that that’s not the intention, certainly, of 
this provision 5.1. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — It may not be the intention, according to you, 
but I’m somewhat suspect, Mr. Minister, because I think that with 
this piece of legislation, we have a loophole here where private 
insurance companies can come into this province, sell insurance to 
consumers — particularly consumers who’ve been hard hit by 
your changes to the prescription drug Bill, or the prescription drug 
plan, hard hit by your changes. And there will be lots of 
consumers that will find that very attractive, Mr. Minister, to 
purchase private insurance because they can’t afford the up-front 
costs of your new and improved prescription drug plan. 
 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3839 

 

And what I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister, is that I don’t think 
Saskatchewan taxpayers should in any way, shape, or form be 
paying private insurance companies for their insurance coverage 
of individuals. I totally disagree with that. We want a public 
system, not a private insurance system, and with that kind of 
situation you set up a two-tiered medicare system. So I’m asking 
you again: if Blue Cross rolls into Saskatchewan at the end of 
January or February and comes to your department with this little 
proposal, what are you going to do about it? What’s your 
response, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I tell the minister, or the member, that 
you’re way off base with this thing; you really are. Now there are 
insurance companies in Canada, and there were insurance 
companies under the old drug plan, who paid the 3.95 that people 
had to pay because people had their insurance plans, whether it 
was employee based or whatever. They would send their bills, 
their 3.95 per prescription which they had to pay under the old 
plan, and they would be reimbursed if they had that type of 
insurance. I’m informed that there are several of those, and that 
was the case. 
 
So I mean, this provision, this little provision, 5.1, which gives us 
the flexibility to pay the very people that you have asked on many 
occasions be allowed to be paid and which we must have the 
flexibility to be able to do, is not there for the purpose of paying 
the insurance company or making something private which is now 
public, or any of those kinds of things. But it’s also not there to 
limit in any way what is already the case in Canada and has been 
for a good, long time and should be for as long as it wants to be — 
that someone can pay a premium to a private insurance company 
and get whatever coverage that insurance company will provide. 
No provision 5.1 in this Bill is going to change that circumstance 
in this country. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I realize that, Mr. Minister, but there is a 
possible scenario, which you’ve agreed is possible under these 
provisions, that a private insurance company can sell insurance to 
a consumer on the condition that the consumer no longer has to 
pay at the drug store. The arrangement will be that the pharmacist 
will bill the insurance company and the insurance company will 
bill the prescription drug plan, and that’s what I’m concerned 
about. Private insurance in the past has meant that — private 
insurance. It has not meant that the private companies bill a public 
institution such as the prescription drug plan and what I’m saying 
is that that is now possible under this legislation, and you haven’t 
disputed that. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, a new question. I notice that you’ve taken 
extemporaneous preparations out of the drug plan, and I’m 
wondering why they’re no longer covered by the prescription drug 
plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The extemporaneous products, which are 
those products which the pharmacist mixes himself, are covered. 
There was a time . . . Yes, they are covered. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — That’s good. That’s new to me, because they 
weren’t covered up until recently. 
 

Now, calcium, has it . . . Is it now covered? Because I understood 
it had been deleted? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Say it again. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Calcium. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It’s not now covered. The formulary 
committee is aware that there are many inexpensive brands now 
available brands now available for prices which are lower than the 
prescription dispensing fee in many cases; so, it’s not now covered 
for that reason. That was a decision of the formulary committee. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I understand from a number 
of consumers that have contacted me that they require the kind of 
calcium available under the prescription drug plan. Now, I’m not 
familiar with all the technical details, but I understand that the 
over-the-counter calcium is not strong enough or adequate enough 
to deal with their medical needs, and I’m wondering whether or 
not the drug plan has taken into consideration that problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, that was definitely taken into 
consideration. There are brands of this calcium . . . of calcium 
products which people said, this is the one that we’ve been taking 
and it remains expensive and so on, and they have been reluctant 
to take other brands. But the formulary committee, which as you 
know is made up of the professionals, say the benefit of these 
cheaper brands, which are now very readily available, are the 
same or equal to these. Some consumers are reluctant to change 
from band A over here which is expensive and which they’ve been 
taking for some time, and move to the others which are more 
inexpensive. 
 
But on the basis of that, of the availability of these new brands and 
cheaper brands, the formulary committee believes that it’s the 
right thing to take them off because they are available to people. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, there have been a number of 
problems that have been brought to your attention in terms of 
consumers getting their drug rebate. I’m wondering whether 
things are at, at the prescription drug plan, when we have people 
that have been waiting five, six, seven, eight weeks for their drug 
rebates. I’m wondering how that is coming along. 
 
I understand that you fired several, or a couple of dozen people on 
August 8 and that some temporaries have been hired. But I 
understand there seems to be a log-jam at the drug plan, and I’m 
wondering when your drug plan is going to get that administrative 
problem sorted out. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. There’s no question there has been 
a delay on some. Eight-five per cent of claims, I’m told, have gone 
out with less than 30 days, but 15 per cent — 15 per cent, and 
we’ve had some real . . . Admittedly, we’ve had some serious 
problems. We’ve had some problems with mistakes which come 
from both the pharmacy . . . mainly from the pharmacies, and 
some of them have been having some, let’s say, some in-service 
work from some of our folks. But the 15 per cent delay . . . And 
there’s no question for those individuals who had to  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3840 

 

wait for those periods of time — it’s not legitimate, it’s not cricket, 
and we’ve been trying to do everything we can to get this done 
more quickly. 
 
And when we find the mistakes we try to fix them up, try to get 
them out as quickly as we can. We will have that sorted out. I will 
give . . . I feel as badly as you do about that. I don’t like the idea 
that there are any that don’t get them out at under the 30 days, and 
I would like to have them done in the three-week period, 
something like that. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, when you say there’s being a 
little in-service done with the pharmacist, can you explain what 
you mean by that? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I just said that in the sense that there have 
been some corrections done and some pharmacies have to be . . . 
when the incidence of mistakes are high from particular locations, 
a little in-service is necessary. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — When you say incidents of mistakes, are you 
talking about overcharging? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It’s just some of the information is not on 
the various receipts and that sort of thing. No, it’s not an incidence 
of overcharging, those kinds of things. But, you know, the mistake 
could be all of the various categories are on those receipts, the 
charge, and what other information is on that receipt. If 
something’s left off, it doesn’t work, and it just becomes one of 
the ones that goes into the pile of mistakes. And that’s where the 
rebates are difficult to get them out on time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, a final question. when the 
Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association negotiated their 
agreement with the drug plan, there was a reference in the 
agreement to the economic impact of this agreement upon 
people’s current operations. 
 
Now I’m told, Mr. Minister, that the new contract with the 
pharmacist allows for some fairly healthy increases in pharmacies’ 
gross margins and, in fact, at meetings with the pharmacist, an 
accountant employed by the Pharmaceutical Association told 
pharmacists that a high volume pharmacy filling 125 prescriptions 
per day could expect an additional mark-up of 16.6 per cent and 
increased profits of $44,000 per day. A lower volume store filling 
50 prescriptions per day would have an additional mark-up of 18.9 
per cent and increased profits of $12.5 thousand per year. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, can you explain to us and the consumers of 
this province what sort of economic impact this agreement that 
you’ve arranged with the pharmacists in this province has had in 
terms of their operation, and what sort of economic impact this 
would have on consumer costs, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. Prior to this agreement, the 
dispensing fee was $5.49, maximum, and 46 cents was an 
inventory cost allowance, or called an inventory cost allowance. 
Presently the dispensing fee maximum is $5.50, but there are 
variable mark-ups that are now allowed, and those are now 
allowed to encourage  

low-cost drugs. 
 
An example, if people will . . . If the pharmacist will encourage the 
lower cost of two or three drugs which are available . . . and to 
encourage the lowest-cost one, obviously their gross margin will 
be higher, because if they’re selling a $2 drug and their dispensing 
fee is $5.50, their gross margin will go up on that basis, than if 
they were selling, say, a $5 drug and at a dispensing fee of $5.50 
for dispensing of that $5 drug. 
 
So that’s the idea. And the idea behind this was to encourage the 
dispensing of lower-cost drugs. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think that it has also 
meant a great increase in profit to pharmacists in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, one final question. The Premier, in his 
discussions with the public on the changes to the prescription drug 
plan, has indicated that we had a lot of drug abuse in this province. 
 
I’m wondering if you share that view, Mr. Minister, that senior 
citizens and the elderly were drug abusers. Is that your view as 
Minister of Health in this province? Because that certainly seems 
to have been the view that the Premier of this province has 
conveyed to the public as to why your government chose to 
change the prescription drug plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The member will know, I am sure, that 
one of the most widely discussed things in terms of the dispensing 
of drugs in the professional journals and all the professional 
reading in the medical profession and in the health care sector, is 
the dispensing of drugs and the use of prescription drugs and the 
over-use of prescription drugs by our elderly citizens in this 
country. That’s the case. That’s a fact that’s out there. 
 
The medical profession, frankly, is trying to deal with this 
internally, and it’s become very widely spread . . . there is a very 
widespread discussion about this. It’s the case. 
 
Now if you are going to stand in the House here, or if you’re going 
to suggest in any way that that is not the case, not only in 
Saskatchewan but across this country and across North America, 
that prescription drugs is a serious — the over-prescribing of drugs 
and the over-use of prescription drugs by many of the elderly 
people in this country — it’s widely known and widely recognized 
as a serious problem. So for anyone to deny that that is a problem 
is someone who really, really is not watching the medical 
literature and so on in these dates. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, this really does raise some 
interesting question about abuse, and I really haven’t seen your 
criteria for deciding what is abuse and what isn’t. 
 
It also raises some interesting questions in terms of who the 
abusers have been, because patients and consumers do not 
prescribe their own drugs; medical doctors do, Mr. Minister, not 
the patient. And pharmacists, Mr. Minister, they’re the ones that 
dispense them. So why are you going after the consumer, and why 
haven’t you launched your  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3841 

 

attack on the people who you have said are the prescribers of these 
drugs that obviously, as you say, some people are abusing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, it’s not a case here of, you know, of 
applying the blame. What you say is absolutely true, which is what 
the medical profession is saying internally, that there is a problem 
in there in terms of dispensing, or the dispensing of these drugs. 
 
But be that as it may, regardless of who does the prescribing, to be 
able to say, well it’s the doctors that do it, so don’t blame anyone 
else. I’m not blaming anyone else, but the fact is the seniors, the 
individuals who are on prescription drugs to a greater degree than 
they should have been. 
 
Now I’m not saying, and I never have said for a minute, that this is 
the major reason for the change. We never, ever have said that. 
But it’s a point that should be made in any kind of discussion of 
prescription drugs and their use by the elderly citizens of this 
country. 
 
There’s no question that that’s true, and there’s no question as well 
that in this province now, as is the case in every other province in 
the country and has been for sometime, people are asking 
questions of their pharmacists, of their physicians, about the 
number of prescriptions that they have, the content of those 
prescriptions, the quantity of those prescriptions. And those are 
responsible and good questions for people to ask, regardless of 
what age they are. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you give me the statistics on 
abuse based on your definition and your criteria for measurement 
of abuse? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I will send the hon. member, since the 
House may be over in a matter of weeks or whatever it will be, but 
for your Christmas reading I will send you a whole package of 
reading which deals directly with this subject. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you promised to send me a 
lot of things, and, Mr. Minister, I can tell you that I haven’t seen 
them yet. Your promised to send a number of articles and items 
and information during Health estimates, and it is some two and a 
half weeks later and we haven’t yet seen it. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I’d just want you to note this, that in the ’60s 
there were a number of clinical studies done that showed that 
one-third of all prescriptions written by doctors for patients went 
unfilled because patients could not afford them. And I want you to 
know, Mr. Minister, that patients around this province and people 
who require prescription drugs see this as the worst kind of Bill 
that your government could have introduced — the very worst 
kind of Bill. Because, Mr. Minister, what you are doing is 
fundamentally attacking our health care system in this province. 
 
In 1962 when the people of this province decided to introduce the 
medicare system, they were proud of their accomplishments, Mr. 
Minister. They wanted to go beyond that hospitalization insurance 
and medicare  

insurance, Mr. Minister; they wanted to develop new programs. 
And so what we saw in the ’70s under the leadership of the Leader 
of the new Democratic Party, we saw a number of expansions to 
our health care system including the children’s dental program and 
the prescription drug program. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have said that this program that you’ve 
introduced is going to cut down on drug abuse. Well I can tell you, 
Mr. Minister, for people who are abusing drugs, this program is 
not going to cut down on abuse because they are still going to get 
their drugs. 
 
The people who will be impacted upon by this particular drug plan 
are people who have very little money. And, Mr. Minister, you 
know, and I know, and most other people know that there are a 
number of elderly people in this province who are not living on 
high incomes. You know, and I know, and everybody else knows 
that if you’re a disabled person, or if you’re chronically ill, or if 
you’re sick for certain periods of time, that that impacts upon your 
income and your ability to make a living. And, Mr. Minister, what 
this is is an attack on the sick, and it’s a tax on the sick. 
 
And you can sit in this legislature and stand in this legislature and 
try and justify this Bill all you can, but reality is this, that there are 
people in this province how do not earn $60,000 a year like you 
do; they do not earn that kind of money. there are people in this 
province that live on very, very small incomes. And this Bill is 
simply transferring a cost that you say the provincial government 
can’t afford in terms of the cost to the provincial treasury — 
you’re transferring a cost, that you say you can’t afford, on to the 
backs of the individual and the people who are most unlikely to be 
able to afford these changes to your prescription drug plan, and 
that is the sick, the elderly, and the disabled. 
 
Now for people like ourselves, this change will not negatively 
impact upon us; we will be able to afford the cost of prescription 
drugs. But, Mr. Minister, there are hundreds and hundreds of 
people in this province that cannot — they cannot afford the cost. 
And they’re making decisions right now. They’re deciding 
whether or not they put food on the table or they get a prescription. 
 
And my colleague from Regina Centre a couple of weeks ago 
described a situation where a young woman didn’t have the $30 
for an ear infection. And there are cases after cases after cases. 
And they may not be applying to your little special review 
committee; they may not be doing that, Mr. Minister, but all you 
have to do is talk to any pharmacist in this province and they will 
tell you that there are people going into their pharmacies with 
prescriptions and they’re leaving that pharmacy without the 
prescription because they can’t afford the cost of that drug. 
 
Mr. Minister, we think that this is an unfair Bill. It’s an attack on 
the sick; that it undermines and erodes medicare, and it does what 
your government said you would never do. 
 
You said, Mr. Minister, that you were going to guarantee — you 
had a sacred guarantee, signed by the Minister of  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3842 

 

Finance — that dispensing fees would be eliminated because you 
saw that as a deterrent fee or a user fee. And did that happen, Mr. 
Minister? No, it didn’t happen. We not only have an increase in 
the dispensing fee, from $3.95 to $5.50, we also have this new 
deductible program. And you call that an improvement to the 
prescription drug plan! It is not. It is a step backwards. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, every time consumers in this province and 
patients in this province go to the pharmacy, they are going to 
remember. They are going to remember that you’re the 
government, and you’re the minister that betrayed them, because 
you promised, you promised, Mr. Minister, and your government 
promised — every one of you — that you would not attack and 
erode medical care or our health care system in this province. And 
that’s simply not true. The truth is that you are taxing people; you 
are transferring the cost that at one time was the expense of all of 
us, the taxpayers, on to the backs of the very few. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is a bad Bill. We will not support it. And, Mr. 
Minister, I believe that ultimately you will pay at the polls because 
of your decision to attack and erode medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(2215) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to Provide for the Imposition of Taxes 
on and the Collection of Taxes from Certain Purchasers of 

Certain Fuels and to Provide for Rebates of  
Taxes to Certain Purchasers 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
(2222) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Muller Martin 
Duncan Toth 
McLeod Sauder 
Andrew Johnson 
Berntson Hopfner 
Lane Petersen 
Taylor Swenson 
Smith Martens 
Swan Baker 
Hodgins Gleim 
Gerich Neudorf 
Hepworth Saxinger 
Klein Britton 
Meiklejohn  
 

Nays — 16 
 
Blakeney Anguish 
Brockelbank Goulet 
Koskie Lyons 
Tchorzewski Calvert 
Mitchell Lautermilch 
Upshall Trew 
Kowalsky Smart 
Atkinson Van Mulligen 
 
— 16 
 
The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Department of Revenue 
and Financial Services Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move this Bill now be read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting Veterinarians 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move the Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 57 — An Act to repeal The Scrap Vehicles Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Uniform Building and 
Accessibility Standards Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to amend The Prescription Drugs Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 34 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
(2229) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

 
3843 

 

Muller Martin 
Duncan Toth 
McLeod Sauder 
Andrew Johnson 
Berntson Hopfner 
Lane Petersen 
Taylor Swenson 
Smith Martens 
Swan Baker 
Hodgins Gleim 
Gerich Neudorf 
Hepworth Saxinger 
Klein Britton 
Meiklejohn  
 

Nays — 16 
 
Blakeney Anguish 
Brockelbank Goulet 
Koskie Lyons 
Tchorzewski Calvert 
Mitchell Lautermilch 
Upshall Trew 
Kowalsky Smart 
Atkinson Van Mulligen 
 
The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this day there was 
notice filed for a first reading of An Act to amend The Provincial 
Court Act. It has been agreed that this Bill should go to 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee, and since that committee is 
sitting tomorrow, I would like to have leave, Mr. Speaker, to move 
first reading of An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 96 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of An 
Act to amend The Provincial Court Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill ordered 
to be referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial 
Bills. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 
 
 


