


















































November 3, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 November 3, 1987 
 
 

3891 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 10 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The member from Regina North West has 
asked for leave to introduce some guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you 
colleagues. I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce to the 
chairman and through the chairman to all members of this 
Assembly, 20 Cubs from the Walsh Acres 80th Cub Pack in the 
Speaker’s gallery. They are in Grades 3, 4, and 5, and they are 
visiting this Assembly this evening for a tour, and we’ll have a 
little meeting with them later on. But accompanying the Cubs are 
five chaperons, six of them actually: John White, Brian Moffat, 
Jan Marqwart, Bud Ashby, Brain Millar, and Kathy Thomson. 
 
I hope that the Cubs and their chaperons this evening enjoy the 
visit to the Legislative Assembly, and I ask all members of this 
Assembly to join with me in welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, like many of those in 
the room here tonight, I also was a former Cub, later on a Boy 
Scout, and I think it’s marvellous that these young people are here 
with their leaders to see how the legislature works. I’d also like to 
welcome you, as a former Cub myself, welcome you to this 
Legislature. Welcome and enjoy yourselves. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 10 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Premier, in the examination of this budget 
and these estimates, you’ve had many questions put to you and 
much discussion regarding the effect of the deficit — the $3.4 
billion deficit that the province has accumulated since you taken 
over, and this year $1.2 billion. Most of the discussion to date has 
been regarding the effects on health and the cuts that have had to 
take place there. 
 
But there also is a great deal of concern, not quite as loudly 
expressed in the media, but there is an underlying  

concern by every parent and every educator, certainly every 
school board member in the province, about what is happening to 
the deficit, or to the education as a result of your deficit. They’re 
especially concerned at your continuing disregard of suggestions 
that have been put, and the continuing of spending money on 
out-of-province travel, advertising, and polling. And the result has 
been, that there has been a shift in education funding this year, a 
lowering of the percentage of the amount that’s been spent on 
education. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Premier, whether this is a direction that you 
did consciously. And are you conscious that you are actually 
lowering the priority of education by reducing the amount that’s 
gone into education? is this a direction that you intend on 
continuing to pursue? 
 
I notice . . . I heard this afternoon that you expected to have a 
balanced budget by the year 1990 or 1991. Now that either means 
that you’re going to be trying to pick up more revenue or you’re 
going to have to cut expenditure. I can tell you — and I think you 
know for yourself, if you ask any of your colleagues — that the 
people of Saskatchewan certainly have education as a high 
priority. So I want to know, Mr. Minister, if the people that work 
with education can expect continued erosion of education funds as 
it comes from the government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. 
member with respect to funding, I pointed out today that our 
health expenditures and educational expenditures, social services 
expenditures and agriculture expenditures are way, way up 
compared to when the NDP were in government. And they are up 
substantially — I mean, like large amounts. 
 
In health, it’s 63 per cent; and in agriculture, it was two or 
threefold. In fact we spent more in terms of interest rate relief than 
the entire Agriculture budget of 1981 - 82. So I make that point. 
We don’t get that many bouquets from the opposition as a result of 
those expenditures. 
 
And with respect to education, I point out to the hon. member that 
the budget in 1985-86 was $718 million, and this year it’s $741 
million. So it’s up again. If you want to look on page 32 of the 
Estimates 1987-88 — and the hon. member, I am sure, knows that 
a good part of my background has been in education — and 
expenditures towards a new agriculture college, in terms of a new 
technical school in Prince Albert, for example, the expenditures 
that we have made generally on education are up significantly and 
substantially. 
 
So I would just say that he probably would like to have more 
money in education and health and social services and agriculture, 
but they’re all up, and up substantially across the piece, and up 
more than you would find in other jurisdictions that have gone 
through anything comparable in terms of a decline in revenues. So 
from 1981 to this year, from in any time in the previous 
administration and from our own administration, its been a 
significant increase. 
 
I think if I could give you another dimension in terms of school 
funding, school financing between 1981 and ’87  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3892 
 
 

— and maybe this is what you would like — total government 
grants to school boards are up 56.8 per cent; ’81-87, total 
government grants to school boards, up 56.8 per cent; enrolments 
have been down 2 per cent; total grants per pupil are up 60 per 
cent; and the consumer price index is only up 34 per cent. This 
shows a 26 per cent real growth in educational funding — real 
growth. 
 
Other facts — you can look at the average local mill rate increase: 
’82-87 was 15 per cent; 1976-81, under the NDP, the local 
average mill rate increase was 69.7 per cent — almost four times 
as much. Accumulated surpluses by boards in 1981-87 have 
increased from 30 million to 57 million, surpluses increased by 7 
million last year alone. 
 
Do you want to look at public school expenditures? Do you want 
to look at universities? Do you want to look at technical schools, 
new colleges, new technical schools, increased spacing, increased 
funding per pupil, school board grants? They’re all up, all up, and 
up substantially — significant increases, 56 per cent — and, as I 
said, in other jurisdictions like health, up 63 per cent, and 
agriculture, up several fold. 
 
So I know we don’t get many bouquets for that expenditure, and 
you may have differences in terms of how you might like to see it 
spent, but in terms of dollars allocated to education, social 
services, and to health care and to agriculture, some of the largest 
increases in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Premier, you did get your bouquets 
from ’82 until this budget — you did get your bouquets. You got it 
from the total education community, I would say, and I would say 
you got it from a lot of parents. But it’s this year that we’re 
concerned about, and it’s this year that I want to bring to your 
attention exactly what is happening and that you’ve got a decrease 
in the budget, and you keep insisting somehow that it’s an 
increase. Now you used the figure . . . pardon me, in educational 
spending, not in the budget. The budget obviously shows an 
increase. 
 
You use the figure from page 32 of 741 — let’s even be more 
generous, let’s add the educational development fund — and let’s 
use the figure from page 33, which is 756 million total, total for 
Education, including education development fund. Now, but this 
figure includes one transfer of $23-some million, back on page 29, 
item 22, payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, and that was paid the year previous, I believe, 
because in the asterisks down below, it shows that those were paid 
by the supply and Services department prior to this year. So when 
you subtract that amount that’s been transferred to the Education 
budget from Supply and Services, there is a decrease in budgeted 
money to education. And that’s showing a completely new 
direction. 
 
And also what it’s done is it’s reduced the amount spent over the 
last two years of 20.6 per cent and 20.3 per cent, down to 19.6 per 
cent of the budget. It’s showing you’re going the wrong way. And 
if we want to maintain education as a priority, that’s a direction 
that we must not go into — we must not go into. 
 

So I ask you again: do you deny that that Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation payment is not something new that’s 
been added to this budget? I mean, you could do that, you could 
increase the budget several times by incorporating some other 
department into it. 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
points out to the fact that some of the $756 million, like 23 million 
of it or something, might have been allocated towards the property 
management corporation, it might have been allocated towards 
school construction, it might have been allocated towards a 
combination of things. If he is trying to say that we haven’t 
substantially increased the educational budget because he has 
found a place where we can put some of that educational money, 
it’s just . . . I mean, we have put money in place, year after year 
after year, in the long run, for education, and it’s been growing, 
and the construction facilities have grown, and the property 
management corporation helps us manage the properties, manage 
construction. I mean, you know in your own community, a 
tremendous increase in expenditures in education — and in 
Saskatoon and in other communities. 
 
Now if you want to fine tune 10 million here or 10 million there 
on $756 million worth of expenditures . . . It is a very large 
expenditure compared to anything that you did in education. 
 
Now I run into the same thing today with respect to agriculture, or 
yesterday. They said, well you’re down a little bit now compared 
to last year. I mean, we’re down from . . . even this year down, just 
the interest relief is more than the entire NDP budget in 
agriculture. And you’re trying to find a few million here or a few 
million there, that you say, oh well this went over to this 
department or this went into construction or this went some place 
else. I mean, fair enough, if you want to explore those, but 
generally the budget is up; it’s long-run; it’s involved in school 
construction, which takes a long time, and involves some 
university buildings and facilities. It is involved in technical 
schools construction, and these are long-run commitments. 
 
All I can say is that we can have a fair disagreement about where 
we would spend the money with respect to education, but let there 
be no disagreement on the amounts of money in health, education, 
social services, and agriculture that’s allocated to those portfolios 
that are spent in either services or property or construction or 
something to do with education or the appropriate departments. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Premier, what I’m really after here 
is not so much as to say that you didn’t increase the budgets from 
’81 to ’87. What I’m really after here is the truth of what’s 
happening this year because I don’t want you and the Minister of 
Education going around and saying something that’s not true, 
saying that the amount of money to education this year has 
increased again, because I believe that to be patently false. And 
that’s all I want from you, is an admission of the truth on that one  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3893 
 
 

matter. 
 
If I can get the admission of the truth on that one matter, please, 
the I will be quite satisfied, and I will acknowledge the fact that 
you provided increases over the past years, and I think you’ve 
already had your bouquets for that. But I think it’s patently wrong 
to say, by transferring some money in to the Education department 
from another department and then saying the amount spent on 
education has increased. I think that’s dishonest, and I don’t think 
you should be going around saying that we increased the budget 
again. You can say, we spent a great deal of money, or we’re 
spending adequate, but to say it’s increased is wrong. And that’s 
what I’m after. 
 
It’s like me giving my child an allowance of $10 a week and then 
saying, now I’m going . . . This year let’s put in another $5, which 
I’m going to spend on gasoline in my car; and your budget’s up to 
$15 a week, but $5 of it goes into my car. All I’m doing is 
transferring it into there. And that’s what I’m after, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I know what you’re after. I mean, I . . . To 
be fair, I haven’t heard you give us a bouquet in education since 
you’ve taken your seat. I have never heard you say, thank you for 
a new technical school in Prince Albert — not one bouquet. And 
you’ve said, oh, well they’ve increased educational funding. 
You’ve said that in here tonight: ah, but this year I’ve found a spot 
where they’ve got X million dollars going into construction or the 
property management corporation. See? They’re not consistent 
year after year after year after year. One year I found a hole some 
place. 
 
Well I know what you’re after. We haven’t heard a solid 
congratulations on the big increase in funding, either at 
universities or technical schools or expansions, or in terms of total 
grants to government school boards that are up this year — no 
congratulations. I mean, I know very well what you’re after. I 
mean, you haven’t . . .You probably haven’t been my best 
campaign advocate, right? Right? I mean, in terms of education or 
health or social services . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 
Chairman, the member from Saskatoon South is speaking from his 
seat again. Every time I go to speak about looking for people on 
my side, he speaks up. He must be a friend of mine, I guess, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Anyway, if you want to go through the department’s budget — I 
mean, you’ve had the Minister of Education here — and say, well 
what did this 10 million go for and this 5, and you want to say, 
well I don’t think that’s in education, that’s in construction of 
property, or that’s in schools, or that’s in long run, or that’s in 
leasing land, or whatever it is, and to make a point that education 
funding isn’t up, well I’m not going to get into that with you. 
 
I know what you’re after. I have not received many bouquets in 
Education from you, sir, and I don’t suspect I will — but fair 
enough. But an admission that we have not spent and allocated 
significant money in Education year after year after year — and 
it’s very large this year, and it’s much larger than you have ever 
seen it under any NDP administration . . . I mean, you can’t get 
that out of me. So you can nit-pick on where the money might 
have gone in terms of which construction project, but, I mean, we 
can  

agree to disagree in terms of where you might spend the money. 
But I’m sure you would like to have had a budget like this in 
Education under your administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Premier, you may not have heard 
the bouquets because I don’t speak too loudly, but the truth of the 
matter is, I was rather pleased when you people took on the tech 
school and decided to finish it after slowing it down, I might say, 
for about a year and a half. There was a time when the member 
from Prince Albert had an item in the paper and he said, look, I 
was talking to the Minister of Education and he said, this technical 
school, she’s not for you boys; and it was shelved for a while. And 
then, of course, the community responded and, to your credit, the 
school was built — it was built. And the people of Prince Albert, 
they know full well that I’ve been quite supportive of that school. 
 
But that doesn’t give you the right — even if you didn’t hear that, 
Mr. Premier — that does not give you the right to refuse to answer 
this particular question. So not having answered it, we can only 
assume, and I will assume, that this figure of $23.85 million is a 
simple book transfer, and what it does is, it makes it look like 
there’s an increase to educational spending this year — and 
enough being said on that matter. 
 
I want to know one other thing, Mr. Premier, because the direction 
that education takes . . . Of course, I know you delegate to your 
minister, but the overall direction for the province is really your 
responsibility, and so I’m kind of interested in what you feel is the 
future of education in sort of general terms in Saskatchewan. Now 
we know already that you’ve decreased the percentage amount of 
money, slightly, of the total budget that’s being spent in 
Education. it’s now below 20 per cent; it used to be above 20 per 
cent. This is the first year. 
 
I notice also that in the legislation for the technical schools, that 
the legislation now has been set up so that it allows for user-pay 
system in the technical schools. It makes it feasible for it to do so, 
because the minister has the power to set the fees. 
 
We know that there has been a bit of a shift in the amount of 
money that public school boards are paying from property tax with 
respect to their total budgets. They’re down to around the 50 per 
cent mark now, and back in ’78 it used to be, according to 
members of the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association), up close to 68 or 70 per cent. So there’s been a 
gradual erosion there. 
 
I want to know . . . I should mention also one other thing. We 
know that there’s been an increase in the number of students that 
are enrolled in privately-operated schools. So I want to get your 
picture, your view, of where you would like to go in Education 
with respect to those matters that I touched on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I think I could point out to 
the hon. member that I’m more than happy to answer this 
question, but I think that the Minister of Education spent 42 hours 
in estimates being asked many of the same questions, and 
obviously we meet as cabinet  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3894 
 
 

and we review the policies in education and agriculture and so 
forth. So just so that the public knows, these questions have been 
asked many, many times. 
 
With respect to the whole question of the future of education, the 
key in education today is to arm young people and educate young 
people so that they can compete in a very changing and a very 
challenging world and one that is truly interconnected world-wide. 
We operate in a global village; we need to have a greater emphasis 
on basis skills, language, computer service. The whole question of 
information -based economies is relevant, and young people need 
to have those technical skills. The technical schools have to be 
relevant to compete with the Japanese and the Americans and the 
Europeans. And all of our children have to be as well armed as 
possible in an educational sense. 
 
When I go on campuses in educational institutions, I often talk 
about free trade and knowledge. The children want knowledge as 
it’s developed world-wide. We look at the Japanese spending 
about $15 billion a year on new technology, and their children are 
being shown all the latest technology and educated in the latest 
techniques, and we’re going to have to compete with Japanese 
children — our children will have to. And in terms of 
mathematical skills, technical skills, scientific skills, and language 
skills, it’s increasingly important that we have those basics for our 
children to compete in the year 1990 and the year 2000 and 
beyond. 
 
For anybody that thinks that we can live in a vacuum or we will 
not have to compete internationally, I believe that they’re only 
kidding themselves. As you know and I know, our pensions on our 
financial retirement are connected world-wide in the markets of 
the world. The teachers’ pension funds, for example, are 
internationally invested and financed. Our environment is 
internationally connected; our security and generally basis for 
peace is internationally connected; and our children are more and 
more aware of that. 
 
And if you talk about the environment and you talk about issues of 
peace, you’ll find that young people are very much tuned into 
those, and frankly, that’s somewhat comforting because they do 
recognize our international interdependence. And that’s why, 
obviously, I’m interested in international relationships and 
international tariff reductions so that we can have these 
constructive kinds of relationships — economic and education. 
 
And in terms of education, when I go in campuses and I say, do 
you think we should have free trade and knowledge internationally 
and everybody agrees. They say, well, of course we should. And 
to compete, none of the children want to be behind. So for K to 12, 
of those in technical schools and those in universities, to be well 
armed in terms of all the new skills in the information, 
technology-based industries is going to be extremely important 
and that means, at least, the fundamentals. 
 
(1930) 
 
I could say with respect to public and private schools, we have 
some private schools, and they have received some support from 
us, and they’re very good schools. I think of  

Notre Dame at Wilcox here, and I can think of other private 
schools that are around the province — College Mathieu, for 
example, is one in Gravelbourg, and there’ll be . . . Caronport has 
a very good educational institution, and there’s probably others 
across the province that don’t come to mind, but good schools, 
good academic record. And the children there, and I certainly 
know from Notre Dame for example, are graduating from grade 
12 going into some of the finest universities in the world and 
doing extremely well. And we are glad to see the children find the 
quality education wherever they can find it, public or private. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to 
ask the Premier some specific questions with respect to 
accessibility. 
 
Before I do that, I just want to comment, sir, on the misleading 
nature of your comments with respect to the Education budget, 
just to add to the remarks of my colleague from Prince Albert. 
You claim, sir, that the budget had risen from $718 million to 742. 
The fact of the matter is, as my colleague from Prince Albert 
noted, that in the property management corporation alone, which 
was not a budget item in the Department of Education last year but 
is this year, there’s $24 million, and I suggest to you, sir, that if 
you deduct that $24 million, in effect what’s happened is that the 
education budget has been frozen at exactly what it was last year 
in actual dollar terms. I invite you to take 742 and subtract 24, and 
see what you get. You get 718, which is exactly what it was last 
year; you know that full well. The reason I want to raise this again 
is because it’s an example of the kind of thing that you’ve been 
giving this Assembly again and again with respect to misleading 
statements, and the public deserves more from the Premier of this 
province than that kind of a misleading statement. 
 
So in effect, in actual dollars, the budget didn’t go up a penny. 
You know that full well. And, in effect, if you had applied the 
inflation rate of 4.5 per cent to the Education budget of last year at 
$718 million, you’d have gotten about $32 million more. That’s 
what your budget would have had to increase just to keep pace 
with inflation; in reality it didn’t go up one penny. So in real dollar 
terms, we’ve had a $32 million cut in the Department of 
Education, and you know that. And I think that all members of the 
House have every reason to be very frustrated with the fact that we 
can’t have a premier who gives us straight answers on the budget 
in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I want to turn specifically to the question of 
accessibility in post-secondary education. You know full well the 
impact of your cuts to the technical institutes and your two-year 
budget freeze on the universities of this province is the last year. 
 
In effect . . . And I’ll use Kelsey Institute as an example. Kelsey 
Institute, Mr. Premier, turned away 2,700 people this fall, in 
September, who wanted to get into Kelsey, who were qualified to 
get into Kelsey, but who could not get into Kelsey because there 
wasn’t space for them. And in addition to that, Mr. Premier, they 
turned away more than another 900 students who had planned to 
attend Kelsey at programs that existed at Kelsey until this fall 
when you eliminated those programs — programs like  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3895 
 
 

office education and programs like the certified nursing assistant 
program at Kelsey. Those students were registered. They would 
have been accepted if those programs existed, and you abolished 
those programs, Mr. Premier. So that in total, more than 3,600 
students were turned away from Kelsey. And at the same time, 
Mr. Premier, you fired or laid off — as the Minister of Education 
likes to call it — 74 staff at Kelsey. Some of those staff were 
rehired on a part-time basis with reduced hours. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, we’ve seen the same pattern at the University 
of Saskatchewan. I’m not suggesting that the number of people 
there is lower than it was last year, but I am suggesting to you that 
you have, in effect, frozen the budget of the university for two 
years, as you have in Regina. In net terms that means a 10 per cent 
cut in the budget of the University of Saskatchewan, and as a 
result of that, Mr. premier, 475 qualified students who would have 
got into the University of Saskatchewan last year are not being 
admitted this year. 
 
Now my question to you, sir, is very simple. How can you justify 
to the young people of this province that at a time when 3,600 
people are being turned away from institutes like Kelsey — at 
Kelsey alone, 3,600 people — that you have laid off 74 staff at 
Kelsey, and you have given early retirement to a large number of 
others and not replaced their positions? Can you explain to the 
young people of this province how you can justify that, how you 
can, in effect, tell young people who are trying to get into the 
University of Saskatchewan, are qualified to get in and can’t, that 
they have to leave Saskatchewan in order to get an education? Can 
you explain that to this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
acknowledges that our education budget is up substantially from 
when the NDP were here, and he acknowledges that our space is 
up substantially — 1,200 new spaces in technical schools. He 
acknowledges that we have built a brand-new technical school. He 
acknowledges the space at university has increased in Geological 
Sciences Building and others, and that we have built high schools. 
He acknowledges the fact that we have increased funding to 
school boards, increased funding per student, increased funding 
for students at university, and he’s standing there in his place 
harping because he said, well, you know, you’re way up; you’re 
not as up as much this year as you were in other years. And he 
says, you’ve got new spaces, 1,200 new spaces, and you’re 
building new technical schools and new university facilities and 
all that, but it’s not enough. 
 
Well, I mean, it’s like the member from Prince Albert. It’s never 
enough. I wish I had more money. I didn’t see anything like 1,200 
new spaces built in the NDP’s administration. I didn’t do a 
technical school. The member from P.A. says, it took you some 
time to build a technical school. Well where in the Lord were you 
guys? Year after year after year and election after election, a new 
technical school — nothing there. And when we get in and we 
built it, there’s never even any thanks. And we build a new facility 
— not any thanks. 
 
Tonight, I give you credit. I give you credit. Tonight, you said, 
thank you, Mr. Premier, you built that new technical  

school. Well that’s more sand than some of your colleagues got, 
and I appreciate that. And I’ll come and thank you later, okay? I’ll 
pour you a cup of coffee. 
 
The member from Saskatoon University, I mean, you know, you 
can get on us because we have only built 1,200 new spaces, or we 
have new classes and cancelled some classes. Well I was just 
asked, what do I think of education. We got to be modern; we got 
to be contemporary. We should be. 
 
We can’t be teaching things the same way we taught them 20 
years ago or 30 years ago. You wouldn’t want to confine your 
children to that. I mean, look around the world — the United 
States and Europe and Japan and other places, or even in other 
provinces — and they have the latest techniques in health and 
education, in engineering and welding and shop, and all the things 
that we should be teaching that are up to standards. 
 
If we want to be on the forefront in an information-based economy 
world-wide, we’ve got to change some classes. In some cases we 
had more instructors than students. And you’d say, no, leave it 
exactly the way it is. I mean, it’s the same arguments we got in 
agriculture —leave it just the way it is. 
 
I mean, your leader, again, has been all over the province asking 
people for new ideas. And it seems like you’re all hidebound to 
the past somewhere. I mean, I read an editorial in The Globe and 
Mail recently about, the NDP’s going to be the new government. 
And they said, they’re so far behind other governments 
world-wide, even in terms of their philosophy. I mean, grow up or 
wake up or come on into the 21st century; I mean, join us. 
 
I mean, you’re sitting there way, way, way back, and all you can 
do is say, Mr. Premier, you only built 1,200 new spaces. Why 
couldn’t you do more? Well the budget is much larger than it was 
under the NDP. It’s grown. We’ve had difficult times, and we’ve 
done it in health, education, social services, and many other areas. 
 
And I can only say to my hon. friend, look, I agree. I wish we had 
more money, and we could build more facilities all over the place 
as long as I can have some support from you saying, yes, Mr. 
Premier, you could raise taxes or you could cut other places, and 
here’s where you could put your educational budget. Wouldn’t it 
be nice. Okay? 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I will just say that . . . Fair enough. I wish I 
could have more spaces, that I’d built them. We have new 
technical schools, new expansion in universities, new high 
schools, a tremendous increase in enrolments at university. I 
mean, we’re looking at a 14 per cent increase — from 19,000 to 
22,000 students — and we’ve accommodated that and more 
money going out for students than we’ve ever seen. 
 
So I mean, you would like more. I understand. But for Heaven’s 
sakes, I mean, you have to tell the public how you’re going to do 
this when we’ve had major and significant increases in 
expenditures allocated to education and new facilities, both at a 
time when many other jurisdictions across North America have 
cut, year after year after year, their educational budget. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3896 
 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Premier, you know I think all I can say 
to begin with is that we understand exactly what your idea of 
taking us into the 21st century is. 
 
To begin with, your vision of the 21st century is a vision that . . . 
You know, you’ve already taken us $3.4 billion into debt. If your 
government was to continue governing until the 21st century, the 
entire tax budget of taxpayers would go to pay the interest of the 
deficit you’ve already mounted at the rate you’re going, Mr. 
Premier. So we don’t need any lectures from you in preparing for 
the 21st century. 
 
You talk about the 1,200 new spaces that you’ve created in the 
technical institute system. But I remind you of the 1,200 spaces 
that you cut this year — the 1,200 fewer spaces that exist as a 
result of the 600 spaces that were lost at Kelsey, the 300 spaces 
that were lost at STI (Saskatchewan Technical Institute), and the 
300 spaces that were lost at Wascana. So I just remind you of that. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I want to ask you another question with respect 
to accessibility, and this relates to bursaries. I’ve debated this with 
the Minister of Education; I’ve not got satisfactory answers. I want 
to hear directly from you, sir, as the final architect of this policy, if 
you could explain to the people of this province and the students 
of this province why you chose this year as the year, not only to 
eliminate the Saskatchewan student bursary program, and to 
change it to a forgivable loan program — that’s not my primary 
concern, although I don’t agree with that. 
 
What I want to know is why you made a decision that every 
student in this province, except students with special needs, has to 
now borrow $180 a week in student loan before they get any of 
that forgiven, when last year all they had to do was borrow $80 a 
week before their forgivable loan or bursary kicked in — why it is, 
in other words, that a student at a technical institute who last year 
could get a bursary after they borrowed some $2,600 now has to 
borrow, Mr. Premier, $6,840 before they get a bursary; why a 
university student last year who only had to borrow some $2,600 
in a 33-week program before they qualified for a bursary now has 
to borrow $5,940 before they’re eligible for any forgivable loan. 
How do you justify to young people in this province why they 
should have to borrow more than twice as much as they did last 
year before a penny of that is forgiven? As a result of that policy 
they find that they are driven thousands of additional dollars into 
debt before they graduate. Can you explain that to this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is a 
little confounding when it comes to making money and spending 
it. I say that, and I know exactly how he thinks he would gain 
money in the province. I’m going to give him a couple of 
examples where it’s extremely difficult. He wants, Mr. Chairman, 
to have a deficit, and he just blamed me for the deficit. He says, 
Mr. Premier, you shouldn’t have this deficit; it’s accumulated 2.3 
to 2.5 billion. He doesn’t like that and yet he wants, Mr. 
Chairman, more money spent on education, so I’d ask him how he 
would get the money. 
 
(1945) 
 

I know, for a matter of fact, that the entire mining industry 
associated with uranium can contribute significantly to the 
province and he’s against that. So he would not allow that major 
industry that affects Saskatoon and Prince Albert in northern 
Saskatchewan to contribute to students at all. And he sits there 
kind of piously saying, well for Heaven’s sake, Mr. Premier, we 
should cancel that industry which can contribute significantly to 
the province, and the NDP are against uranium. And the member 
from Saskatoon University walks around saying we should have 
more money to students, but oh, we shouldn’t have this industry. 
We shouldn’t trade with the United States. We shouldn’t do this. 
 
Now let me give you a point. The NDP administration borrowed 
$480 million to buy the potash corporation. It had something like 
$800 million borrowed for all the Crown corporations. Right? 
That’s what it is. And it’s all interest free. Well, since the 1970s, if 
we had just invested that money and put it in the bank there 
wouldn’t be an accumulated deficit today in the province of 
Saskatchewan, $800 million from the ’70s to today. Now, you 
borrowed the money to buy potash industries and you lost your 
shirt — lost your shirt and you blame me. You say, where’s your 
money for this, and then money for that? You did that because of 
your philosophy. Today when an industry . . . One of the only ones 
that are going good is the uranium industry. Right? What do you 
and your colleagues say? Oh no, you cancel that one. Cancel that. 
 
Well the people of this province want to know where you’d get the 
money. You borrowed a whole bunch of money to buy farmland 
—never did pay for it — borrowed it from New York bankers, 
borrowed it to buy potash from New York bankers; borrowed 
money to buy the pulp company from New York bankers; paid the 
interest rate to Americans. And they can sit over there and smiling, 
looking rather interesting tonight when we talk about more money 
to students, and they don’t know how to make money. They don’t 
know how to make money. 
 
All you can do is say, Mr. Premier . . . Hey, they’re starting to 
wake up a little, Mr. Chairman. The member from Saskatoon 
South, he’s waking up a little bit. 
 
Let me say you’re against trading with Americans to make money; 
your agriculture critic is against sending meat into the United 
States to make money; you’re against a paper mill marketing into 
the United States to make money; you’re against the potash 
industry making money — you have to go buy it; borrow money 
from Americans, put us all in debt and we have to pay it off; and 
you’re against uranium industry. In fact it’s making money. How 
about the member from Athabasca? 
 
Well let me say, my friend, if you walked around the university 
campus and you told them all the ways that you wouldn’t make 
money and then said, well but I’d give more to education — 
you’re a real nice guy, right? You’ve got more money for 
education and you’d cut them all off at the knees. 
 
And when you did have a chance in power, what did the NDP do? 
They lost and they lost and they lost, and they  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3897 
 
 

left a legacy — no heritage fund, and all this borrowed money to 
buy back land and mines and buildings and all these things. And 
do you know what they did? They borrowed the money from 
United States, watched the exchange rate go to 25 per cent in the 
wrong way, and we’ve got to pay it all back — not only interest, 
but the exchange on the interest. 
 
Now, my friend from Saskatoon University, you tell me how 
you’d borrow all that money, $800 million, not pay the interest on 
it, and then stand up in front of anybody and say, but I’d have all 
this money for education; more than the new 1,200 spaces you’ve 
got, Mr. Premier, and a new technical school and the new 
agriculture college for the university. 
 
When you borrowed all that money for Crowns and for land and 
the rest of it, what did you do with it? Did you build technical 
schools? No. Did you build new mines? No. Did you build an 
upgrader? No. Did you build a university? Did you buy CAT 
(computerized axial tomography) scans? No. What in the world 
did you do with it? What did you do with it? You bought property 
that was already here, and you stand there like a . . . like some sort 
of magical economist that’s going to say, oh, but we could do all 
that and still spend for everybody. 
 
Well that’s why you’re sitting in the opposition, my friend, 
because people say, look at this. They can’t continue to borrow 
from New York and just buy out from under us. 
 
Well you tell me how we take the uranium industry and the potash 
industry and the oil industry and the beef industry and oil 
upgraders and paper mills, and all those things . . . You tell me, 
tonight, how you would do and manage those assets like you have 
in the past — $800 million invested and no interest, and you 
haven’t paid it back — and not let them function because you’re 
going to nationalize them or cut us off at the border. You won’t let 
us trade with them. 
 
You tell me how you’d do that, my friend, and we can talk about 
education from now until next December. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well the man who . . . Mr. Chairman, the man 
who . . . The Premier, who likes to give us a lesson in economics, 
happens to be the same man who inherited a province that had net 
equity, Mr. Premier, and now instead has a net debt, after you take 
liabilities minus assets minus liabilities, of $1.9 billion. So I’m 
sure you can give us a great history lesson how to manage the 
economy. 
 
I think, Mr. Chairman, that the viewers on television tonight, if not 
all members on the other side of the Assembly, will have noted 
how the Premier failed to answer the question on student bursaries 
and failed to give the students of this province any explanation 
about why he turned a plan that used to involve students getting 
bursaries after they borrowed the first $80 a week into a plan in 
which they now get forgivable loans only after they borrow $180 a 
week, in effect requiring them to go into debt thousands of 
additional dollars a year. But I say  

to the Premier, everyone noted, Mr. Premier, that you didn’t 
answer that question, as you’re well noted to doing in this 
Assembly. 
 
I want to therefore give you some suggestions about where we 
would find the money in order to finance things like student 
bursaries and the student loan program and lifting the freeze on the 
University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan and 
reinstating the cuts to your technical institutes. I want to give you a 
few examples just very briefly, Mr. Premier. 
 
First of all, Mr. Premier, you’ve just managed to undertake the 
miraculous step of selling the Prince Albert Pulp Company to 
Weyerhaeuser corporation of Tacoma, Washington, for $248 
million, without collecting one red cent in the form of a down 
payment. I suggest to you that, first of all, we wouldn’t have sold 
it. But had we sold it, we would have collected a down payment in 
the area of 100 to $150 million, and that in itself, Mr. Premier, 
would have gone a long way to financing many of the cuts in 
health and social services and education that you’ve made. 
 
You’re spending $130 million in the riding next to yours in the 
member for Weyburn, building the Rafferty damn. And, Mr. 
Premier, it’s our view that that is nothing more than building a 
giant mud-flat in southern Saskatchewan that is completely 
unnecessary, and that’s $130 million. And the Premier says, we 
don’t need power. That dam’s got nothing to do with power, Mr. 
Premier. You can air cool that dam just as easily as you can water 
cool it. You know full well, Mr. Premier, that that’s a bad 
investment and the only reason it’s being built is to prop up 
electoral support for you and your colleague from Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Premier, you talk — misleadingly, I might add — about the 
money that was spent in potash. What you fail to own up to, Mr. 
Premier, is that you inherited a situation in which the money of 
over $400 million that had been spent on purchasing the potash 
mines had all been recouped as a result of the profits that the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan made by 1981. You know 
that full well, and you’re the one, Mr. Premier, knowing the assets 
that existed in that corporation, that chose to drain it off. You 
chose consistently, after running up losses year after year, when 
prior to 1981 that company had made profit year after year. You 
then chose to drain the assets that had been run up and to pay 
dividends each year during the term in office when no profit was 
being made by the corporation — in fact, when it was running up 
a loss. 
 
So you’re the one who’s drained the corporation of its assets 
without even acknowledging, Mr. Premier, that you inherited a 
situation in which all the money that had been put up to buy 
potash mines in the first place had been completely recouped from 
the operation of those potash mines in the five years that the NDP 
ran them. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, those are just some examples of the kind of 
misleading statements that members of this Assembly and 
members of the public have had to put up with from you, not just 
for the last few months but for the last five years. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3898 
 
 

And I suggest to you, Mr. Premier, that the people of this province 
understand now that you have been misleading them, and that’s 
why you’re 24 points behind us in the opinion polls, Mr. Premier. 
And I suggest that as long as you continue to mislead members of 
this Assembly and members of the public, you’ll fall even further 
behind because you have lost the most important quality that’s 
required in a Premier, and that’s the quality of honesty and 
credibility. I suggest to you, sir, that you no longer have either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Premier, I want to move specifically to 
a third point in education, and that is ask you for a commitment 
with respect to the direction that you’re clearly headed in in terms 
of education for profit. 
 
Your Minister of Education is on record as saying that he is 
looking for the new super-institute, the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Science and Technology, to begin, raising money for its 
operations. I want to say, Mr. Premier, I’ve got no objection to 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) entering into contracts with the private sector to 
deliver programs and making money on them as long as SIAST 
does not have to look for its core operating grant from anywhere 
other than the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s my view, Mr. Premier, that education in this province, that 
core funding for education, should always come from government 
and should never come from the private sector. It seems to be 
fairly obvious that you don’t agree. Your government has just 
entered into a contract with the Government of Canada to have 
$160 million worth of programming that is largely education, 
albeit there’s some specific job training in there as well, again 
delivered largely by the private sector through Canadian job 
strategy. And what we’re seeing in this province, Mr. Premier, is a 
clear strategy by you and your government to first of all, to 
privatize education, eliminating courses like office education and 
barbering and other such courses that were in full demand and 
where graduates were doing well from our technical institutes, 
handing those courses over to the private sector to be delivered by 
them. We disagree with that. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Premier, you’re also embarked on a course of 
encouraging our educational institutions to go out and raise money 
from the private sector for their core operations, depending more 
and more on the private sector for research moneys and for core 
operating moneys, and we disagree with that. 
 
And finally, Mr. Premier, it’s clear as a result of the Canadian job 
strategy program that you’re now out to encourage small private 
businesses to go into the business of offering education courses, 
delivering education courses, even though they’re not even 
necessarily registered with your government as educational 
institutions. You’re in the business of encouraging them to deliver 
education, contracting with the federal government to do that. 
There are no standards with respect to quality in place, Mr. 
Premier. There are no standards with respect to qualifications for 
instructors in place. What we’re getting is second-rate education 
being  

delivered by hundreds of small, private business operators and we 
say that’s wrong. And you obviously say that’s right. 
 
And I say, Mr. Premier, will you acknowledge now that you’re 
clearly out to privatize educational services in their delivery in this 
province. And will you instead agree, Mr. Premier, that that is 
simply not going to be good for quality education, that students are 
going to have to pay much higher tuition rates at the private 
schools that are being established around this province to replace 
courses at places like Kelsey that have been deleted? 
 
And will you instead, Mr. Premier, first of all acknowledge that 
that’s what you’re doing; secondly, acknowledge that that’s going 
to result in a second-rate education system; and thirdly, will you 
reconsider your plan to do that and instead embark on a course of 
action which would see education in this province being delivered 
through the well established public institutions that we have in 
place in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will point out to the 
hon. member, and he is . . . wants to talk about financing. And he 
keeps saying that it’s so easy under these difficult times. 
 
I pointed out to his leader that our resource revenues have dropped 
46 per cent. He seems to imply that if he was in power, wheat 
wouldn’t go down and oil wouldn’t go down and potash wouldn’t 
go down . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, but the revenues . . . 
Mr. Chairman, they won’t let me finish. 
 
Oil dropped to $10 a barrel. And potash dropped — potash 
dropped significantly. Wheat has dropped from $5 to $2.50, and 
he has to acknowledge that. And there’s deficits even in the 
province of Alberta, right? That’s right. Nod your head; are you 
there? Okay. Manitoba has the same problems because there’s not 
the money in the resources. That’s correct; now he has to 
acknowledge that. 
 
(2000) 
 
But he talks about somebody misleading. Well let me just point 
out to the hon. member, in the last NDP budget the forecast 
surplus was $206 million. Your Finance minister, under the NDP, 
forecast a surplus of $206 million. He was out 126 million in 
potash revenues; he was out 100 million in oil revenues; he was 
out a 100 million in expenditures; and he overpaid, in terms of 
equalization, 100 million. He was out 426 million. For a $208 
million deficit, he was out by $400 million in his forecast. 
 
Granted he went into an election year with that so he might have 
padded it, but in terms of forecasting revenues in potash and oil 
alone, he was out — $226 million he was out. And as a result of 
the various kinds of changes we’ve seen internationally, the hon. 
member says, oh, well it wouldn’t matter. If the prices went down, 
we’d just continue to balance the books. 
 
Let me point out, you didn’t encourage the private sector to build a 
new paper mill. You bought the old pulp company, 280 mill — 
no, $300-and-some million that  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3899 
 
 

we were in debt, $91,000 a day, and you had no idea in selling it. 
We didn’t hear any plans of selling it. And when we do and make 
a profit and build a new paper mill, which you said would never 
be built, you complain. You say, well we haven’t got our first 
payment yet. 
 
Well will you stand in your place when the first payment comes in 
and acknowledge, yes, there is a new paper mill, and, yes, the 
province is making money? Will you do that? I bet you. Well, 
we’ll see. I challenge you to anyway when it happens. 
 
With respect to the Rafferty project, when the NDP were 
campaigning against me in Estevan, what did they say? We will 
build Rafferty. When the NDP were in Saskatoon, what did they 
say? We are against Rafferty. When the NDP were in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, we’d build the dam and the power 
project over there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And Coronach. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And Coronach. Well, Mr. Chairman, the 
NDP are the same all the time. They say one thing one place and 
one the other. Their leader, for example, was at the Saskatchewan 
Federation of labour and he got two standing ovations from the 
union boys. Then he’s out in the country where there is a different 
point of view, and he says, I think we could kind of consider 
privatization in some of this stuff, trying to get a response. One 
thing to the town folks; one thing to the city folks. I mean you’ve 
been at this a long, long time. 
 
And with respect to investment, you’re against American 
investment. I mean . . . but the problem with it, and with you, is 
that you’ll take U.S. investment like in an automobile factory in 
Oshawa — $4.8 billion — and then the very people that are 
working there will turn around and campaign across the country 
and say, we don’t like American investment. Well how could you 
do that? 
 
Do you like that new paper mill in P.A? Are you glad to see the 
$500 million? do you like that? Is it good? Is it good . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, let’s be fair. 
 
You went on and on about Rafferty and about potash and the 
paper mill. So let’s talk about making money. You didn’t make 
money with your borrowing. You didn’t make money in the paper 
mill; you lost money. Right? You lost it. You lost money on the 
pulp company for years and years and years. We sold it for $280 
million, and having a new paper mill, and it’s all new money — 
all new money —not government money, not borrowed money, 
but new money. And you stand in your place and say, well, we 
could close uranium mines, and we could nationalize the potash 
industry, and we could nationalize this, and it would all be magic. 
Well even when you were in power and you forecasted, you’re 
only $400 million out. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to point out to the hon. member the 
changes with respect to educational funding year after year, just 
for the hon. member’s record. Okay? So we can argue about 
uranium — you’re against it, and I’m not. Why don’t we just say 
this, you are a confirmed socialist, confirmed socialist, rather on 
the left side; I am a free enterpriser, and I’m kind of on the right 
side, and that  

means our views are going to differ with respect to Crowns and 
industry and farming and all kinds of things. Right? So you won’t 
convince me, and I won’t convince you, but maybe the public can 
look at both. 
 
You are rather a left-wing socialist, and I’m a Progressive 
Conservative, and I believe in the capitalist system and free 
enterprise, so we might as well acknowledge that. Okay? The way 
you would run a potash industry or the oil patch or farms is 
different than the way I would. 
 
Now I’ll tell you, when we all left Europe to get out of centrally 
planned economies and come here, it was for a chance. You don’t 
like that; you don’t like that. Where did your parents come from, 
young fella? Where did they come from? Well, why did they get 
out? They came here for an opportunity, right? An opportunity, 
freedom — freedom — freedom of education, freedom of speech, 
right? We all left those centrally planned countries; we came to 
North America for a chance — right? — an education, freedom of 
speech, freedom of the media, freedom of association assembly. In 
most of Europe and a good part of it, you can’t. And you know 
your ancestors and yours and yours and many of mine didn’t 
experience that, didn’t experience it. They didn’t come to this 
province and to this country because the government was going to 
control everything, right? 
 
Well let me point out to the hon. member just so he knows. I’ll go 
through 1981 to 1987-88 on combined educational, advanced 
educational expenditures. In 1980-81, the budget was $403.3 
million; in ’81-82, it was 549; for a 9.1 per cent increase. And the 
increases from ’82 to 1988 were as follows: 7.3 per cent, 1 per 
cent, 7.2 per cent, 5.8 per cent, 6.7 per cent; and from ’86-87 to 
’87-88, another 3.2 per cent, up to $741 million — year after year 
after year. 
 
I’ll go through it again: 7.3, 1 per cent, 7.2 per cent, 5.8, 6.7, and 
3.2 per cent up till this last year. Increases in education and 
advanced education — in money. So it’s up over . . . What we get 
from all our income tax is going to education. All our income tax 
in the province of Saskatchewan, with $2 wheat and low priced 
potash and all the other things that we have to face. 
 
And I will point out that with respect to provincial assistance for 
students, $4.3 million in ’81-82, 1987-88 is $31.5 million — from 
4.3 to 31.5 in the last five years. That’s a significant increase. 
Student numbers enrolment: 5,400 in 1981-82 to 15,000 in 
1987-88. Now those are tremendous increases. And you’re saying, 
but, Mr. Premier, you could’ve had a little more here or a little 
more there. 
 
Look, granted you might spend your money a little bit different 
than I might spend it, but you can’t argue that we haven’t spent a 
lot of money on education — a great deal of money — with new 
facilities and more money to students and new technical schools 
and new universities. 
 
Now the second thing we could argue about is how do you make 
money. Well, you have a planned society in your mind. I mean, 
you are a classic socialist that you would . . . the government own 
this. I could get out the Regina Manifesto and read the whole thing 
to you, and  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3900 
 
 

you’d just think you’d died and gone to heaven, right? I mean, 
you’d really like this. 
 
And it starts off that we will own the means of production and we 
will own the marketing and we will control the people and we will 
control the banks and we will control everybody. Right? Look at 
them smile, they love it. They think I’m preaching from the pulpit 
here. Here’s socialism 101, right? We could go back to the 
planned stuff, all over Europe and all over other parts of the world, 
and these people would start to grin and they’d say, way to go, by 
gosh, the government’s going to control everything. And you like 
that, don’t you? He that’s . . . look it, he’s really enjoying this. By 
gosh, I got him. He’s finally in his . . . I’m making him 
comfortable. Maybe I should go speak to some of their meetings. 
Would you like me to do that? Well, come on. 
 
You believe one way. Obviously you are on the left side of the 
spectrum; I’m not. You would close mines and you would 
nationalize industries and you’d have the government own the 
farmland — I know that; you believe it; fair enough . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, you do. Well what’s your position on 
uranium? You haven’t spoke on uranium tonight. Stand up there, 
young fellow, speak on uranium. What do you think? Should we 
close it up . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Come on. You say, yes, 
we should close it. It was a good idea to nationalize the potash. 
Yes, come on; it is, right? Was it a good idea to buy the pulp 
company? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, he’s nodding his head. Well, see it’s all 
the same old stuff. You’re hidebound by your socialist philosophy, 
I know that. And you’re not very old. I don’t know who got you 
when you were a young guy but . . . you know, come on. You 
won’t convince me that you know how to manage in a socialist 
fashion because I don’t believe in it, and most people in Canada 
don’t. You’d back away from NATO (North American Treaty 
Organization). We’ve been in two world wars defending people 
for freedom and liberty — two world wars — and you’d take us 
out of NATO and out of NORAD (North American Air Defence), 
right? You don’t even believe it. You’re closer to the Soviet Union 
than you are Americans — you hate Americans. I know that. 
Well, do you like Americans? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, they don’t. See, they don’t like 
Americans; they like the Soviet Union; they like Czechoslovakia, 
right? They like that system. But you know how they trade over 
there? You know how they trade over there, and say, well we’ll 
phone Moscow, how will we trade today? Well we’ll let so much 
go through and so much go through, and it will be good for the 
students and it will be good for somebody else. Come on, we’ve 
been there. We’ve been there, we’ve been there. Come on. 
 
You know and I know that in terms of educational spending, we’re 
spending more and more than you did. Educational spending, 
building new facilities, we’re building more — building new 
educational and technical  

schools, building more than you did, and you know that. Now you 
hate to admit it, but it’s the truth. You would like me to even 
spend more, but you won’t let me have a deficit and you won’t let 
me tax and you won’t let me cut expenditures. Right? That’s what 
you say. 
 
So I mean, you can talk here I suppose until December but you 
won’t convince me that you know what you’re doing in uranium 
or potash or revenue generation. You haven’t convinced anybody 
else, and least of all those on campus who would say, oh well, Mr. 
MLA from Saskatoon University really knows about the uranium 
industry; and, isn’t this nice what he’s going to do for us. Well, 
you know, we can debate each other there too as well as here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I can 
hardly believe that I’ve heard what I’ve heard. May I as a librarian 
recommend to the Premier that he file all that under fiction. 
 
Now I’ve heard the Premier say tonight that some of us have been 
asking questions that we’ve already asked in estimates. One of the 
reasons why we are continuing to ask these questions, Mr. 
Premier, is that we are not getting answers to them, and certainly 
my colleagues just lately have had no answers to their questions. 
 
I have a question to you and I want to pick up on what you said 
earlier, where you were giving yourself a lot of credit for 
protecting the people of Saskatchewan, that your government has 
been focused on protection of people. Will you please explain to 
the 4,400 investors who lost their money in the collapse of First 
Investors and Associated Investors how your government and 
your Department of Consumer Affairs protected them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to people who 
have invested either in Principal Trust or Pioneer Trust or others, 
those companies have provincial charters and they apply 
interprovincially. And when we look at Principal Trust, for 
example, it is under review, as I understand it, in Alberta for the 
fact that it is now bankrupt. And the information that we are 
receiving from the province of Alberta and the people that we 
have there . . . And the legal staff we have there are reviewing it 
on behalf of Saskatchewan people because it is an Alberta-based 
company. And so the recommendations and the information given 
us from the home province, if you will, is the kind of information 
that we depend on and other provinces depend on. 
 
When you have, say, trust companies that operate in Ontario with 
a head office, and they have clients across the piece in Canada, we 
get the information from Ontario. If it’s from Alberta, we get it 
from Alberta, and so forth. If the Bank of British Columbia’s 
centred in B.C., then we look to British Columbia. Pioneer Trust 
was here, and we were responsible for managing that and provided 
information to provinces on either side of us with respect to its 
financial condition. So the rules are applicable interprovincially. 
 
(2015) 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3901 
 
 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Premier, I know that your colleagues, the 
Minister of Finance and the Minister of Consumer Affairs, have 
continued to present First Investors and Associated Investors as 
extraprovincially licensed companies, but they are licensed, they 
were licensed by the province of Saskatchewan, by your 
government, under The Investment Contracts Act. 
 
I’m not talking about Principal Trust company. The trust 
companies are licensed differently. I’m talking about the two 
companies that were licensed under The Saskatchewan Investment 
Contracts Act. Yes, they were Alberta based companies, but in 
order to practise here in Saskatchewan and to sell investment 
contracts, they had to be licensed by the Department of Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs. 
 
And I want your explanation as to how the department was so 
negligent that it gave licences to those companies to practise here 
in Saskatchewan, when they already had audited statements that 
those companies were insolvent. 
 
It was your government. Will you please explain how you failed to 
protect those investors, many of whom have lost their life savings. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, as I understand it, is that 
when companies file their reports — I believe this was in 1985-86 
— that they look at their audited statements, and sometimes 
there’s a caution put on the audited statement, and it’s to be 
reviewed and examined. And it’s monitored from then on through 
1986 or ’87. The same applies in other provinces. So it probably 
wouldn’t be the first time that you would have an audited 
statement with some qualification on it. It didn’t say that it was 
necessarily bankrupt, or it didn’t say that they had devalued all the 
assets, but there’s a qualifier that’s put on it. 
 
Now that’s what they’re supposed to do. So I think that in general 
terms, across western Canada particularly, under these economic 
times — and to be fair, I mean, your colleagues have said that 
these are perfectly normal times, with oil dropping down. Ask 
Alberta if oil prices didn’t drop through the bottom. Ask the real 
estate people. Ask the farmers if land didn’t drop. I mean very 
difficult times, and they aren’t normal times, and we’ve had some 
difficulties. 
 
And you say, well, Mr. Premier, why didn’t you fix these, or why 
did all this happen when you were in power? why? Well it 
happened world-wide — the stock market crash. I suppose you 
want to blame me for that. I mean, come on. We’ve had difficult 
financial times across the west, Alberta, B.C., Manitoba, 
Saskatchewan. Okay? And so you have rules and regulations to 
deal with financial institutions. Banks in United States went broke 
— whole banks. I think something like 1,500 of them have closed, 
and they had pretty tight rules and regulations. 
 
So, you know, you don’t like to see it happen and you try to 
protect people. And some auditor said, some of this should be 
qualified and you look at it and say, well, fair enough. And you 
look at the portfolio in total. You know, you got people looking at 
the market every day trying to  

figure out if it’s going to go up or stabilize or improve. 
 
I mean, I understand why you’re asking. I mean, you’re trying to 
embarrass the government in difficult times. Fair enough. I 
understand that. We embarrassed you in difficult times. Interest 
rates were 21 per cent; you didn’t do anything, and we 
embarrassed you so bad you lost the election. Okay? We did that. 
So you’re doing that, too. I understand that, but I can’t change the 
market, and I can’t change those real estate values. And in many 
cases that’s what the trust companies were investing in, associated 
with real estate, land, and other things. You know that and I know 
that. So you can stand and ask me about the market as long as you 
like. 
 
But I know it’s been difficult. The whole country knows it’s been 
difficult. Now internationally, the world knows it’s been difficult. 
And you’re saying, well, couldn’t the Department of Consumer 
Affairs straighten this out? Well, not likely. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Premier, I am not doing this so much to 
embarrass the government as I am to ask you to take responsibility 
for the actions of your department and for the collapse of those 
two firms in which a lot of people in Saskatchewan lost an awful 
lot of money. and I’m doing it because I think your government 
should take responsibility to those people in Saskatchewan, which 
you have yet not done. 
 
You have already said the firms were in financial difficulty and 
that governments were in difficulty prior to 1986. And that is all 
the more reason why, when these investment contract firms were 
licensed to practice in Saskatchewan, that you should have been 
watching what they were doing and the health that they were in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well let me try another approach. We care 
about people who have homes, and people who have money 
invested, and money in savings, money in farms. And again, I go 
back. When we saw people with money in, for example, Pioneer, 
we made sure that their savings were protected — those that put 
their money in savings, not the shareholders, but those that had 
savings. And we understand that. When you invest in companies 
as a shareholder, you have some risk and you know that. but those 
people who put money in banks, in savings, or credit unions, or 
trusts, expect that money to be there. That’s why they’re called 
trust companies and why they’re called savings companies, and so 
forth. And I agree with you. We should protect them and we did. 
 
We’re not going to bail out Pioneer and we’re not going to bail out 
Principal Trust. Okay? Now you don’t want me to — I don’t think 
— to bail out Principal Trust. And I don’t think you want me to — 
or maybe you did — to bail out all the people that had shares in 
Pioneer. Now we would help them in terms of their savings, and 
that’s fair enough. Let’s both agree that that would be a good idea. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3902 
 
 

With respect to helping people and caring for them, again I go 
back. Do you know what? How many people in Saskatchewan 
were hurt by 21 per cent interest rates and the NDP didn’t care at 
all. You don’t have a leg to stand on. You don’t have one leg to 
stand on. Now every family in Saskatchewan that bought a home, 
bought a farm, bought a car, bought clothes, bought a refrigerator, 
was paying 20 per cent interest rate and the NDP didn’t care and 
that’s the entire population. 
 
And you will stand here and defend an Alberta firm. I mean, I care 
about those people that invested, but don’t be so self-righteous. 
You know, come on. You weren’t there when it mattered for 
everybody. I mean everybody. Talk is cheap, my friends. You can 
stand there and say, well I’d have all this money but you’d close 
uranium mines and nationalize the industry. Or when interest rates 
were 21 per cent, you didn’t care about anybody. You wouldn’t 
give them a penny — to home owners, or seniors, or farmers or 
anybody, and every family was touched — not a dime. 
 
And you’re on my case because you had some investors invested 
in Principal Trust and they’ve lost their money because the market 
went down. Well I care for them, and we will help them as much 
as we can. But I can’t bail out the company, but I will certainly go 
the wall for people who face international interest rates of 20 per 
cent. 
 
I mean, I don’t buy your argument and I know people do. Yes it 
would be nice to help those people. And yes, if you could just 
forecast where the real estate would go up or down, you could 
really control investments. And that’s what you’re saying. There’s 
a qualified statement there with respect to audits. And they said, 
okay, at these real estate values, fair enough. What happened the 
next six months? Well it went down more. Right? You know that. 
The market collapsed for real estate all over Alberta and 
Saskatchewan. Everybody knows that. Who forecasted it? Not too 
many. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, they did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — You did, did you? Did you forecast that? 
Who did? Who forecasted that the markets would go down and 
down? Boy, there’d be a few very wealthy people if you could 
forecast what’s going to happen in the markets. 
 
So you want me to be able to forecast markets, and my staff too. 
When they go up and we make some profit, you don’t give us any 
bouquet, but when they go down, we’re responsible. Well let me 
just say we helped people in Pioneer, and where we can, we will 
help people with respect to Principal Trust. We have people in 
place to examine all the possibilities. 
 
I am saddened by the fact that people lose money. Farmers have 
lost fortunes; machinery dealers have lost money; people in the oil 
industry have lost a great deal. We adjust all the time. I mean, 
when you look at 20 per cent interest rates, $2 wheat, decline in 
potash, the problems we’ve faced in trade, people adjust all the 
time. and every day you stand here with respect to Principal Trust. 
I mean, fair enough. That’s one fraction of the  

market that we’ve dealt with all across the piece. 
 
So I go back and I’m reminded of the member from Saskatoon 
University asking about education. No, but you were asking about 
. . . You want to talk about caring for people. I mean, when the 
NDP were in power and you look at the various kinds of money 
that they allocated to students, and you evaluated how much 
money their parents had, it was pretty tough. 
 
We took parental assets and we eliminated them in determining 
dependant students’ eligibility so that students could have money 
right across the piece. And single parents were included in our 
programs available to disadvantaged groups — single parents. I 
didn’t see the NDP do that. I didn’t see the NDP remove extra 
billing because they cared; they didn’t. I didn’t see NDP give 
senior citizens $500 and $700 for low-income people. I didn’t see 
the NDP build new rehabilitation centres. I didn’t see that kind of 
care. I heard a lot of talk about it. Okay? I mean we want to go 
through all the lists of caring, and if you stand and you care . . . 
Well, let’s say we both care; fair enough, we both care. 
 
All right. We will help where we can. We’re not going to bail out 
the company. I can’t take responsibility for the market, and I will 
not put my staff in charge of the markets. They look at statements 
and they say, there’s qualification to this audited statement, and 
fair enough, it is. The market might go up, or it might go down. 
Unfortunately, it went down, and people lost some money. And 
it’s . . . I feel for them and wherever we can we will help, but I 
can’t lay the responsibility for my staff interpreting what the 
market’s going to do in real estate when most trust companies . . . 
to be fair Principal Trust, and I think Pioneer invested in real estate 
in a good part of their portfolio. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Premier, I am asking you to take responsibility 
for what’s happened to the people who lost guaranteed — what 
they thought were guaranteed —investments. They were not 
speculating in stocks; they were not risk takers. They were taking 
what they thought was guaranteed investment. 
 
The reason I’m making such a point of what’s happened with 
Principal Trust is because your government and the federal 
Progressive Conservative government are both focusing on 
deregulation of the financial industries in general. You want to 
keep arm’s length; you want governments arm’s length from the 
market-place. This is the sort of thing that happens when you take 
arm’s length from the market-place — a lot of people get hurt, 
particularly around what they think are guaranteed investments. 
 
Now in British Columbia, the provincial government has launched 
a civil action against the Principal Group and they’ve named Don 
Cormie as one of the people to be held accountable. They’re also 
doing some sort of a public inquiry in the Maritimes. Alberta has a 
public inquiry, which Premier Getty has said if it finds that the 
provincial government has been negligent, they will bail out the 
investors in Alberta, or they will help the investors in Alberta. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3903 
 
 

I have not mentioned a bail-out from this government to the 
investors in Saskatchewan, but I have asked that your government 
do some sort of a public inquiry or some kind of an investigation 
to find out how it is that these companies collapsed when they 
were licensed by your government. And the reason for having this 
inquiry is even more urgent when we look at the future, and we 
look at the fact that you’re going to back away from any kind of 
regulation on financial institutions and institutions that do this kind 
of investment. And because of that, I think it’s particularly 
important to look at what’s happened with your government in the 
collapse of these two companies. That’s why I am focusing on this 
issue. 
 
And I’m focusing on this issue because I have constituents in 
Saskatoon Centre who have lost a lot of money, and they aren’t 
investors in the same kind of way in which people have invested 
in the stock markets that have collapsed. These are people who’ve 
put their savings, their retirements plans, into RRSPs (registered 
retirement savings plans). All around this province — 4,400 
people — and they’re waiting for some response from your 
government. 
 
The B.C. government has responded, the Alberta government’s 
responded, the maritime government, the New Brunswick 
government’s responded. Why won’t you respond to these people? 
And why won’t you do something to guarantee that this won’t 
happen in the future? 
 
And one of the ways you can do that is to have a public inquiry so 
that their story can be told clearly and concisely: the way in which 
the salesmen operated; the way in which they operated behind the 
front of the trust company; and the way in which your government 
didn’t carry out the supervision of the audited statements and the 
other requirements of the Superintendent of Insurance. It’s a 
crucial issue. That’s why I’m raising it. 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we are fully 
co-operating with the investigation that is going on in Alberta and 
we have been assured that we will be given all the information 
with respect to the review and investigation. 
 
I wonder if the hon. member would . . . I don’t think she would 
agree with the Government of British Columbia and the 
Government of Alberta that is moving towards more and more 
privatization and deregulation. Now I mean, I agree. I agree with 
deregulation, and I agree with opening up the financial institutions 
to more international exposure. I have a little problem, I suppose, 
with the Premier of Ontario who says we shouldn’t have 
American investment come in, and he’s just opened up all of 
Ontario to outside financial institutions from across the world, 
American and other. 
 
But, I mean, deregulation world-wide is taking place, and that’s 
the way it is. So it’s going to create economic activity 
internationally, and I share with the hon. member the fact that 
there may be more investment and more deregulation in British 
Columbia and Alberta and Saskatchewan and Ontario, right across 
the piece. 
 

She says, well there is a public inquiry in Alberta; well, we’re 
there. We’re involved in that, where the whole activity is taking 
place. The management of the corporation is in Alberta. The head 
office is in Alberta. All the decisions with respect to investment is 
in Alberta. And we’re involved there in a co-operative fashion to 
review it. And they will share all that information with us. They 
said that they would be glad to share it with us, and we’re involved 
with it. Now you know that’s the case, and we’ve told you many, 
many times, and we’ve been through this question time and time 
again. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I 
believe that the Prince Albert pulp mill started in operation, I 
believe, in about 1967, and I’m sure you can provide me with the 
exact date. My recollection of that time was that the Prince Albert 
pulp mill started as a joint venture between the government of 
Saskatchewan, under the leadership of Ross Thatcher, the Liberal 
premier at that time, and another company called Landegger, and 
another company called Parsons and Whittemore. And I’m 
wondering if the Premier could tell us what the profit or loss was 
in the first year of operation of the Prince Albert pulp mill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I really don’t have any idea, 
and my officials aren’t specialists in the pulp company. This is 
Executive Council estimates. I can only answer with respect to the 
last few years, and I can say that the eventual take-over by the 
NDP of the pulp company was a big loss and it was a big loser. 
And eventually it was $91,000 a day and $300 million. We sold it 
for a profit and built a new paper mill, and it’s worked out really 
well and we’ve got out from under this debt. So, I mean, back in 
the ’60s, what exactly did the Liberal administration made or lost 
on a particular one, I mean, I wouldn’t have that here. And it’s a 
. . . I mean, we can go back and look in the records, but I certainly 
wouldn’t have it this evening. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Premier, what did the Prince Albert 
Pulp Company make, either as a profit or what did they suffer as a 
loss, in 1970? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, this is Executive Council 
estimates of this last year, and you’re asking me what a particular 
company made in a particular part of the province in 1970. Now 
you have been a member of parliament, my friend, and you have 
been an MLA, and you’ve been through estimates probably in 
both jurisdictions. I mean, how would you expect me to know that, 
and how would you expect my officials to know that? I mean, 
that’s a classic. I’m sorry. 
 
I will try to get you the information, but this evening, it’s 
absolutely impossible. I mean, I have no idea what the answer is, 
but I could go to our forestry officials and they could go dig it up 
out of the archives and find out what money was made in previous 
years. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Premier, 1975 is the year when some 
of your members that are here tonight were first elected to the 
legislature. Could you tell us what PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company) or the Prince Albert pulp mill made as a profit or 
suffered as a loss in 1975? 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3904 
 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I think we’re getting a little 
beyond the bounds of Executive Council at this point. The way I 
understand Executive Council is, general questions dealing with 
the responsibility that the Premier has over the entire philosophy 
and so on of the government. To get specific questions about 
1970, 1975, bout one particular aspect of a department that is not 
even here, and the officials are not here. I think this is going 
beyond the bounds of what this estimate is expected to do. So 
please get your questions a little bit more general in that respect. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We’re getting to the 
point. There was an expression of dissatisfaction with the pulp 
mill, and I was just trying to get at where the minister, or where 
the Premier was basing the assertion that he had made. And there 
has to be some background as to historical fact. 
 
So I would ask — we’ll move closer to your administration 
coming into place — what profit or what loss did the Prince Albert 
Pulp Company have in 1980? Do you have those figures with you 
here this evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, I don’t. I don’t. Mr. Chairman, I don’t 
have those figures of year after year of a particular company. It’s 
like asking me how did Intercontinental Packers do from 1965 to 
1985? I don’t know. I mean, we’ll dig it up and we’ll phone the 
people. Okay? 
 
All I know is that as a result of all your expenditures, you were 
losing $91,000 a day and it was over $300 million in debt, and we 
had it. And you wouldn’t sell it and we did. That’s what I know. 
That was the major decision of us, $280 million for the people of 
Saskatchewan and another $200-and-some million in a brand new 
paper mill. 
 
In P.A., we’ve never seen a paper mill before. This is first one in 
history of all of Saskatchewan — a new paper mill. And you are 
from North Battleford, why don’t we talk about what’s relevant 
about North Battleford? What about new bacon plants or 
recreational vehicle plants, tourism, the oil patch? Isn’t that funny? 
I mean, for Heaven’s sake! You’re standing there in your place 
asking me what money was made in PAPCO in 1970, and it’s my 
estimates ’86-87, and you’re from North Battleford. You don’t 
even know what town you’re from, young man. My Lord! 
 
Let’s talk about what’s relevant. What’s relevant? Diversification 
and building. That paper mill is diversification and it’s jobs and a 
lot of new jobs that weren’t there before. And the same applies to 
North Battleford. Now you go around town saying, oh, we 
wouldn’t do that, we wouldn’t build. 
 
Well you want to talk about 1970 — I don’t have the numbers — 
and I can tell you what we’ve done to date. Okay? And we’ve 
provided you the information that we have sold PAPCO, and 
we’ve provided a new paper mill, and it’s $500 million — half a 
billion dollars — of outside money that came in to replace the debt 
and build a new company. Brand new paper mill, a new PAPCO 
operation tied to it, a new chemical plant beside it, and expansion 
plans for even more. And we want to have free  

trade with the United States so that we can sell that bacon in North 
Battleford and that paper from prince Albert right through to the 
New York market. Now that might not be relevant today in 
1986-87 in The Battlefords and P.A., but I would venture to say 
it’s as irrelevant as 1970 with respect to what went on at PAPCO. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Premier, earlier this evening you said, 
pardon me, you said that there were never any bouquets being 
passed out from this side. Well I’ve passed out bouquets on 
several occasions in this House for all the investment that’s been 
made in The Battlefords. I want you to know we in The 
Battlefords appreciate that. 
 
I’ve asked you about 1970; I asked you about 1975. I asked you 
about 1980 as to whether or not there was a profit or a loss with 
the Prince Albert Pulp Company. Do you have the figures, Mr. 
Premier, whether there was a profit or a loss in 1981? That’s the 
year, Mr. Premier, just before you became government. 
 
My questions have been short and concise, and I think people in 
the province would appreciate hearing some answers from you 
once in a while that were short and concise instead of spewing out 
the political rhetoric that you’ve been doing this evening. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, is: do you have the figures as to 
whether there was a profit or a loss in 1981 at the Prince Albert 
pulp mill? And if so, what was that profit or loss? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Very briefly, Mr. Chairman, I don’t have 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. I think I’ve ruled on that 
already, and I don’t think that that question is in order. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I’ll respect your ruling because of the 
position you hold in this House, Mr. Chairman. But that Premier 
over there asserted that the Prince Albert Pulp Company lost 
$91,000 a day. He can stand in this House and make that kind of 
an assertion, yet can’t document with one bit of fact in this 
legislature here this evening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — How do you expect people to have credibility in 
what you say if your officials here can advise you that there was a 
loss of $91,000 a day, yet you don’t have any of the statistics. You 
don’t know that, and I maintain to you that it is not true that the 
Prince Albert Pulp company or PAPCO lost $91,000 a day. If you 
want to make those assertions, put those figures before us in the 
legislature in your estimates, or else stick to the estimates, as you 
say, in Executive Council and don’t stray all over the board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Must have touched a nerve there, Douglas. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well the Premier says he touched a  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3905 
 
 

nerve. That brings up another interesting point, Mr. Premier. It’s 
just the whole sort of respect or lack of respect that your caucus 
seems to have for this institution that we stand in here this 
evening. 
 
You mentioned I sat as a member of parliament in Ottawa. I was 
very pleased to serve the people of The Battlefords-Meadow Lake 
at that time, and one of your colleagues, John Gormley, offered 
me early retirement in 1984, which I graciously took, because 
that’s what the people said should happen. 
 
But I can remember during the term I did sit there, with people 
like Walter Dinsdale, the Conservative member of parliament 
from Manitoba, the late Walter Dinsdale, dean of the federal 
parliament. He had some respect for the institution and there was 
some fairness in the way the institution operated. If one side could 
stray, the other side could also stray. 
 
People like the late Walter Baker, another person who held some 
respect of the institution; George Hees, who is still there —
members from your same party that show some respect. And I just 
don’t think that you give any guidance to having your members 
maintain respect in this Assembly. 
 
And I don’t know how we can operate when there’s one set of 
rules for one side of the House and another set of rules for the 
other side of the House. And if you can have that . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. I’m very close to 
interpreting that statement as a challenge to the Chair. And I think 
the hon. member should, at this point, cease and desist from that 
line, or I’m going to have to call you to order. You may continue. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I believe you did call me to order, and I 
respect the ruling that you make. I’m very happy you didn’t 
interpret it as me challenging the Chair, Mr. Chairman, because I 
wasn’t challenging the Chair. And I have no intention of 
challenging the Chair here this evening. 
 
But I can think of some courtesies that are offered in most 
legislatures and parliaments, which are almost totally wiped out 
here. I can think . . . And it has nothing to do with the rulings, has 
nothing to do with chairman or Speaker. But the courtesy, when 
our leader gave to your office one morning back in June or July a 
resolution honouring the 25th anniversary of medicare in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and gave to your office as a courtesy 
between parliamentarians or people who should be statesmen, and 
he said to you, Mr. Premier, in that correspondence, that he would 
rise at the first opportunity after question period to put forward the 
resolution — and, I’m sure, hoping that your party would show 
some respect to that as well — what happened right after question 
period on that particular day? The member from Redberry stands 
up and reads out the resolution, word for word, as if to take credit 
for it under false pretences, deceiving people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier. 
 
And so maybe I was wrong in wording rules for one side,  

rules for the other side. I was wrong in saying that. It was a 
misinterpretation on my part, and I apologize to the chairman. 
 
The point I’m trying to make, Mr. Premier, is that the legislature 
can’t operate under those kinds of traditions. For many, many 
years, the parliamentary and the legislative system has built up. 
And it’s not only the written rules that count, it’s the rules of 
courtesy, it’s the conventions and the tradition that’s been built up 
over the years. And your government does not respect that in any 
degree whatsoever. 
 
And I would ask you if you would give leadership to the 
government, through your position as the head of the Executive 
Council, to make sure that there is some respect put back into the 
institution that we serve in. And if we can have respect in it, then 
also the people of Saskatchewan can. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I will ask the hon. member 
to stand in his place and apologize when I point out that the 25th 
anniversary, whatever . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You don’t even know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, come on, just let me say, it was 
gazetted way in advance of the Leader of the Opposition or 
anybody even bringing a resolution to me. It was already 
published. We had already acknowledged it. And I will expect an 
apology from you. 
 
We passed it in cabinet and it was gazetted and the fact that we’re 
going to celebrate the anniversary of medicare was out long before 
you even raised it. so you stand there like a sanctimonious, 
self-righteous socialist again. 
 
We had already passed it in cabinet, and it was printed and 
gazetted, and then you raised it, and you said, for Heaven’s sake, 
my gosh, you didn’t respect the fact that we raised it. And that’s 
the very fact. We’ll dig it up for you and show you that it was 
gazetted before you even thought about it. We passed it. 
 
So, I mean, don’t . . . You know, you stand there like this is really 
something that we did left-handed or forgot about. We did it and 
raised it in cabinet and gazetted it before it was ever raised in this 
legislature and before anything got to my office before a 
resolution. That’s the facts. 
 
So if we acknowledged it and we had it on paper, then we’re 
entitled to make the resolution like you are. In fact, we did it ahead 
of you. 
 
So don’t come on my case because we followed you. You were 
after us in terms of acknowledging the recognition of medicare, 
and you were after us with respect to extra billing, and you’re 
behind us in terms of a lot of other things. Okay? 
 
So I am not at all intimidated by you standing there and saying, 
well, for Heaven’s sake, we haven’t treated you fairly. If it was 
dealt with in cabinet and it was gazetted, then you, sir, owe me and 
this whole bunch an apology. 
 
(2045) 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3906 
 
 

Mr. Anguish: — I certainly will not apologize for the statements 
I’ve made here this evening, Mr. Premier. I have no intention of 
doing that. The facts that I related to you, if you discussed it in 
cabinet, fine, but the coincidence was awful great on the day that 
the resolution was put forward. And in most institutions where 
there is respect for the system, it could have been a joint 
resolution, showing some sort of support from both sides of the 
House for medicare on its 25th anniversary. 
 
So you wonder why we sometimes question the credibility. I’ve 
had one of my colleagues here get the consolidated statement of 
income and retained earnings for the Prince Albert Pulp Company, 
ending December 31, 1981. In that year, there was a net income 
— net income, 1981 — of $24.132 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Whose figures are those? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The member from Cut Knife-Lloyd says, whose 
figures are those. Peat Marwick Mitchell & Company. It’s an 
auditor’s report to the shareholders dated February 12, 1982. And 
I would ask that the page take this and table those figures 
. . .(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, oh, are you questioning the 
integrity of Peat Marwick Mitchell & Company in their audit? 
They’re private sector auditors, Mr. Premier. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, they’re making some kind of 
accusations, and I can’t pick it up. So if they would just be quiet 
over there and when I finish, then the Premier can respond to these 
in whichever way he wants to. 
 
But the point is, Mr. Chairman, it’s hard for people to take 
credibly what the Premier says when he can stand and say oh, 
PAPCO is losing $91,000 a day, yet the financial statements — 
one of which I sent over to you — shows a net income for the year 
ending 1981, December 31, 1981, of $24.132 million. And it goes 
on in the statement for the 12 months ended March 31, 1980, with 
a net income of $23,461,879. Now anybody with any degree of 
accounting would understand that you can’t be losing $91,000 a 
day, Mr. Chairman. So I’ve got those figures. 
 
You make the assertion that we lost $91,000 a day, that the people 
of Saskatchewan lost $91,000 a day, but you don’t have the 
figures in the past that would substantiate that. The two years I can 
get just prior to you taking office don’t substantiate that. When did 
it start losing money? As soon as you took office it started losing 
money because you drove it into the ground. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member . . . And 
we’ll go back and dig up the information because we’re certainly 
not going to let you make a point that covers up your big loss. 
Now I will go back and I will confirm these figures, and I don’t 
have them all tonight, but obviously you came with some figures 
of your own. From what I recall about the debate some time ago is 
that you never paid the interest and you never charged interest to 
that pulp company. You borrowed the money and bought the pulp 
company, and then said, okay, do an audited statement but don’t 
pay any of that back and don’t pay the bankers off — just like you 
did potash, like  

land bank. 
 
Land bank is a typical example and I’m familiar with that one 
because we just finished it. You borrowed the money from land 
bank, borrowed it from the banks, and you never paid them back. 
You borrowed the money, and then you go to a farmer and say, 
well how’s your audited statement? And the guy says, well I’m 
making some money on land bank. I get a nice little lease — 
okay? — and I’m making some money. And you say, hey, look at 
this, it’s profitable. But you never paid it back — the same with 
PAPCO. 
 
If you go back and look . . . and we’ll check this out. If they didn’t 
pay for that borrowed money and that wasn’t included in here, and 
obviously there was this big debt. Nobody was making the 
payments — $91,000 a day in interest and loss. Okay? For 
Heaven’s sakes, my friend, you can’t have it both ways. Who was 
going to pay for that borrowed money? 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, just let me say this: the hon. member knows 
that you lost all this money and he knows, as a matter of fact, that 
you didn’t pay it back. And he knows there’s interest on the debt 
as there is in potash, land, and the pulp company. So I’ll dig up the 
information; I’ll have my officials go for it. And if, in fact, you 
didn’t pay it back, then I’ll expect an apology on that account too. 
Okay. So you’ll owe me two of them. 
 
We’ll dig up the information and that will be two apologies, and 
we’ll square it with two cups of coffee. Okay? You and I can meet 
downtown, but you will owe me two as you were wrong on both 
accounts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — My constituents would be very upset if they 
caught me downtown having coffee with you, Mr. Premier, and 
apologizing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I think, Mr. Premier, you slam the credibility of 
the private accounting firm by not accepting the statements that 
they prepared. There was no pressure or coercion from the 
government. I hope you’re not implying that, because if you are, 
then there should be an apology from you to this side of the House 
because we never coerced people into doing things that they didn’t 
want to do. 
 
Mr. Premier, some of my other colleagues want on here this 
evening, so I have a couple of other things I’d like to address. It’s 
just the whole partisanship nature which you operate. Any time 
you want to strike a committee to go out around the province, if it 
was a serious attempt to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Are you 
keeping order in the House here, Mr. Chairman? Are you keeping 
order in the House? 
 
Well thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Actually, what we’ll go on to is . . . Mr. Premier, I think that many 
people in the province of Saskatchewan are disappointed in what 
they’ve seen happen. You tell them  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3907 
 
 

one thing, you turn out the propaganda to people in the province 
but statistics — anybody who looks at statistics — tell them a 
totally different story. And what people feel in their pocket is they 
feel less services and a heavier tax burden and a government that 
doesn’t show much compassion for the state of affairs that they are 
in — and people are in very trying times. 
 
I would like to know, Mr. Premier, what your views are on 
diversification of the energy sector in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I know that you rely very heavily on your 
megaprojects and your heavy oil upgrader here in Regina, the 
NewGrade project, which I think is a very good project. That’s 
another bouquet and that’ll maybe be the last one that you’d ever 
get from me. 
 
But I want to know, Mr. Premier, whether you see room for 
another upgrader in the province of Saskatchewan, and whether or 
not there can be greater diversification in the province in terms of 
our energy so that all regions can become a little more 
self-sufficient. Like, Saskatchewan can quite well be a province of 
regions. Canada being a country of regions, the province of 
Saskatchewan can also be a province of regions. And I’m 
wondering, Mr. Premier, if you have any plans on diversifying in 
the province of Saskatchewan to the extent that regions of the 
province can better take care of themselves in food production; 
better take care of themselves in their energy requirements and the 
communications within those industries. I think that there are 
many areas in the province, in the wood area, where we can have 
wood fired electrical generators. I know they got one that’s started 
up over in Lac la Biche, vertical axis turbines in some of the 
northern rivers — things like that. 
 
Do you have a view of Saskatchewan that’s a really truly 
decentralized province, where regions of the province can take 
care of themselves better? Or do you believe in going the way of 
all bigger and better, and moving people into centralized locations 
in the province? And I certainly hope that you have a view of the 
province that is more conducive to the way in which 
Saskatchewan people have lived over many, many years since this 
province came into being. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, that’s a pretty good question, Mr. 
Chairman. I was going to say when I invited my hon. friend out 
for coffee, we should go with the chamber of commerce from 
North Battleford, because they’re good. When we go our for 
coffee, let’s go out in North Battleford with the chamber of 
commerce — okay? — so that you and I can both be with them, 
because I know that you’re big fans of the chamber. 
 
In my discussion with the chambers of commerce and boards of 
trade across the province, the whole question of diversification 
comes up all the time. That’s one of the reasons that we have 
implemented the rural gas distribution system province-wide; our 
individual line service for telephones, so people can have 
immediate communication; why we’re burying power lines across 
the province for economic reasons and safety reasons and aesthetic 
reasons for rural Saskatchewan — about $1.5 billion in those three 
projects alone; ethanol projects; feeder associations; paper, that 
we’re doing; recreational vehicles in North Battleford; bacon that 
we’re looking at  

there. 
 
And yes, in terms of oil exploration and processing and upgrading, 
wherever we can encourage it. We’ve got projects going with 
Mitimitsu of Japan on Kindersley heavy crude, to look at the 
possibility of upgrading. We are exploring the whole possibility 
with other companies. You’ve seen major exploration. 
 
So whether it’s pulp or paper or bacon or processing, 
manufacturing, turbines, rural infrastructure, community 
corporations . . . And please, let’s not forget, crop insurance has 
moved out of Regina, going to Melville. And the agricultural 
credit corporation is moved to Swift Current, out of Regina. And 
science and technology is lock, stock, and barrel in Saskatoon, out 
of Regina. 
 
And we’ve expanded facilities around the province in terms of 
technical education, technical education so that people can have 
education. For example, your old riding and home of Meadow 
Lake, we’ve got technical education going on there. 
Decentralization and distance education, associated with rural 
people and rural life-style. 
 
And somebody just mentioned the Sask Water Corporation moved 
form here to the city of Moose Jaw. So yes, diversification and 
rural support in building is extremely important to us, Mr. 
Chairman. We’re spending literally billions of dollars in support of 
rural Saskatchewan, not only in terms of support in drought and 
flood and low interest rate payments and protection for farmers, 
but for community development, education, and indeed health 
care. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a few 
comments to make. And I want to address the Premier in terms of 
his credibility, or lack thereof, and that of his Executive Council as 
well. You don’t want to talk about the profit and loss statement of 
PAPCO, apparently, and that’s fine. 
 
But I just want to share with you a few facts that the people of 
Prince Albert are very clear with, and the people that work in there 
as well — people who have worked in accounting in that mill, and 
people who are familiar with the operation of it. And I think, Mr. 
Premier, if you were to be fair about this, you would understand 
that what they say about that mill is true, and they don’t believe 
your $91,000 a day figure any more that we do. 
 
I want to share with you a little piece out of the Toronto Globe and 
Mail where one of the former executives of that corporation 
indicated that in two years that that debt could have been retired 
on that mill. And I want to also share with you that in the last 
third, the third and the fourth quarter in 1986, just after you sold 
that mill — or, pardon me, gave it — to Weyerhaeuser, that thing 
returned profits of some $15 million. 
 
I want to, as well, share with you, Mr. Minister, or Mr. Premier, 
that your minister in Crown corporation estimates, when I asked if 
he had an independent audit done, an independent appraisal done 
of the worth of that  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3908 
 
 

mill, couldn’t tell me if he had or if he couldn’t. One of your 
former executive tells us that they sold it for $100 million less than 
what the worth of that mill was. But you don’t want to talk about 
that. You still talk about your rhetoric hype, the $91,000 a day that 
PAPCO apparently lost, to your figures that you spent hundreds of 
thousands of dollars trying to sell throughout this province, but 
that nobody believes you. 
 
And I’ve got a little piece of paper in my hand that gives the 1986 
industry performance of the pulp and paper industry which you 
could’ve had access to if you were interested. It gave the forecast 
for 1987, which indicated the pulp and paper industry was going 
to have a very good year and return very great profits. But you 
want to talk about ideologues. That’s what you are. You would 
sell any asset, any Crown corporation in this province just for 
strictly ideological reasons with no clear understanding of what to 
do with the profits from a Crown and how to turn it back into 
health care and whatever. But that’s you. You’re ideologues. 
That’s what you are. 
 
And I say you’re on the same track with the sale of the plywood 
plant, the same track of the plywood plant in Hudson Bay. And 
I’m not afraid to stand up here, Mr. Premier, and to say to the 
people of this province that my belief is that you’re going to 
undervalue that mill when you sell it; and I’m also saying on 
behalf of the people of this province that you’re going to be giving 
away another very valuable asset. 
 
And I say to you as well that I wouldn’t be surprised if you’ve got 
one of your board of directors involved in the sale and in the 
purchase of that particular plant. But that’s the credibility you’ve 
got and that’s why you’re 24 per cent in the polls behind the New 
Democrats in this province. And that’s why you indicated earlier 
that when my colleagues were beating on you, you were doing the 
same to a former administration when they were downhill. And 
I’m telling you, that you’re on the way down the same as what that 
former administration was. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I don’t believe, I don’t believe that you’ve got 
the courage to correct it by delivering an honest, a reasonable, a 
business-like government because you haven’t done it in the five 
and a half years you’ve been in power, and I don’t believe you’ve 
got the ability to turn that around. 
 
And I just want to ask you, if you are aware, Mr. Premier, I only 
have one question for you tonight. Only one question tonight, and 
if you’ll quit yapping, you might be able to hear my question. And 
I ask you this, Mr. Premier: do you know what the market value of 
the Hudson Bay plywood plant is? Do you care? I don’t believe 
you care but I want to know if you’ve had an independent 
appraisal done of the assets of that particular plywood mill. 
 
And as well, I want an answer to the question as to who you’re 
going to sell it to. And I would like to know if you’re going to 
have some of the management or some of the board of directors of 
that mill involved in the purchase of the mill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I got this  

information and I’ll share it with the hon. member — if you’ll just 
bear . . . it will just take a minute — from North Battleford, or The 
Battlefords. This is the Saskatchewan Gazette and it’s June 12, 
1987. And in there on “Special Days”, we have it here, just so the 
hon. member knows: 
 
The following day has been designated by the Minister of Health, 
Province of Saskatchewan, Medicare Day, July 2nd, 1987. 
 
That was published on June 12. Then in the legislature on June 30, 
the Hon. Allan Blakeney stands up and moves a motion with 
respect to celebrating the anniversary of medicare. Now I think 
you owe me an apology. 
 
On the 12, it was gazetted. On the 12, it was gazetted, and we said 
that we would celebrate Medicare Day, July 2, 1987, and it’s 
published for the whole province to look at. And you get on my 
case because we have a motion that is apparently the same as your 
leader. 
 
Now you go around and tell on your friends’ stories all the time. I 
mean, I know that you’re pretty good at it. You make up all this 
stuff and you go into the coffee shops and other places, and you 
tell them. If this is the kind of stuff your making up to them, I 
mean that’s not fair. It’s not fair. Right? this was published before 
you even raised it here in the legislature, or your leader did. So 
you don’t . . . you know, you’ve got to play ball reasonably. So 
when we go for coffee, maybe I’ll have one more cup with you 
when we got to North Battleford there, and tell your hon. friends. 
 
With respect to the value of a particular project, I’ll have to go get 
the appraised value of something. But I can say to the hon. 
member . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Which project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, of any of it. I mean, I don’t have the 
numbers here of every particular project, but I’ll go dig it up . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You were asked today. You were asked 
days ago. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, well I’ll go find out. But I would just 
say to the hon. member, look it, you didn’t sell it, and you didn’t 
want to sell it, and you accumulated a large debt, and it was losing 
money every day. And it’s not the workers’ fault. Don’t hang that 
one there. When you put that kind of debt on the workers, they 
can’t pay it off. That’s the problem. 
 
You put this kind of debt on the potash corporation, you can’t pay 
it off. You put that kind of debt on the landowners, they can’t pay 
it off. It’s not the people. It’s your administration that borrowed 
money from banks, bought these assets, and then said to the 
people, you pay for them. And then when they couldn’t pay, you 
said, we will eat the debt; we won’t even charge you so you can go 
to peat Marwick and Mitchell and say, oh, look at the profit we’re 
making because we give them the company. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, we all know the philosophy of those 
opposite. I mean, clearly they’re into the business of buying up 
everything; they like that. I mean, so we’re not  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3909 
 
 

going to agree. They want to buy farms and potash companies and 
pulp mills and all this stuff. You do that and we don’t. We put it 
back into the private sector so that they can make money; you put 
it in the public sector so it can lose money. And you’ve been doing 
that for decades . . . well, for years and years and years all over the 
world; it’s classic. I mean, find me a socialist country that’s 
making all this money. I mean, we can look at 67 crop failures in a 
row in the Soviet union. I mean, it’s all run by bureaucrats, right? 
And it’s controlled by the government - we will tell you what to 
plant and when you plant and all the rest of this stuff. I mean, I 
suppose we can travel world-wide to find out. 
 
But let’s just put it in perspective. You agree that the government 
should own the pulp mill; I feel that the private sector should own 
it. And we might as well agree to disagree because you lost money 
in it; we’re making money. It’s not the people’s fault, it’s just a 
different financial arrangement. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, a couple of points, Mr. Premier . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Send him out for one for me, too. 
 
The date you refer to, June 12, when it was gazetted, you 
discussed the resolution in cabinet. That’s what you said here this 
evening. Well you said then that the exact wording was related on 
June 30 by Leader of the Opposition. Is that correct? Is that what 
you said, Mr. Premier? 
 
Well what I heard you say was June 12, it was gazetted; therefore, 
it had been passed by cabinet. June 30, you referred to a Blakeney 
resolution. Well, we’re obviously talking about two different 
things, so I’m certainly not prepared to apologize to you because 
in my earlier accusation, it was not our leader that stood up in the 
House, it was your whip that stood up in the House on the motion 
I was talking about. So we’re obviously on with two different 
things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — And I would like to go back just a bit. The one 
concluding thing that I have to say, Mr. Premier, is on the debts 
going back to this $91,000 a day. And you’ve never given any 
justification to the public of this legislature for those accusations 
you make, and you should owe me an apology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — In fact, the apology should be for something 
more than that. Let’s look at the record, let’s look at the record — 
your own documents, Mr. Premier. The figures show that on 
March 31, 1982 the total debt in the province — the total debt in 
the province — was $3.5 billion. After a few years of your 
administration, six years later, March 31, 1988, the total debt will 
be $10.9 billion — an increase of $7.4 billion, Mr. Premier. 
You’re the one with six consecutive accumulated deficits in the 
province, now totalling $3.4 billion, and there was no accumulated 
deficit before. So I’d like you to stand up and do some more 
ranting and raving about debt and deficit because you’re the expert 
on it. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will just reiterate to 
my good friend from The Battlefords, my coffee partner here. 
Clearly, if you’d have taken the $800 million that you borrowed in 
the ’70s and just put it in the bank — it’s over $2.3 billion — there 
wouldn’t be an accumulated debt at all. Now you borrowed money 
for potash and it’s lost. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That is intellectual stupidity, never mind 
dishonesty. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The member from Regina North East can’t 
stand the heat, Mr. Chairman. Look, you’ll get a chance. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re the economist; you’re supposed to 
be the expert. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well my M.B.A. and my Ph.D. are two 
more than you have. Okay? 
 
Mr. Chairman, just let me point out that in PAPCO . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Intellectual snobbery. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, they don’t like the truth. Mr. 
Chairman, they don’t like the truth. let me say, the Crown 
Management Board . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. Order! All members of 
this House get the opportunity to enter into the debate without 
hollering from their seats. I would ask members to allow the 
Premier to make his comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, let me just say to my hon. 
colleagues that the Crown Management Board invested a hundred 
and six . . . $80 million to purchase 100 per cent of PAPCO by 
December 31, 1980. From 1981 to 1985, it incurred another 
operating loss of $42 million. In addition, the Crown Management 
Board incurred interest expenses of $124 million. 
 
Now when you put that together with the fact that it is not making 
money, and the interest and the money you borrowed was not 
returned, and you never paid the interest on it, like you didn’t pay 
the interest on the potash and you didn’t pay the interest on the 
land bank and you didn’t pay the interest on all this money, but 
you kept saying we have a balanced budget, didn’t you? Right? 
 
You borrowed all this money, billions in the Crowns, and you say, 
but it’s balanced, but you never paid it back. Do you get my point? 
You never paid it back. You never paid any of that money back, 
and then today you say, well the potash corporation, for Heaven’s 
sakes, it’s only 4 or 5 or $800 million in the hole. Well, who 
bought it? I didn’t buy it; no member here bought it — you bought 
it. 
 
Do you know what? It was already here. PAPCO was here, the 
land was here, the potash companies were here, all those assets 
were here. And you went to New York, borrowed American 
money at an exchange rate that was floating and bought what was 
already here. Now if that  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3910 
 
 

isn’t classic socialism. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . think our philosophy differs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I would think so. I would think maybe 
it does. The member from The Battlefords says his philosophy’s 
different than mine, Mr. Chairman. We should just agree to 
disagree. 
 
He believes in buying the assets that are already here with 
borrowed money, which is the truth, right? You borrowed the 
money from New York bankers at a floating exchange rate to buy 
what was already here, and you said to the people, isn’t this good 
because the people own it. Why didn’t you buy the roads? Why 
didn’t you buy the lakes? You could have bought the legislature 
back. You could have borrowed and bought the whole darn 
province. Okay? 
 
We are putting it into the private sector like it was when the 
province was started. Farmers want to own their own land. People 
want to build their own plants. People want to build bacon plants 
and recreational vehicle manufacturing plants. They don’t want 
the province to buy it all back. This is classic. 
 
And now I know why we have the legislature sitting 110 or 11 
days. Finally we get to the nub of it. You want to buy the province 
and borrow the money from New York and not pay it back. We 
want to give it to the people and let them run it, and it’s classic 
difference, Mr. Chairman. 
 
For Heaven’s sakes, they lost all this money, and they said well, 
well, well, well. We shouldn’t have maybe borrowed at such high 
interest rates, they said. They wouldn’t help anybody else with 
interest rates, but they would go to New York, spend $800 million, 
never pay any of it back, put the burden on the workers in P.A., or 
land bank, or the potash mines, blame the workers, say oh, we’re 
not making it — never paid it back, and then see the debt 
accumulate here, and say oh, but it’s somebody else’s fault. Well I 
didn’t borrow the money to buy those assets; you did, and you’ll 
have to eat that history for a long time. 
 
(2115) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, 
no other premier in the history of this province has assaulted our 
health care system such as you have — not even Ross Thatcher, 
the Liberal premier of the late ’60s. Mr. Minister, or Mr. Premier, 
you will recall the kind of price Ross Thatcher paid when his 
government decided to attack and undermine our health care 
system. 
 
Mr. Premier, you led your government to victory, to power in 
April of 1982 with some guarantees. You guaranteed the people of 
this province that you would expand the health care system and 
have a health care system superior to any other part of this country 
or this world. And, Mr. Minister, that guarantee is absolute is 
absolutely worthless today — absolutely worthless. It means 
absolutely nothing. Your word means nothing. Your word — the 
country boy from rural Saskatchewan’s word —  

means nothing to the people of this province. 
 
And I want to review what you and your colleagues have done to 
our health care system in the last year. And this is for this year 
alone, Mr. Premier. you have cut the health care budget by $18.6 
million. You say that you’ve increased the health budget by $33 
million, and that is simply not true. What we have in this province 
is an $18.6 million cut. 
 
You say that you’ve had to cut the prescription drug plan because 
senior citizens in this province were abusing drugs. Mr. Premier, 
that’s not true. That’s another untruth on the part of you, and the 
people of this province don’t accept it. You say that you had to cut 
the children’s school-based dental program because parents were 
asking that dental therapists no longer look after their children’s 
teeth and that this particular health care service to the public be 
transferred to private dentists. 
 
And once again, Mr. Premier, when we asked your Minister of 
Health to table the letters from parents in this province asking for 
the school-based children’s dental plan to be eliminated, he sat in 
his chair for some 10 minutes and didn’t do that because he 
couldn’t. Parents were not asking for the school-based children’s 
dental plan to be eliminated. 
 
Mr. Premier, your minister says on your behalf that the health care 
budget for hospitals has increased significantly. And when we 
examine the increase under budget items for hospital funding, we 
find that it is only increased by one-half of 1 per cent. And this is 
while inflation rate in this province is running at 6 per cent, higher 
than any other part of the country. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, hospitals in this province are sadly and grossly 
underfunded, and health workers in this province are telling us that 
they’re getting out of the health care profession because they can 
no longer take the stress of what your underfunding to the system 
is doing to them. 
 
Mr. Premier, your minister and your government has cut rural 
mental health services. There used to be a time in this province 
when rural people had access to rural mental health clinics. Mr. 
Premier, that is no longer the case because a number of those 
clinics have been closed. Particularly at a time when the 
agricultural crisis in this province is deeper and worse than any 
other time in our history, farm families need access to those kinds 
of services and, Mr. Premier, they’re no longer available to many 
farm families. 
 
Mr. Premier, your minister has also admitted that your 
government cut 16 positions in the public health profession in this 
province. Mr. Premier, that means that there are families in this 
province that no longer have access to pre-natal and post-natal 
care. In fact, Mr. Premier, in your own constituency of Estevan 
there have been no pre-natal courses held in that city delivered by 
public health nurses since the end of June because of your health 
care cuts. 
 
We also have a situation, Mr. Premier, where a number of families 
no longer have access to post-natal health care because the public 
health nurses do not have the time and  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3911 
 
 

they are so understaffed that they cannot possibly visit every new 
mother who has just had a baby. 
 
In addition, Mr. Premier, your government has increased home 
care fees to the elderly and the sick and the disabled by 66 per cent 
— 66 per cent at one time. And, Mr. Premier, at a time when you 
are cutting back on the construction of nursing homes in this 
province, we have a situation where senior citizens are telling us 
— and I’m sure they’re telling you — that they can no longer 
afford that particular health care service that allowed them to 
maintain some form of independence in their own home as a result 
of the service that was delivered by home care across this 
province. 
 
And then we have a situation where nursing fee increases have 
gone up to an extent that many, many senior citizens have only 
$100 a month to spend on all of their personal effects. In fact, Mr. 
Premier, in this year alone, we’ve experienced an 18 per cent 
increase in nursing home— an 18 per cent increase in a 
seven-month period. How is that fair, Mr. Premier? 
 
Mr. Premier, in addition, when we asked about speech therapist 
positions in this province we were advised by the Minister of 
Health that many of those positions had been cut. At a time when 
children who are young and disabled require those kinds of 
services, your government is cutting back. And I can assure you 
that a cut-back today will mean more expense in the days ahead 
because of lost services and lost opportunity for those children. 
 
We also have a situation where the audiologist positions in this 
province have been cut. We have senior citizens and hearing 
impaired people waiting for 6, 7, 8, 12 months to get into see an 
audiologist at the hearing aid plan. Now, Mr. Minister, at a time 
when senior citizens and hearing impaired people are hard 
pressed, they no longer have access to that service because of the 
hearing aid waiting list. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, many of those people are finding themselves 
having to go to a private entrepreneur for a hearing aid at a much 
increased cost to them. A hearing aid provided by the hearing aid 
plan is offered to the public at cost. People who go to see the 
private industry are paying 1,200 to $1,500 for an aid. 
 
Mr. Premier, many of those people are telling us that they can’t 
afford not to hear but they can’t afford to go see a private 
audiologist or a private entrepreneur who is providing this kind of 
service. 
 
In addition, Mr. Premier, your minister has cut — and your 
government has cut — physiotherapy services to disabled 
children. We’ve had letter after letter after letter from parents who 
are telling us that while their child used to receive physiotherapy 
services two or three times a week, that they’ve been cut back to 
one or two times a year. And in a province like ours, Mr. Premier, 
where health care is a number one priority of the people of this 
province, that is totally unacceptable. Totally unacceptable. When 
you cut physiotherapy services to disabled children now, we are 
going to pay through our health care system at a later date for 
orthopedic surgery and all of the other kinds of services that will 
be needed  

because these children have not had the opportunity to be 
independent. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want you to justify to the people of this province 
why, when you know full well that health is an important priority 
of this province, why your government has cut back our health 
care system to such an extent that you are frightening a whole lot 
of people because they no longer feel secure in knowing that 
regardless of how sick they are, or how low their income is — 
regardless of all the kinds of personal factors —that they will 
always have access to a health care system in this province. And 
that’s simply not the case today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would say at the 
outset, in 1982 we campaigned that we would have the very best 
health care system in Canada, Mr. Chairman, and we do have the 
very best health care system in all of Canada in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And the hon. member knows that. She can’t find a 
better health care system any place else in the nation. And whether 
it’s drug, or dentist, or hospitals, or care, there’s only one province 
in all of Canada that spends more money per capita and that’s 
Alberta and they happen to have more money. But certainly that’s 
not the case in any other jurisdiction. 
 
We have an increase, 63 per cent expenditures over the NDP and 
if you take real dollars — that’s constant dollars taking out 
inflation — real dollars since 1982, we have increased real health 
spending by 15.7 per cent, real dollar increases. During the last 
five years of your administration the real increase was less than 
half of that, at 7.2 per cent. And when you left office, this province 
had seen a real growth in health expenditures over and above 
inflation of about 4 per cent. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I point out to the hon. member, your record 
when you were in power was not good and you ranked way 
behind other provinces. And the record of our administration is up 
in terms of constant dollars and real dollars above anything that 
you had and any other jurisdiction in Canada, except for the 
province of Alberta. We have increased our health care spending 
more than any of the four western provinces. Since 1982-83 real 
growth in the West has averaged 9.4 per cent a year, and in 
Saskatchewan it’s 15.7 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I point that out to the hon. member. Now she 
can say . . . We may disagree where we spend that money, and 
that’s fair enough, but you cannot say to the people that we’re not 
spending more money in health. And don’t say that, because it 
isn’t true. You shouldn’t tell seniors or anybody else that we are 
not spending more. Go out and say, the Premier of Saskatchewan 
is spending more money on health than he’s ever spent, or we’ve 
ever spent in the history of the province. And that’s accurate. And 
you know that’s true —more money than every, ever before. 
 
And you can say they removed extra billing, you can say they took 
the freeze off nursing homes, the moratorium that you had on. 
We’ve got 2,000 more spaces. You an say we’ve got more money 
for seniors, $500 per  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3912 
 
 

individual; $700 a couple for low income seniors. You didn’t have 
that. And we could build new rehabilitation centres and additions 
to University Hospital, additions to St. Paul’s Hospital, building a 
brand-new City Hospital, additional to Pasqua Hospital, the 
General Hospital, a rehabilitation centre here, CAT scans that we 
have traded potash for — none of that was done under the NDP. 
 
And you run around and say the premier isn’t spending as much? 
Now, come on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You didn’t say that? 
Okay. You said that you don’t agree where we’re spending all this 
money. Well, let’s agree on one thing. We’re spending a lot more 
money than has ever been spent in the history of Saskatchewan 
and in real terms, and more than anybody in western Canada in the 
last four years, in real terms. And anybody watching this on 
television know two things: we’re spending more money than you 
did and more money in real terms than anybody across western 
Canada; and the best expenditures per capita in all of Canada, 
except for Alberta. And they happen to have a heritage fund, and 
there isn’t one here. 
 
Now with new hospitals and new facilities and new CAT scans 
and new facilities for senior citizens like nursing care spaces, now 
we are beginning to get to where we should be. And you left a 
legacy of a lot of rhetoric and not much expenditure. And people 
were saying, well they talk a lot about it, but where’s the money? 
And where’s the allocation to health care? 
 
Now your new leader, your new leader says — and I quote form 
him or I paraphrase from him — he said, we should ration 
technology because all it does is cost more money and it goes into 
doctors’ salaries. The member from Riversdale, your new leader, 
what’s he say about new technology and health care? I want the 
people in this province to know that. The new NDP leader, the 
man from Riversdale, says, ration technology and health care 
because all it is is an excuse to go give increases in salaries to 
doctors. He’s on the record of saying that. 
 
What does he say about senior citizen accommodations? Don’t 
build; and keep the seniors out of institutions because it’s a waste 
of money. That’s what he says. That sounds to me like the late 
’70s and early ’80s when the NDP and the member from 
Saskatoon South said, waiting lines in Saskatoon are a sign of 
efficiency in health care. I mean, he’s on the record of saying that. 
 
(2130) 
 
Now if your new leader is saying, no new technology because we 
got to ration it for seniors; no new facilities because we shouldn’t 
put seniors into facilities, it’s not the way to go — and he’s on the 
record. And the former minister of health for the NDP is saying, 
long line-ups are a sign of efficiency. And you look at your real 
record and believe me, I’ll go into every nursing home in this 
province, I’ll show them your record of building and expenditures, 
and it’s pathetic compared to this one. And you know it. 
 
Every single nursing home is going to get that information plus 
your new leader’s attitude, plus the NDP’s minister’s of Health 
attitude about waiting lines and efficiency and  

being scrimpy about money and health. Why didn’t you remove 
extra billing? Where were you? Medicare — you wouldn’t 
remove extra billing, you’d charge all those senior citizens and 
frighten them. You did and you’re NDP. But you wouldn’t touch 
extra billing because you wouldn’t have the courage to deal with 
it. You can talk but you didn’t spend the money, you didn’t build 
the nursing homes, you didn’t build the new hospitals, you didn’t 
create the new rehabilitation centre, you didn’t put in CAT scans. 
You just talk — and talk is cheap, young lady, and you know that. 
 
So we can go back and forth and we can talk about your rhetoric 
and your expenditures. You can talk about Manitoba’s, you can 
talk about the history, but let’s look at today. 
 
Your expenditures compared to our expenditures are a paltry 
amount of money. My friend from Saskatoon Nutana . . . and I 
know that riding fairly well. I’ve knocked doors there a couple of 
times; I have a lot of good friends there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It didn’t do any good, Grant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — It did me a lot of good. It got me right to 
where I am today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I had the courage to go run, just to provide a 
little moral support for my colleagues. 
 
The following — if I could share with the hon. member — the 
following are the quotes from, and I can’t use his name, but the 
member from Riversdale, August-September 1985, on the issue of 
hospital products and technology. In that magazine called Hospital 
Products & Technology magazine, the member from Riversdale 
made the remarks in his speech at an annual meeting of the 
Canadian Hospital Association, and it says: 
 

(The member from Riversdale) did not pull any punches 
when he told a large audience of hospital board members and 
administrators that if politicians try to cope with sickness 
problems of our ageing population by building more 
hospitals or similar facilities, the cost will be prohibitive and 
the results disastrous. 

 
Now wait until everybody in the nursing home gets that 
information, and everybody in hospitals. This is the new leader of 
the NDP, his new philosophy: 
 

What we need is a national drive to keep old people out of 
hospitals and old folks homes (he says). 

 
I can tell you, my friend from Saskatoon Nutana, every senior 
citizen is going to find out about the new NDP leader’s philosophy 
about health care — ration technology. And he goes on to say: 
 

I feel that rationing of high-cost technology is desperately 
needed. 

 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3913 
 
 

Is this your new leader? Is this the brand-new plan for health care? 
 
Let me just take you back; let me take you back. You want to be 
looking at campaigning, and you want to look at the truth. You 
just walk with me any place you want to go in nursing homes, and 
you say, who spent more money on health care, the PC 
government or the NDP? And the truth is the PC government 
spent more. Who took off extra billing? We did. Who built more 
hospital facilities? We did. Who plans on having the best health 
care system in the country? We do. And what does the new NDP 
leader say? Ration the technology, keep the old folks out of 
institutions, don’t build any more, and he’s on the record. No, he 
would have enough courage, and he stood here to nationalize the 
potash industry, and he didn’t even have enough foresight to take 
potash and trade it for technology like CAT scans. They’re some 
of the best technology you’ll find in the world today. 
 
And you were pretty high on potash — you bought half the 
industry with borrowed money from New York — but you didn’t 
have the courage to break out and trade and even get new 
technology. Well, my friend from Nutana, you want to look at 
your health care record, you want to look at expenditures, and you 
want to look at the facilities, and you will not look at the new 
technology. I’ll compare our record to your record any day of the 
week. 
 
Finally, let me say this. With respect to young people in Nutana, 
the families in Nutana, I think you should go back and ask some of 
them there with respect to the number one social problem in 
Nutana. What is it? What is it in P.a.? What is it in Saskatoon and 
Regina? It was on them national news this morning. What’s the 
number one problem that we have to address young people? What 
is it? Is it their teeth? Saskatoon Nutana MLA, I ask you, is for 
young people in your riding, for teenagers, what’s the number one 
social problem? Is it their teeth, I ask you? No, it’s not their teeth. 
Parents won’t complain about teenagers’ teeth. They’ll say it is 
drug abuse and drug and alcohol abuse, and they are frightened by 
it, parents are. The NDP will not address it; they didn’t in the past. 
 
And we have said, and we’ve talked to families all across this 
province. For young people, let’s put some money for drug and 
alcohol rehabilitation and treatment and education and awareness, 
and I haven’t heard one NDPer stand up and acknowledge that. 
And if drugs are a problem across the province with young people, 
doctors and medical people are saying it’s a problem even with 
senior citizens, and society should address that — at least be 
careful. And no — won’t be addressed by anybody over there. 
 
And when we spend money on the finest new drug rehabilitation 
centre in all of Canada for young people, do we get any bouquets 
from the NDP? Are you concerned about the youth? Do you know 
what you say? We should have free dental care for teenagers, 
that’s what they say. go fix their cavities free, but don’t worry 
about drug abuse, and drug and alcohol, and combinations of 
chemicals and alcohol together. You don’t even recognize the 
problem. 
 

Well, let me say, your people do, and their parents do. And they’re 
saying to me, build that new facility and provide awareness and 
education of the schools in communities. Do it with the churches, 
do it with families, do it with the police, do it law enforcement, do 
it . . . you know, clamp down on all those people that are peddling 
drugs. Take that on. 
 
Now I would like some support from you and some of your 
colleagues to make sure that we can get some of that done. So in 
terms of priorities, let me just say, you don’t want to spend money 
on drug and alcohol abuse and awareness, fine, you make that 
decision; you’d rather see the money go on fixing teenagers 
cavities for nothing — free. We have chosen to help young people 
address the drug problem. We find murders around Regina — 
murders and stealing and theft. And the theft is not because they’re 
hungry; they’re not stealing food. 
 
Many of the problems that we face today are related to crime, 
related to drugs. Mr. Chairman, we will continue to stay the course 
with respect to providing those kinds of expenditures in health 
care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well the young man from Estevan has just 
taken us on another flight of his fantasy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And let’s settle this once and for all, Mr. 
Premier. Why don’t you call the by-election in Eastview? Why 
don’t you call the by-election in Eastview and we will determine 
who they believe when it comes to health care? Do they believe 
you, Mr. Premier, or do they believe the New Democrats and the 
leader of our party? Who will they believe? Let’s put it all to a 
test, Mr. Premier. In a week or two, call a by-election. 
 
I understand you can’t even find a candidate because you don’t 
have a conservative in the area who has enough staying power. 
We know what happened to the previous MLA, Kim Young; we 
know what happened to your new MLA, Mr. Martineau. They left 
a sinking ship, Mr. Premier. That’s what’s happened. They had no 
staying power. 
 
Now my question to you is this: you talk about this 63 per cent 
increase, and I want to talk about the 63 per cent increase. When 
you talk about a 63 per cent increase, do you include long-term 
care administration which wasn’t part of the budget in 1981-’82 
under our government? do you include the Lakeside home at 
Wolseley? Do you include northern health services or payments to 
the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation? or do you 
include grants and allowances for ambulance services, or grants 
and allowances for home care, or grants and allowances for special 
care services, or grants to special care facilities under the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, or do you 
include the cabinet minister’s salary? 
 
I’d like to know, when you talk about your 63 per cent increase, 
do you include those items that your government has moved  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3914 
 
 

out of other departments, moved them into the Department of 
Health? And now tell us another flight of fantasy, that there’s been 
a 63 per cent increase. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we have, for example, for a 
number of years now, provided integrated hospitals. And they 
used to be separated, and we have combined them. And it makes a 
great deal of sense, because they’re integrated units. 
 
And you say, well you used to spend the money on nursing 
homes, and you used to spend the money on Health, and we’ve 
said — and I can think of one in my riding, in Lampman, for 
example. And we’ve built a brand-new nursing home facility and 
tucked it into the hospital, and we’ve got the same medical staff 
and the same kitchen staff and economies of scale. And, you 
know, you didn’t think about that, and you didn’t do it, and that is 
part of the Health budget. 
 
It’s like we were into with the Education budget. Somebody was 
saying, well you spend $750 million, but this 10 million is in the 
property management Crown, and it may be in construction of 
new schools, and is that legitimate? And so, I mean, we’re 
spending so much more money in health care than you are — than 
you did, and anybody else in Canada. I mean, you’ve got into 
playing some of these accounting games. I mean, it’s tremendous 
amounts of money and tremendous increases. 
 
Now let me go back and say, the by-election. You want a 
by-election. And if you win the by-election, you will say that you 
will have everybody on your side. And if I win the by-election, we 
will say that everybody’s on our side, okay? Okay. 
 
Now the major thing to say is this, right? You did the very same 
thing in Regina North East. You asked for a by-election and you 
won it, and you said, oh, everybody believes the New Democrats 
are going to form government. We have a general election, and 
you’re defeated again. And so as soon as the general election is 
over, you want another election. And you’ll have a by-election, 
and whether we win it or you win it, you’ll want another general 
election, right? Because if you win it, you’ll say, well now it’s 
time for a major one; and if you lose it, you say, well give us 
another chance. 
 
I mean, you have been doing this now since you lost in 1982. It 
doesn’t prove anything. You’ve had by-elections, and you’ve won 
some. You’ve held by-elections, and you may lose some. What 
really counts is at the end of your four or five years, you go 
through this process, and the people are always right. They will 
either elect the NDP and all its rhetoric, or they will re-elect the 
government because we’ve earned it. 
 
So I can only say, Mr. Chairman, obviously they would like to 
have a by-election like they did in Regina North East to give them 
a little morale booster, and they’ll be up 25 per cent in the polls in 
the next general election. We can recall what happened. They lost 
it. Well, I mean, so they called for an election the next day. They 
were calling election ever since we had one in ’82; now we had 
one in ’86, they called for another one. I mean, when you beat  

them on the facts and you give the public the truth, because I don’t 
believe they provide the truth to the nursing homes and the friends 
in the coffee shops, because I hear this rhetoric in here, they 
mislead them. But when you give it them, then all they can talk 
about is elections. 
 
What would you talk about if you were behind in the polls? You’d 
really be in trouble, wouldn’t you? Because you can’t give them 
the information, and you couldn’t go to a poll, and you couldn’t 
give them facts with respect to managing government in terms of 
Crown corporations. You wouldn’t have much left. You’d have to 
rely on your leader’s view of health care, which frankly is pathetic. 
 
So look, we’ll have elections and by-elections and so forth, and 
you can crow if you win, and you can kind of shed a tear if you 
don’t. and we’ll go into the next general election, and that’s where 
it really counts, and you know . . . Let’s agree that we will have 
by-elections and general elections in this democratic process. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Premier, did you cut the health care budget 
by $18.6 million in this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — On page 50 of the Estimates 1987-88, we 
have the 1986-87 figure of 1.136 billion, and for 1987-88 it’s 
1.173 billion, and it’s obviously an increase. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Premier, do you admit that there are 
some items that are contained in this budget that weren’t contained 
in the budget last year, for instance, the payments to the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation? Do you admit 
that if you take last year’s budget along with the supplementary, 
the sups for last year, that there is, in fact, an $18.6 million cut to 
the health care budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, if you want to include last 
year’s supplements, you’d have to include the possibility for 
another year’s supplements. I mean, come on. And even if they 
were identical from one year to the next, at the level they’re at 
now, it would completely dwarf any expenditures you had — a 
tremendous increase. 
 
I mean, you’re nickelling and diming over — I mean, that’s 
probably what you do in nursing homes. You go around there and 
you tell people, oh my gosh, it’s 10 million out here, when you 
don’t tell them the increases. It’s huge, absolutely huge, in real 
terms — 15 per cent compared to 4 per cent in other jurisdictions, 
and less than that from when you were in power. 
 
So I mean, you can get into — as they did in Education — the 
property management Crown, because now it manages real estate 
and construction and so forth, that that isn’t appropriate. 
 
Well, the general increases are very large, and you want to include 
supplements from — well there may be supplements at any 
particular year. Maybe there will be supplements this year. We 
won’t know until next year, now will we? This is last year’s 
estimated expenditures, this year’s estimated expenditures, and 
there is an  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3915 
 
 

increase from one year to the next. 
 
(2145) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, in payments to the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation, there is an item for 
$10,716,700. Can you tell me where this item came from? It’s 
budget item 19. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we went through this 
in Education. The Property Management Corporation is 
responsible for managing buildings and property, and that’s 
allocated by department to department, and it has to come out of 
revenue some place. And it’s allocated to health, it’s allocated to 
education, it’s allocated to departments across government. Now it 
has to be paid. And a certain amount of health facilities pay for it, 
a certain amount of education, a certain amount of others. 
 
So you might not like the way the property management 
corporation is set up, but in terms of managing efficiently, we 
have a corporation that can now do it. And it manages like it does 
in the private sector, but I suppose you wouldn’t understand that 
either. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, it wasn’t there. Let’s turn to 
item 24. In item 24 is grants to hospitals, repayment of principal 
and interest on capital loans for the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. 
 
Can you confirm that this budget item of $4,575,600 was 
transferred to Health from Supply and Services? Can you confirm 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I got to say as calmly as I 
can here that in 1979-80 the province of Saskatchewan ranked 
sixth in per capita expenditures in health, and by 1980-81 the 
province of Saskatchewan ranked fifth in expenditures in health. 
And in 1986-87 we were number two in the whole country, which 
means not only have we had real increases here, but compared to 
all other jurisdictions there’s tremendous increase. And we rank 
right up there, number one in every possibility and every 
jurisdiction except for Alberta, with tremendous increases. 
 
So the member from Nutana asked me, well grants to hospitals, is 
this in the right category, of $4,575,000 with respect to the 
property management corporation? Now, I mean, we’ve had 
Health estimates here for hours and hours and hours and hours, 
and the Minister of Health and all the officials —I have no people 
here in Health. 
 
I have my Executive Council estimates, and you are asking me 
about item number 24 on the Health budget with respect to 
hospital rent and property management corporation and will not 
acknowledge the fact that that the expenditures have increased 
dramatically. And we have the largest expenditures in Canada, 
with tremendous increase in facilities, removing of extra billing 
and saving people millions of dollars. And you’re into line 24 
because you’ve got nothing else to talk about, with respect to the 
property management corporation and how we manage rent, in 
payment of principal and interest, on capital and on equipment and 
on so forth —  

as an accounting procedure. Well the fellows did the same thing in 
education. They didn’t make any sense then, and I mean . . . look. 
 
We are spending a lot of money on health. We are spending all our 
income tax money, and all our sales tax money, and all our oil 
royalties on health alone. That’s more than has ever been spent in 
the history of Saskatchewan, and more than anybody across 
western Canada or all of Canada except Alberta. That’s a very 
large increase. With new facilities, the removal of extra billing, all 
kinds of money for senior citizens and all kinds of new programs. 
 
So if you want the details with respect to the management of the 
health care budget, you had Health estimates here that went into it 
at no end for hours and hours. So I can say that, I mean, the 
accounting mechanism on line 24 with respect to rental of 
property and the health care budget . . . I mean you want people 
who specialize in that. And my people here on Executive Council 
— general things we can deal with in terms of overall policy. The 
accounting procedures with respect to the Department of Finance 
in any great detail we’ll leave to financial officials or to health care 
officials or others. You’ve had your chance. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Premier, can you also confirm that item 
number 32 which is “Grants to special care facilities — repayment 
of principal and interest on capital loans from the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation”, that this item amounts to 
$409,500 was transferred from the Supply and Services and it was 
not an item that was in last year’s budget under Health? 
 
Can you also confirm that the minister’s salary, as well as his 
Legislative Secretary’s salary of $35,200, is now included in 
Health this year when it wasn’t last year. This time last year was 
under Executive Council. 
 
Can you confirm, Mr. Minister, that last year you had a capital 
expenditure fund or a health capital fund of $75,400,000 and this 
year it’s been decreased to $66,527,000. Can you confirm all of 
that? And that, in fact, Mr. Minister, when you talk about an 
increase of some $33 million, that that’s simply not the truth; 
you’re fudging the truth, you’re stretching the truth, and that what 
we have here is some more jiggery-pokery by your government, 
some more falsehoods in terms of trying to convince the public 
that there’s been a real increase in health spending when that’s 
simply not true. 
 
And will you admit, Mr. Premier, because you are the Premier of 
the province and your integrity and your credibility is at stake, will 
you admit that there has been an $18.6 million cut in health care 
spending when you look at last year, the year 1986-87, and you 
compare it to this year, year ’87-88? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, all I can do, and I will 
do, is read from the Estimates as they’re outlined here. And you 
can read the footnotes as well as I can on how the accounting 
works. Let me say first of all, the expenditure increases in this 
administration on Health are as large as they’ve ever been in the 
history of the province, and larger than any that we’ve seen. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3916 
 
 

Now one of the footnotes says: 
 

A portion of this subvote was included in the subvote 
payment to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation in the vote Supply and Services in 1986-87. 

 
That’s what it says. It’s right there in the publication. Then there’s 
a footnote that says: 
 

This subvote was shown as Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Commission — To provide the provincial grant in 
1986-87. 

 
I mean, all you have to do is read it. That’s what it says; that’s how 
they account for it. You’re saying that it’s not evident in the 
publication. It’s right there in the publication, in the footnote. 
Okay now, when you amalgamate parts of some departments . . . 
 
Let me try it another way. You have used the argument, you have 
used the argument as the member from Saskatoon South has used 
the argument, that part of Social Services is in Health, therefore 
you can’t count the Health expenditures because it’s higher. Well 
if you go back and look at Social Services budget, it’s up as well. 
So when you look at the total budgets and you look at the big 
combinations of things that we have increased . . . I mean, you can 
get into playing accounting, but it’s all laid out just as plain as you 
like right there. 
 
So that you can read the subvotes, and you can read the accounting 
principles in Education . . . the same point, let me try it this way, in 
Agriculture. Somebody has made the point, well you’re spending 
less on Agriculture budget and cut it in half and it would be way 
higher than anything you’ve ever spent. Do you get the point? You 
are trying to say to people, well for heaven’s sakes, part of this 
department in this area in this subvote was not the same as last 
year. And you’re saying, I’m finding a little bit here and a little bit 
there. If you look at the overall expenditures in Health or in 
Agriculture, in Social Services or in Education, you will find 
quantum increases in expenditures since we’ve come into power, 
and that’s the basic point. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Chairperson, we’ve had the Premier 
here tonight, and he has gone all over the province telling us all 
that he has increased health care spending by 63 per cent under his 
premiership. Now I just want to point out to the people of this 
province that when he talks about a 63 per cent increase, he’s 
including a number of items that were not included in the 
Department of Health when we were the government in 1981-82. 
 
And I just want to remind the Premier that under your government 
a number of items have been moved from other departments into 
the Department of Health budget. And those items include: 
long-term care administration; the Lakeside home at Wolseley; 
northern health services; payments to the property management 
corporation; payments to the property management corporation for 
hospitals; grants and allowances for ambulance services; grants 
and allowances for home care; grants and  

allowances for special care services. We have another payment 
here for special care facilities to the property management 
corporation, and we also have the Executive Council’s salary of 
the Premier and his Legislative Secretary. 
 
So you can talk about the 63 per cent all you want, but, Mr. 
premier, that’s not true. That’s not true. And I think that it’s time 
the people of this province knew that you go around this province 
day in and day out fantasizing about what, in fact, is reality. We 
saw it earlier when my colleague from P.A.-Duck Lake and my 
colleague from North Battleford talked about this untruth of 
$91,000 a day when it came to the P.A. pulp mill. That wasn’t 
true. 
 
You talk about a 63 per cent increase. That’s not true. You tell me 
to look at the blue book, which is the budget book for the 
Government of Saskatchewan; it outlines the kind of money 
you’re spending. And you try to convince the people of this 
province you’re spending an additional $33 million on health care, 
and that’s not true. It’s not true. 
 
And every time you stand up here in this legislature and go out in 
the public and you give people that kind of information, you are 
misleading the public, Mr. Premier. You are misleading the public, 
and people expect more from someone who is the Premier of this 
province. They want a statesman, and they want someone who 
will level with them. And you don’t do that. You don’t do it, and I 
think it’s time you did, Mr. Premier. 
 
I think the people of this province want to be proud of the kind of 
leadership displayed by their government because they take 
responsibility for the government they elect. And when you do 
what you’ve done to the people of this province, what you’ve done 
in the last year, you have misled them, and you’ve betrayed them. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, there are lots and lots of people who have voted 
for you, lots of people who have voted for you who are terribly 
disappointed, terribly disappointed, because you did not level with 
them last fall. You didn’t say, I’m going to cut the health care 
budget by $18.6 million. You didn’t say, I’m going to do away 
with the school-based children’s dental plan. You didn’t say you 
were going to introduce a deductible system for prescription 
drugs, and we now have a situation in this province where senior 
citizens and all kinds of people aren’t taking their prescriptions 
because they can’t afford them. You didn’t tell people that. You 
didn’t tell people a lot of things. 
 
You told people that there wasn’t a problem with the deficit, that 
you had it under control, and then when the truth was known, Mr. 
Premier, your Minister of Finance levelled and said there was an 
$800 million deficit for last year alone. And when the press asked 
him, why are you telling us now, his response was, all politicians 
do this. And I want you to know, Mr. Premier, not all politicians 
do that. Some politicians have some integrity. Some politicians 
were elected to this legislature because they thought they could 
change things. Some politicians thought that. 
 
And every time you open your mouth, and every time you  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3917 
 
 

do something to the people of this province, I want you to know, 
Mr. Premier, that you do not represent them because you haven’t 
got a mandate to do what you are doing. You don’t have a 
mandate. And, Mr. Premier, you are the Premier of this province 
and you are expected to represent all of us — all of us. 
 
You are my Premier as well, and that government over there is my 
government as well, because I see myself as a citizen of this 
province. But this isn’t the kind of thing that lots of friends and 
lots of relatives voted for. That’s not the kind of Conservative 
government that they wanted. 
 
They didn’t want a government that would hurt people, and, Mr. 
Premier, you have betrayed them. You have no compassion for the 
people in this province. You are not fair. You hurt people 
regularly, and I don’t think that that’s the kind of man you started 
out to be. 
 
I don’t think that’s the kind of many you started out to be at all, 
but I think that you have lost all sense, all sense of decency. 
Power, Mr. Premier, has gone to your head, and sadly in this case, 
Mr. Premier, power corrupts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member can 
perhaps fool her colleagues, and she can go around and tell stories 
to some of her constituents and others that we don’t spend money 
on health care and much more money than the NDP, and that’s not 
the case, is it? 
 
And you haven’t even acknowledged tonight, and you have yet to 
acknowledge, that we spend more money on health care, 
significantly, than you do, and that you did. right? You won’t 
acknowledge that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well just sit and 
listen. The man from Regina North West is into the debate here. 
You want to talk about health care expenditures? why don’t you 
admit that we spend more on health care? You hate to admit that. 
Why don’t you admit that we removed extra billing. Well, would 
you like to remove extra billing? 
 
An Hon. Member: — $300 million on interest payments — 
where does that go? How does that help us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The member from Regina North West is a 
little upset when I say I removed extra billing, because the NDP 
didn’t. right? Acknowledge that. It’s $1 million or more for senior 
citizens that didn’t have any money, that doctors billed them, and 
you didn’t have the courage to take it away. 
 
Mr. Chairman, they will not admit . . . I’ll tell you what they’re 
after tonight. They’re saying, Mr. Premier, it’s not a 63 per cent 
increase. It might be a 64 or a 59 or a 58 or a 65, and you’re out a 
percentage or something. That’s what they’re saying, because they 
know the quantum increase is very, very large. 
 
Who removed extra billing? We did. Who has the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Now, Mr. Chairman, look it. When I want to get 
on my feet and talk about the kinds of  

things they didn’t do, and we did, they point to the clock. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess I will sit back and say one last word 
with respect to compassion: the 21 per cent interest rates that you 
allowed to hit people hurt them more than any single program in 
the history of Saskatchewan. When you let 21 per cent interest 
rates hit senior citizens, home owners and farmers, it was 
hundreds and thousands of dollars a month — a month. And that’s 
where you lost credibility, and you will lose credibility for 
elections to come, because you really showed that you didn’t care, 
and the people won’t forget that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The House adjourned at 10:04 p.m. 


