













































August 24, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 24, 1987 

 

 

2017 

 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 (continued) 

 

National Railway Dispute 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you. Before we broke over the 

supper hour, Mr. Speaker, I worked through the events in so far 

as our Premier’s efforts – and successful I might add – in terms 

of having the federal government act, and act quickly, in the 

event of a railway strike. And we have seen Mac Carson and 

Bill Kelly put in charge to bring both sides to the table, and 

hopefully we’ll see something conclusive come out of that. 

 

I think the reason why this is such a critical issue to 

Saskatchewan has been articulately laid out by speakers before 

myself, Mr. Speaker. And the issues are well-known across 

Saskatchewan because of the fact that so much of our resource 

goods – products, commodities – move by rail, whether it be the 

forest, or the grains, the oil seeds, potash, all those. Because of 

the importance of those, the reasons are well-known why this is 

such a critical issue to Saskatchewan. 

 

And I have to compliment particularly my colleagues: the 

member from Morse; the member for Thunder Creek; the 

member for Kelvington-Wadena; in so articulately laying out 

what the implications are of a rail strike, or certainly a 

prolonged rail strike, to our Saskatchewan economy and 

particularly our farms. And numbers like in the grains and oil 

seeds sides, our shipments to other parts of Canada or outside of 

Canada run in the neighbourhood of $3 billion a year; potash, 

650 million to a billion dollars a year, depending on the year; 

manufactured goods, Mr. Speaker, run anywhere between 775 

million, $875 million in any given year. So what we’re talking 

about here is several billions of dollars, and when you’re talking 

several billions of dollars, and when you’re talking several 

billions of dollars, every day is a critically important day to the 

western Canadian economy, to the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

It’s a critically important day to all of those in the farm service 

industries or the forestry service industries, whose livelihoods 

depend on those primary industries. So it’s not just those in the 

primary resource sector, it’s also those who work at the 

secondary level. Because what we would likely see, Mr. 

Speaker, for example, in the forest products side as shipments 

are decreased, sales are lost, shipments are terminated – we 

would probably see some lay-offs back up the system, as we 

could well expect in others: the elevators, for example, people 

being laid off by elevator companies. 

 

And this time of year, of course, for our ranchers to move into 

the fall . . . The red meat industry, our ranchers – although with 

our move to diversification we’re seeing less and less of our 

calves moved to Ontario – but certainly although the truck has 

become very popular, we still see at this time of year a fairly 

substantial movement by rail of calves to feedlots, particularly 

in Ontario. 

 

And I can’t help think, given that I was myself this past 

weekend down at the farm and had a chance to get on the 

combine, how many farmers must be sitting on their  

combines this very day listening to what has happened and 

contemplating the devastation that a railway strike will have on 

them. There they are, sitting on their combines harvesting a 

crop that for the most part is below average across the province 

– although there are spots where it is very good – a crop that is 

below average, a crop where they have seen the prices fall even 

since last year another 23 or 25 per cent; their input costs for the 

most part are either level or at worst rising, certainly not 

coming down; not much in the way of quotas, Mr. Speaker; at 

every turn, everywhere they look, there is not particularly good 

news on the horizon. And then to get this additional news as 

they sit on their combines taking off this harvest, knowing that 

they may or may not be able to sell that crop and if they do, at a 

very low price. 

 

And you can’t help but sympathize for them because it’s not 

only sort of the financial aspect but after a while it becomes just 

one more emotional straw and after a while you sort of get the 

sense that, how many straw can our farmers take 

psychologically, Mr. Speaker, without sort of feeling totally 

defeated and overwhelmed by a system that just does not seem 

to give them any breaks? 

 

And so as I contemplated this motion, I couldn’t help but 

sympathize because there are a goodly number of those farmers 

on swathers and combines this very day listening to the news on 

an hourly basis in so far as, if I do get this crop off, well it 

probably won’t got anywhere anyways – and the utter despair 

they must feel, some of them. 

 

And that’s why when I listened to the debate, and it started off 

in question period today with the Leader of the Opposition. 

How disappointed I have been at what the NDP has raised. 

Because here is an issue that is so critical to Saskatchewan, so 

large to our economy and to its people, that you would have 

thought for once we could have stepped above mere partisan 

politics, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what was so disappointing 

about the debate this afternoon coming from the NDP. 

 

The NDP have made this a partisan issue. They’ve polarized the 

issue into two dimensions and as I’ve said many times in this 

House, it behoves us as legislators, given that the issues that we 

faced today are so complex, to do something more than reduce 

every issue to a simple duality. It is not good enough to reduce 

every issue to an either, or; them, us; right, wrong. It is not good 

enough to reduce this to an issue where it’s railway companies 

– you’re for them or agin them. And that’s exactly what we saw 

trotted out by the NDP opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’m not here to make the case for the railways. Certainly 

they can speak for themselves. But what I think we are all here 

for or should be here for is to look at this in a reasonable, calm, 

studious, and thoughtful manner and to look and see what 

would make sense and what would be fair, Mr. Speaker – not 

only fair for the workers and their spouses, whether they be 

wives or husbands at home who, I’m sure, do not want to 

contemplate the thought of a major wage earner in their family 

being on strike for two or three or six months. That is not what 

. . . I’m sure there are housewives, or on the other side of the 

coin, there are husbands who do not want to have their families 

face that. And that is not what the workers want,  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2018 

 

nor is it what our farmers want, or our potash mines, nor the 

people who work in the . . . mill operators in our forest 

products, Mr. Speaker. But what they do not want is to have 

issues categorized and polarized into this simple duality of right 

versus wrong. 

 

As I said earlier, the NDP typically . . . I mean, this is classic 

socialism, Mr. Speaker. It has been for 50 years in this province 

as far as the CCF-NDP are concerned. I mean, if you want to 

sort of be seen to be on the side of the public – never mind 

looking at the debate in a thoughtful or studious fashion – if you 

know one thing that works, just slam the railways. And I mean 

I’m not, and as I said, here to defend the railways. But aren’t we 

above that and beyond that finally, Mr. Speaker, in this day and 

age? That’s old-fashioned sort of typical socialism and I think 

we have come some distance, or we should have come some 

distance from that. 

 

That’s why I was so disappointed to see, for example, the 

member for Regina Centre. I mean, what was his solution to 

this complex problem? His solution was, well nationalize the 

railways. I mean, that’s a typical knee-jerk reaction. That’s 

typical. The only answer is this hard and fast socialism answer 

– and if it moves, nationalize it. If it moves, turn it into a Crown 

corporation, because that is the best. A typical response, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And then we had several members, and particularly, I suppose, 

the one from Moose Jaw North. Here was the classic example 

of sort of the sanctimonious speech. But at the end of the day 

what he came down to was, have you seen CN’s profits? I 

mean, let’s kick the railways around, let’s kick their profit line 

around because that is the root of all evil. They’re this big 

corporation; and have you seen their profits? Well I don’t know 

what their profits are, Mr. Speaker, but I have no doubt that if 

one was to look at their return on investment that they would 

probably argue – I don’t know, rightly or wrongly – but they 

would probably argue that it’s pretty measly, their return on 

investment. Mind you, I would argue equally hard, Mr. 

Speaker, that our farmers’ returns on investment are pretty 

measly. And I raise the point not to suggest whether they are 

right or they are wrong, or whether the profits are large or they 

are not, but the issue is simply once again of, here we have a 

case of simple railway bashing. Polarize the issue. Either you’re 

for them or against them. The railways are the bad guys and 

that’s all there is to the debate. 

 

And then he brought in another favourite bogyman of the NDP 

in this debate, in that the Tories here have to be suspect, Mr. 

Speaker, the Tories have to be suspect in how they would 

approach this, federally, provincially, or wherever, because, my 

goodness, they get donations from Canadian Pacific or 

Canadian Pacific Express or whoever. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I am getting tired of that kind of 

insinuation coming from the opposition benches. Because what 

that does is it strikes at the moral integrity of every member of 

this legislature, to suggest that somehow, because we get a 

contribution or our party does or the federal party does, that that 

warps my thinking, Mr. Speaker, or that somehow I collapse 

under the weight of knowing all of this and it fogs up my mind 

in so far as making rational, reasoned, thoughtful, studious  

observations. 

 

And I know why they think like that, Mr. Speaker. I know why 

they think like that, because that’s maybe the way they respond 

in those kinds of situations. But I resent the insinuations 

because I think it reflects on every member of this legislature, 

Mr. Speaker – every member of this legislature. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition today in question period came at 

this from a unidimensional aspect again, Mr. Speaker. And the 

comment was made from a member’s seat, “Don’t you care 

about the farmers?” I mean, I think what the issue there was is a 

question of fairness and balance. There is no need to make 

every issue one of winners and losers; them, us. There should 

be all winners at the end of the day, I think, is one of the . . . 

maybe perhaps it was my colleague, the Minister of 

Transportation talked about. 

 

We’re not looking for losers here; we’re looking at what is right 

for our entire province. And isn’t that our obligation? And I 

couldn’t help but think when that comment was made from the 

seat that how true it was, and it brought back to me, Mr. 

Speaker, the shades of yesterday when we sat is in this 

legislature with the difficult task of legislating the dairy workers 

back to work. And when everyone across the province would be 

looking for fairness and reasonableness and balance in their 

approach, not one member opposite, Mr. Speaker – as you 

probably well remember – not one member opposite, not the 

agriculture critic, not any of their members opposite, got up and 

uttered the word “farmer” during that legislative debate. Not 

one of them could sort of stand back and say, on the one hand, 

we must, as we always must, appreciate the rights of the 

workers. On the other hand, not one of them would get up and 

acknowledge, but what about the farmers, and what is this strike 

going to do to them and to their farms and to their families? Not 

one word, Mr. Speaker. They sat on their hands through that 

entire debate and only pushed one line. They could not stand 

back and look at this in the larger perspective. 

 

(1915) 

 

And I wouldn’t mind that, Mr. Speaker, if they really had the 

workers’ best interests at heart, but they do not. It’s the union 

bosses who pull the strings and call the shots, Mr. Speaker. That 

is the problem. Because we are all interested, I hope, at the end 

of the day, and the workers here, whether it be the farm worker 

or the potash worker or the railway worker . . . They want to 

look at this in only the one dimension, reduce it all to a simply 

duality – always have winners; always have losers. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that what the larger public policy 

issue – and the Leader of the Opposition addressed this, touched 

on this to some limited degree – the larger issue here for all of 

us, the larger public policy issue here is, how do we address the 

issue of change in society? 

 

Here we have, and rightly so, railway workers threatened by, in 

their minds, some unforeseen or in some instances, some 

foreseen technological change. And how we will we  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2019 

 

adapt? Shall we stick our heads in the sand and say: whatever 

you do, there shall be no lay-offs; I shall have job security for 

ever and for ever – albeit that they are still working the tracks 

with those pump what-ever-you-call-them that they used to use 

50 years ago, Mr. Speaker – that at all costs, we shall have no 

change. 

 

I mean it’s not surprising that this is what the NDP. . .the 

perspective they took in this debate. Coping with change is 

never easy. It must be coped with fairly, that we know for sure, 

Mr. Speaker. That we know for sure. 

 

And I’m not so sure. . .And I don’t have all the details, but I’m 

of the view, at least I’ve been led to understand, that, for 

example, Canadian National has a provision where they do 

ensure job security after eight years due to technological 

change. 

 

And it seems to me . . . I don’t know if that goes far enough or 

whether it’s right, Mr. Speaker, but it certainly flies in the face 

of merely thumping on the railways because they contributed to 

somebody’s campaign coffers or that they made a profit or 

whatever. It’s a dimension that’s worth looking at and talking 

about, getting down to the meat of the issue rather than just 

thumping the same old drums. 

 

I think we saw the same thing, as I understand it, and the 

members of the SaskTel unions had visited with me when there 

was strike action contemplated there They were concerned 

about job security in the face of technological change. And as I 

said, as I understand it, CN has a provision after eight years that 

there will not be lay-offs due to technological change. 

 

But that’s quite different, Mr. Speaker, from a company 

recognizing that they too must change and how do they best 

help their employees change from an attitude of . . . taking the 

other position of, there shall be job security, period – no ifs, 

ands, or buts. Now then, the question there becomes: and is that 

reasonable? I mean, is the thoughtful approach on that one, is 

that the best answer; is that the right bottom line? I think not, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly as my colleague, the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena, pointed out earlier in the debate today, 

there are lots of farmers across this province who would like 

guarantees in lots of areas – working hours, working conditions, 

salaries, etc., etc. but such is not to be the case. 

 

But of course, rightfully so, the railway worker may argue, 

well, that is his cross to bear. And so it’s not as though one 

wants to reduce that into an either/or situation. As well, it’s a 

matter of looking at the question of job security and 

approaching it in a reasoned and thoughtful manner. And I 

would suggest to you that it’s worth knowing – at least I think 

it’s worth knowing, when this House contemplates this motion 

about some of what is going on now relative to job security. 

 

As well, the Leader of the Opposition, I think, made some 

comment about CN being . . . not meeting its targets. And 

rightfully so, perhaps. And I don’t know what the details were. 

He did not point them out, as to why they didn’t meet targets 

and they were 3,000 and-some-odd cars  

short. And that’s fine to point that out, I suppose. I think I could 

find numbers . . . For example, at Prince Rupert last year CN 

put 1.3 million, 1.4 million tonnes, something of that order in 

there. This year they’re 4 million tonnes. Sounds to me like 

that’s performance. 

 

Now I’m not saying that that by itself is good enough, but I’m 

saying for an example that you can use to find the railways 

aren’t meeting their targets, well, I can find examples where 

they probably exceeded everybody’s wildest expectations. So 

that, too, is not the issue and a simple railway bashing exercise 

serves no one well. 

 

I think as well in this debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s worth 

knowing. As I mentioned earlier, there are certainly some 

spouses that would be concerned, I think, with a lengthy strike, 

as I’m sure they are. There are others, I think the train 

dispatchers, for example, who were in conciliation, and now 

whose talks have been suspended because of this strike – 

certainly I’m sure they are concerned with what might happen. 

They were obviously on a course that they thought would lead 

to a successful resolution, and now that has fallen off the tracks, 

if you’ll pardon the pun, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I raise these issues not because, as I said earlier, that I 

think that if anybody needed, the railway needs a spokesperson, 

because they do not. But I think we haven’t examined all 

dimensions of what some of these issues are. We only see the 

single dimension that the opposition put forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I started out to say that the real issue here is change, things 

like technological change and how do we cope with it. And, Mr. 

Speaker, isn’t this so reminiscent of the debate that we had in 

this legislature during my estimates when we discussed how is 

our education system going to gear up to handle the change that 

comes with the technological era, or the information era, or the 

knowledge-based economy, as some call it. You see, so the 

issues, Mr. Speaker, are not all that different. 

 

And, in fact, it seems to me if I was to make some suggestions 

to people like the railways in this country, if I was to make 

some suggestions to them, Mr. Speaker, I would tell them that 

they ought to seriously look at helping their employees retrain 

and upgrade and get the skills required to operate a 

transportation system that will take us into the 21st century. 

That’s what I would tell them. I would say that they have 

absolutely a corporate responsibility. It is in their best interest to 

make sure that their employees have every opportunity 

available to upgrade, retrain, or to gain the new skills for the 

new jobs in the transportation system of the 21st century, Mr. 

Speaker. That would be my view, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the NDP’s approach would be to say: don’t touch 

anything; give them guarantees; let them become 

non-competitive. If that is the final price you must pay and the 

company must go broke then they say, so it shall be. Well, I ask 

you, Mr. Speaker: who is well served? Who is well served if the 

railway company goes broke and the employees are without a 

job and the farmers have no rail line to serve them? No one. No 

one is well served, Mr. Speaker. 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2020 

 

But what we are looking at here, if I could use an agriculture 

analogy for a moment, is if we are to be change resisters like 

the NDP – change resisters. They have become the 

establishment man of Saskatchewan politics, Mr. Speaker. The 

reform party, the CCF grass roots reform party, is now your 

classic establishment proponents: do not change; keep us with 

the status quo; we are the change resisters. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I ask you: where would our farmers be 

today? Would our farmers be shipping? Would our railways, on 

behalf of our farmers, be shipping? Would the wheat board and 

the railways and our farmers be shipping 32 or 33 millions of 

tonnes, even with these trade wars on, if they had adopted the 

attitude and the mentality of the NDP? I think not, Mr. Speaker. 

Because where would our farmers be today if they had said 

when the Massey 44 tractor came along, if they’d gone out to 

the 12 hired men out there and said, well guys there’s a new 

Massey 44 here but I know if I get that tractor I won’t need six 

of the horses in that barn? Well, I better not do that because old 

Dobb, he might not like to be turned out. So I’d better keep the 

horses and let the Massey 44 stay in the shed. Now I ask you 

where would our farmers have got if they’d left the Massey 44 

out in the shed and relied on horses when the rest of the world 

that was producing the wheats like we were, Mr. Speaker, 

would have made that change. 

 

Or where would they have got, Mr. Speaker, if they’d have left 

the Massey 44 in the shed, and not taken out the new 

four-wheel drive, or not looked at the new hybrid grains in 

some instances? Where would they have got? 

 

And I raise those examples, not to point out that change is easy, 

because it is not – it never is – but that is the issue here. And 

what these people are trying to decide in these negotiations is 

how best to accomplish that change, how best so that we can 

protect our workers; more than protect our workers, Mr. 

Speaker, isn’t the issue, how do we help them? 

 

There’s no sense having people trained to drive horses when 

you need them to drive tractors, and the similar analogy would 

be . . . I would use in the railway, the strike that faces us today. 

Because the reason that they fear, as I would . . . that they want 

job security is that they fear for livelihoods. 

 

So should it not be our obligation and the obligation of the 

railways to help them with that change and to make sure that 

they are technologically upgraded, Mr. Speaker? Because if the 

railways can’t make these changes and if the workers can’t fill 

the new jobs that they need, then we are not all well served 

because there will be no railway there and there will be no 

workers and there will be no farmers who can ship their grains 

on that. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, I think that at the end of the day what 

we all ask for here is for these workers to have the kinds of 

things that all of us would aspire to, to have job security, if you 

like. But it’s no good just to reduce it to a simple duality, as I 

said earlier. Certainly as I understand as well, they would like 

an increase. 

 

In this debate, I think it’s worth pointing out, Mr. Speaker,  

that although we all would like wage increases at any given 

time, the way the legislation is enshrined today and the controls 

put on railways, if there is an increase in the workers’ salaries, 

costs of labour, that’s factored right back into what the farmer 

pays, Mr. Speaker. And I think any of us in this House would 

be hard pressed to argue this very day – this very day – for 

increases because of the situation facing farmers and potash and 

potash miners and forest products – and the list goes on and on 

and on. That doesn’t’ mean to say that there shouldn’t be pay 

increases when times improve, Mr. Speaker, but certainly at this 

very day, it’s hard to argue that case and especially if we are to 

look at the entire province. 

 

The final point I would make here, Mr. Speaker, and the one 

that I would particularly want all members of this House to 

support, is the issue of 72 hours. That if there is no solution, 

that we look at, as the amendment says: 

 

That should a negotiated or mediated settlement appear to 

be unachievable after 72 hours, (the federal government) 

to move immediately to take such legislative action as 

necessary to resolve the dispute. 

 

And I think that’s a particularly important amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, for these reasons, in that I don’t think, as I said earlier 

in this House, that the housewife or the husband of the railway 

worker who sees this, is now part of this strike, I don’t think 

that they’re interested in seeing this thing go on and on and on 

for ever either. 

 

The hon. member has tried to suggest, particularly the member 

from Moose Jaw North, that this was the only agenda that this 

. . . I think, to use his word, the only agenda that this fit was the 

railways’ agenda, and once again that’s a simplification of a 

complex issue. But it seems to me, if I was . . . And let’s use the 

example of the housewife. If I was a housewife of a railway 

worker sitting at home, would they not think it reasonable of 

this legislature to suggest if they cannot make it work in this 

last set of negotiations and after 72 hours of intense negotiation, 

then perhaps there needs to be something more done? Now it 

seems to me that would be reasonable, as opposed to letting go 

on for 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 months. 

 

If I was that person at home tonight watching television and 

they saw that come out of this legislature, I would think that the 

average person, their spouse and the worker, would say, well at 

least it’ll get settled one way or the other, and reason will 

prevail. And that seems like a reasonable . . . From the worker’s 

standpoint that seems to me ultimately reasonable. The hon. 

member suggests that it’s only the railways’ agenda. 

 

The other test of fairness here, it seems to me, would be: is that 

fair to the rest of our province and to its people? Should our 

farmers, our potash miners, our forestry workers – should they 

be left out on an economic limb that’s about to snap for weeks 

and months on end? And I think not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think that that motion, that amendment, makes eminent 

good sense. 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2021 

 

On a final point, Mr. Speaker, there are many issues 

surrounding this strike. It is a complex issue. Merely 

categorizing this and saying that either you are for the railways 

or agin them, would be an oversimplification, and the issue 

would not be well served. And similarly, those who would try 

and drive a wedge in this issue between the railway worker and 

the farmer, the railway worker and the potash miner, the railway 

worker and the mill operator in the forestry area, similarly 

would be doing a disservice to all involved and to this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1930) 

 

We dismiss issues in that fashion by making them all a simple 

duality too often in this House. As I suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, and I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, the larger issue here 

is one of change, and how do we adapt to change. How do we 

deal with the technological age? And I’ve talked about what I 

think are some corporate responsibilities, corporate 

responsibilities to their people. Because one thing we know for 

sure, Mr. Speaker, is this: is that the population is getting older. 

There is not a second so-called yuppy wave coming through the 

system. So what I say to Canadian National and Canadian 

Pacific is that they had better look after their workers because 

there is no other wave coming along behind them to replace 

them. That we know for sure. And yes, they may well need 

skilled workers and workers to be retrained to make them 

efficient and to compete. 

 

I think CN, for example, Mr. Speaker, at one time was in the 

top five in terms of output per worker and now are down at 20 

to 25. Well there may be lots of reasons for that but I would 

suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, and to them, that one of the best 

things that they could do is to make an investment in their 

people to help them cope with the technological change. And 

that doesn’t mean that we get into this silly simplistic notion of 

job security at all costs, under all scenarios, etc., etc. The 

reasonable person doesn’t want that, nor do they expect it. What 

they want is help to deal with the issue of change because that’s 

what causing uncertainty. 

 

What we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, is how our people cope 

with the implications of the new economy. For all these 

reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion, as 

amended – when it’s amended — Mr. Speaker, and I would 

urge all members of the legislature to do the same because it’s 

in everyone’s best interests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak on the 

motion which I moved, and I hasten to add that I’m not going to 

speak on the motion but on the amendment which is before us, 

and I will confine my remarks to the amendment. 

 

I must say that a number of the comments made by the member 

for Weyburn were tempting, but I have had my opportunity to 

speak on the motion and will confine myself to the amendment. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why don’t you let somebody else have 

their turn. 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I hope that this 

debate will continue just as long as possible and that all hon. 

members, and particularly the member for Kindersley will have 

an opportunity to address the Assembly. 

 

But right now, with his permission and with yours, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m going to speak to the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

always been a tradition in this House that when people wish to 

speak to a motion and an amendment, that the people that 

haven’t had the opportunity to speak are recognized first, not 

somebody that goes for the second time on the same basic issue 

and the same motion on the same day. Now that’s a tradition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to speak to the 

point of order now that is before us, and all I want to say is that 

if some hon. members wish to get into this debate . . . I looked 

and I didn’t see any competition. And if some hon. members 

wish to speak, while I don’t for a moment accept the point of 

order raised by the member for Kindersley – and I say it is no 

point of order – I will be happy to defer to hon. members who 

may wish to speak. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I listened to the hon. member’s point of order 

and the hon. member’s . . . the Leader of the Opposition’s 

response to it. But the rules indicate that anybody who has 

spoken to the main motion may also speak to the amendment. 

And the Minister of Justice was not raising that particular point, 

I realize that – he was saying that if somebody else was 

standing, it’s the practice of the House . . . To my knowledge, I 

don’t know if that is the practice, but having said that, I didn’t 

see anybody standing at the time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure all hon. 

members that I’m not going to speak long and there will be an 

opportunity for members to speak. 

 

I stand in opposition to the amendment. Obviously, I will be 

supporting the motion which I moved and I speak in opposition 

to the amendment because of the reasons which I earlier gave of 

the desirability of a negotiated settlement. 

 

I favour a negotiated settlement, both on principle and because 

of the circumstances of this particular dispute. I favour a 

negotiated settlement on principle because in my judgement, 

labour-management disputes are best settled at the bargaining 

table between employer and employee. They have to live with 

the settlement and it’s better that they arrive at the settlement. 

And I think that this is a strong point to be made and a strong 

point to be made in any industrial dispute – if at all possible, 

make the parties strike a bargain. Then they will feel committed 

to it; then they will feel committed to live with it. 

 

In this particular dispute, it is particularly important that we 

have a negotiated settlement. And this is true because  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2022 

 

the nub of this dispute is not wages or hours, which are 

relatively easy to saw off for an arbitrator; but rather the issues 

are job security and the difficult problems which the member 

for Weyburn has outlined. No one is suggesting that all jobs 

should be retained. In fact, everybody agrees that this is not the 

case. And therefore, ways have to be found to down-size the 

work-force that the railways have employed. They have to deal 

with early retirement, with pensions, with bumping, and with all 

the problems that come with down-sizing. And those are 

intricate and the sort of thing which can best be dealt with at the 

bargaining table and not by an arbitrator after 72 hours or any 

other given time. 

 

Now just to make clear that we are dealing with the intricate 

problems of down-sizing – and in my judgement those ought to 

be dealt with at the bargaining table if at all possible – I point 

out that we have had a very major down-sizing of work-forces 

over the past 10 or 15 years, all of which have been bargained 

out and by and large have been lived with even though they 

were very difficult for individuals and groups in the railway 

labour force. 

 

I pointed out earlier that the car men, a particular group of 

employees, have seen their numbers drop from 14,000 to 7,000. 

Every second car man is gone and this was done without any 

work stoppage. It was bargained out and worked out. We have 

seen other major technological changes. We’ve seen the switch 

from box cars to hopper cars and we’ve seen track abandoned 

and we’ve seen trains get longer – I don’t want to dwell on all 

of those things except to say that the major issues which these 

have posed over the last 15 years, resulting in reassignments, 

lay-offs, early retirements and the like, have been dealt with at 

the bargaining table. And I’m not at all sure that those issues 

lend themselves easily to arbitrated settlements. So I have a 

very strong preference for a negotiated settlement. And in my 

judgement, of course, Mr. Speaker, the amendment will make a 

negotiated settlement much more difficult to bring about. There 

is no question of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Once one sets a deadline in the manner 

that the amendment does it seems to me that you make a 

negotiated settlement a good deal more difficult. This is a sort 

of dispute which almost quintessentially should be solved at the 

bargaining table, because of the many intricacies of it. It’s not 

the sort of issue which we can say: you people are asking 6 per 

cent; we’re offering 3; let’s make it four and a half. So you 

can’t do that with the intricate patterns which must be 

developed to have a fair down-sizing. And all of us, I think, are 

agreed on the fact that there will be down-sizing in the labour 

force who work on the railroads – and I hope we all agree that 

this has got to be done in a fair way. Once we make those two 

assumptions, which I hope we all agree with, then the trouble 

starts so far as finding the pattern. And I think that we are not 

going to get an arbitrator, however wise, to find the right 

solutions to those sorts of problems. He can certainly try, he or 

she, but I would much prefer the parties to solve that one 

themselves. So I favour a negotiated settlement. And as I 

indicated I believe that this amendment stands in the way of a 

negotiated  

settlement. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am troubled by this amendment in another 

way. I had hoped that this House would send a message – a 

unanimous message – to Ottawa. The resolution which I 

introduced was framed in a way which I think could not be 

taken objection to by anybody in this House. And indeed, in the 

amendment, not one single word is deleted. I felt it was 

something we could all agree to and I felt it was important that 

we show that on the issue all legislators in Saskatchewan, and 

virtually everybody in Saskatchewan, is in agreement. Because 

I think that’s important. 

 

And reference has been made to whether or not this should be a 

partisan issue. I can assure all hon. members that if I had 

wanted to frame a partisan resolution I could have done so. But 

I framed one which I felt nobody in this House could take 

objection to, and in fact nobody has taken objection to it. I felt it 

was important that we put forward this resolution and debate it 

– again, in the words of the member for Weyburn – in a 

reasonable, calm, studious, and thoughtful manner. And we 

hope we are doing that. And I hope I am now doing it. Well, we 

are – I think we want to pass the original resolution, and I don’t 

see anybody demurring on that score. 

 

And then when we come to the amendment, we ask ourselves 

what is the nub of the amendment. The nub of the amendment is 

that it seeks to tell the federal government how to go about 

solving this dispute – how to go about solving this dispute. If 

you do not have results within 72 hours then you should do this. 

That’s what it says to the federal government. 

 

Members will know that the federal government is a PC federal 

government. Members will know that I had many, many 

differences with the Mulroney government. But I think this is 

no time to raise my differences with the Mulroney government. 

This is the time to say to them, please turn your mind to this 

serious national issue. Use your best judgement. We won’t try 

to second guess you. See if you can get this thing solved and 

solved quickly, and Godspeed. 

 

(1945) 

 

Now that’s what we tried to do. The amendment does 

something very different. It says: and in case you don’t know 

what to do in Ottawa, we will tell you from Regina. In case you 

don’t know what to do, we will tell you what to do. 

 

Now I think that we should rely in this case on the federal 

government. I believe the Prime Minister of Canada has some 

knowledge about labour-management relations. We have never, 

I suspect, in the history of Canada had a prime minister who 

had more experience in how to deal with labour-management 

relations. We have an assistance deputy minister of Labour, Mr. 

William Kelly, who is probably as skilled a mediator as there is 

in Canada, and they are turning their mind to the matter. 

 

Now, I want you to think about that for a minute, Mr. Speaker. 

We have a Prime Minister who, undoubtedly, knows more 

about labour-management relations than  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2023 

 

any other prime minister in the history of Canada, and knows 

more about labour-management relations than most, if not 

everybody, in this House. And we have Mr. William Kelly, who 

is undoubtedly a more skilled negotiator than anybody in this 

House, and may well be than anybody in this province. So they 

are turning their mind to this issue. 

 

And what should we tell them? I say we should tell them, use 

your best judgement; it’s better than our judgement. We’ll tell 

you what result we want achieved. You use your judgement to 

get there as fast as you can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not likely to 

stand in this House and tell Wayne Gretzky how to score goals. 

I’m not likely to stand in this House and tell Tim Raines how to 

play baseball, or Tom Clements how to play football. And if I 

did – and if I did – those people would laugh at me, and they 

would be right to laugh at me because I don’t know how to 

score goals, to put it mildly. I don’t how to score goals as well 

as Wayne Gretzky or play ball as well as Tim Raines or play 

football as well as Tom Clements. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how to solve 

industrial disputes as well as Brian Mulroney or William Kelly. 

And I’m not going to tell them how to go about dealing with 

this issue because they would rightly laugh at me, and so they 

should, because that is not my skill. And if I have any skills, it 

is not in that regard, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not going to make a 

bigger fool of myself than I sometimes do by advising those 

people how to go about solving a labour dispute that they have 

been close to and I haven’t been close to. 

 

And I think we ought to not, I think, sully our resolution, which 

I think is an important resolution to get to the Government of 

Canada, by attaching to it some conditions which make us very 

nearly the laughing stock of anybody who is dealing with 

labour-management negotiations. 

 

We want the Prime Minister to get on with the job of solving 

this. We want him to use his best guns – people like William 

Kelly. But I don’t know whether it’s going to take 48 hours or 

72 hours or 96 hours. And I don’t want to tell him, well, you’ve 

got 72 hours and after that it’s high noon and we are shooting. 

 

That is not reasonable or sensible or productive. We ought to 

give our full support to the federal government. We ought to 

say, you people please get at this; see if you can get a 

settlement. And we ought not to tell them how to do it. We 

ought not to tell them how to do it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I think, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 

they will pay attention to our resolution because they will know 

that it is not put forward with a view to solving the dispute, but 

with some other objective in mind. They would know that 

however skilled the member for Kelvington-Wadena may be, 

they don’t regard him as an expert in solving 

labour-management  

relations, and his view on the matter is not to be accorded very 

much weight when we’re dealing with a very serious national 

problem like solving a national railway strike. 

 

So I would like to think that we would back off on this; that we 

would defeat this amendment or have it withdrawn, as the case 

may be, and we would send a resolution to Ottawa that we 

could all agree on. And I suspect there would not be a member 

of the House who would vote against that resolution, and say to 

Brian Mulroney, the Prime Minister and his cabinet and his 

staff, get at it; solve this problem; do it the way you think best 

because you know best in this area. Godspeed. And if, in fact, 

you need to do something legislatively at some future time, well 

that will be a judgement which you should make and not we. 

That has to be done in the face of all the facts at that time and 

not now. 

 

And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I find myself unable to support 

the amendment, would urge hon. members to defeat the 

amendment, or alternatively, the mover and seconder withdraw 

it so that we can send our resolution to Ottawa – which 

everybody in this House will have supported, and thereby 

underline the importance which we give to this serious national 

problem which is having an effect on our economy and which if 

prolonged will have a very serious effect on our economy. 

 

This is no time for dividing ourselves, particularly on the basis 

of giving advice which we are not qualified to give. This is the 

time to unite and I invite all hon. members to do so. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with pleasure, 

Mr. Speaker, that I rise to speak on this debate, but I’m also 

saddened of the quality of debate which I’ve heard from the 

opposition members today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I drove into Regina today with my wife I said 

to her, it’s not hard to see what the question period and the 

debate, debate number 39 would be today. The members 

opposite naturally have to talk about the railroad strike. They 

have to. 

 

But I said to myself, Mr. Speaker, that if they do so they are 

hypocrites because, Mr. Speaker, they have been . . . All, most 

of my life, since the early ‘40s, I have heard the CCF and the 

NDP state very clearly that they are the union people of this 

country and that is correct, Mr. Speaker. So really what they 

done is they had to bring this question, these questions, forward 

in question period to make it look good to all the people in 

Saskatchewan that they’re on everybody’s side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They tried very hard to prove to the farmers that, we’re on your 

side, but they didn’t do a very good job, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I travelled this last year throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan, it’s very easy to see where the members 

opposite stand. Some people say, Mr. Speaker, that the last 

election was a tough election, but in rural Saskatchewan it was 

the easiest, just like taking candy from children. Because these 

are the kinds of things I  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2024 

 

heard out there, Mr. Speaker. This is the kind of things I heard: 

NDP . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

Order. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — We heard very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that 

NDP farmers said it was not time for a Blakeney union 

government. It was time for Devine. Now that’s what happened 

all over this province. It’s very clear that farmers lined up and 

said in this province that it’s time to be behind Devine, and 

that’s exactly what they’re doing, Mr. . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’d ask the hon. member please 

not to refer to members in the House by their name. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just 

referring to election time, what they were saying – not in the 

House, Mr. Speaker – but I apologize. 

 

The farmers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will be wondering 

why they called an emergency debate today, and they’ll be 

calling it hypocritical, Mr. Speaker. They know the NDP are the 

union party and the Tories are the party for everyone. We 

believe, on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we believe in 

governing for every citizen in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. The hon. 

member for Arm River is attempting to state his views on the 

amendment, and I would ask the hon. members to give him that 

opportunity to do so without interrupting him every few 

seconds. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know that some 

of the things I’ve said and some of the things I’m going to say 

will upset the members opposite very much. But I did give them 

the courtesy for 40 . . . pretty near 60 days in this House of 

never heckling once. So I ask the same courtesy from the 

members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite do not 

understand the farmers’ problems in the 1980s. They don’t 

understand. They don’t understand that a grain truck in 1980, 

’81, ’82 . . . but in 1987 you get exactly half the dollars and 

cents. They don’t understand that. They don’t understand that a 

farmer out there cannot pay his bills today. They don’t 

understand that. But the people on this government side do 

understand that, and that is why we’re in this here debate today. 

They’re the union people; we are the farmers’ people, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But what they do understand, Mr. Speaker, they understand 

socialism over there. They understand what socialism and 

unions are. 

 

In England, Mr. Speaker, after the war, England had a 

labour-socialized government. They were knocked down, 

battered into the ocean, Mr. Speaker, because of the war. And a 

socialized-labour government was good for England. But, Mr. 

Speaker, many free enterprises throughout the world stated that 

England would be in  

trouble in 25 years with a socialist government, and this is what 

happened to many governments throughout Europe at that time 

with a socialist government because, I wish to state here, Mr. 

Speaker, that socialism does not work without a hard-working 

free-enterpriser to pay all the bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, it is not the time for strikes. I 

agree, Mr. Speaker, with the member from Moose Jaw South 

and the member, I believe it was from North, I believe, Regina 

North, when they were talking about the problems that the 

railroads are having like cabooses and things like that. I agree 

these little things should be cleared up and they should have 

their rights, but they’re making such an issue of it. They seem 

to think that a caboose, whether it tags on or whether it don’t, is 

more important than moving grain for farmers. That’s what they 

believe, that’s the issue. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what they . . . What I don’t believe in, and I 

stand here proud to say that I do not believe in guaranteed job 

security. Mr. Speaker, I do not think that any MLAs, elected 

people in this room, are guaranteed their positions – not one of 

us. But if we keep on having debates like we did today, I’ll say 

that the members opposite will sure be looking for a union job 

because they’ll have to, because they won’t have a job in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — The members opposite, Mr. Speaker, they 

believe in no lay-off guarantees. They believe in this – they 

really believe it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a few comments from a few items that I 

picked up through the supper hour that I just want to share with 

the members of the legislature here. But firstly, the Leader of 

the Opposition stated in question period – I wish he was here 

but he’ll hear about it – that the Transport minister, John 

Crosbie, wasn’t interested in strikes and doing anything about 

it. Let me quote. This is from The Globe and Mail today: 

 

Transport Minister John Crosbie, said the federal 

Government will review the situation today to determine 

what action to take “to protect the public interest.” 

 

“The strike is very costly not only for the parties 

immediately, but in this case for all of Canada,” he said in 

a statement in Ottawa. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Misleading. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Misleading is right, Mr. Speaker. The 

member from Kindersley said misleading and I agree with him. 

Misleading – trying to mislead all of Canada. And also, Mr. 

Speaker, he said in question period today that the farmers could 

stand to have the movement of grain stopped for a few weeks 

without hardship to them, Mr. Speaker. Let’s just quote him 

some information because  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2025 

 

he does not understand what he’s talking about. “Grain 

shipments affected.” Let’s put this on the record. 

 

During late August . . . 

 

Excuse me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

During late August and early September, an average of 

3,000 cars per week are shipped out of Saskatchewan. This 

translates up to 300,000 tonnes of grain per week that will 

not get into the grain export market until the strike is 

settled. At current grain prices, up to 50 million per week 

will be delayed returning to the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Now don’t anybody tell me that a farmer can stand this, Mr. 

Speaker, because they cannot. The business people of this 

province cannot stand it either because they’re affected every 

day by what the farmers have for income. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — I’ll read some more implications that we’ll 

put on the record here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The railways stand to lose $20 million per day in revenue. 

There will be almost immediate detrimental effects on 

Canada’s agriculture and resource industries. The inability 

to move grain coupled with the already very low grain 

prices could have disastrous effects on Saskatchewan’s 

agriculture economy should the strike be prolonged. 

 

Now if the member from Elphinstone was here; maybe he 

would realize that he made a mistake in question period today. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, two 

times now the member from Arm River has referred to the fact 

that a certain member was not present in the House. I’m given 

to understand that such comments are out of order, and I would 

ask you for a ruling in this respect. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The point of order as stated by the member 

for Regina Victoria is, in fact, well taken. There is, in fact, a 

rule that indicates that the member should not refer to the 

absence or the presence, as a matter of fact, of hon. members. 

So I would just ask members to follow that rule, please. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize that 

the member opposite is absent from the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a few more quotes from The Globe and Mail. 

 

The workers with eight years service or more could not be 

laid off for technological, operational, or organizational 

reasons. Economic reasons such as a decline in traffic 

were not covered. However, the unions want no lay-off 

guarantee expanded to include all reasons and to apply to 

anyone with four years service or more. 

We want protection for these railway workers. We’re 

talking about workers with 25 or 30 years service. Mr. 

Passaretti said, adding that the current wording is too 

loose. Anyone could say there’s a traffic fluctuation 

tomorrow morning, and bang – there’s a lay-off. The 

unions say they have lost about half their membership on 

the railways in the past 15 years, and that management’s 

desire for an even leaner work-force can be taken care of 

through attrition, early retirements, and with contract 

changes that give the railway greater flexibility to redeploy 

surplus workers. But management officials repeatedly 

used the phrase “economic suicide” yesterday to describe 

the consequences of tougher no lay-off guarantees. 

 

The following headlines, Mr. Speaker, appeared in the 

Leader-Post, March 21, 1985. Mr. Speaker, I ask your 

permission to use their names, because these are quotes from 

papers: “Ned Shillington fears weakening of unions.” 

 

Allan Blakeney said in the Leader-Post November 10, 1983: 

“Organized labour has to become more militant.” 

 

From the Commonwealth, September 12, 1969: 

 

Central to the creation of an independent socialist Canada 

is the strength and tradition of the trade union movement. 

By strengthening the Canadian labour movement, New 

Democrats will further their pursuit of Canadian 

independence. 

 

From the book Canada – What’s left?, Elwood Cowley. Many 

members opposite know Elwood Cowley. 

 

The government employees union wanted to bring in three 

professional bargainers. Catch me drunk at night and 

negotiate with me by myself hoping I’d signed a contract 

without knowing about it. 

 

I conclude, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP needs to enter into a 

dialogue about the content of future NDP government policy. 

The union movement is an integral part of the NDP, and I think 

the unions and the NDP are natural allies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time to ask the leadership hopefuls 

over there to stand and let us know who they support. The 

member from Riversdale has an obligation to let us know. 

Maybe as does also from Regina North, Regina Lakeview, 

Saskatoon Nutana – I’m sure they’re going to run for the 

leadership. Why don’t they stand up, Mr. Speaker, and say are 

they for unions or farmers, Mr. Speaker. I challenge the 

leadership hopefuls to come into this House and stand up yet 

tonight and say are we for farmers or unions. Now we want that 

said here loud and clearly in the province of Saskatchewan so 

we know where the members opposite stand. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is not only their friends in Toronto . . . 

They themselves have a hard core of big labour advocates 

sitting on the benches. They have the big labour lawyers, the 

member from Riversdale. The  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2026 

 

member from Elphinstone, he hasn’t been a lawyer for awhile, 

but he’s sure been around. The member from Quill Lakes, the 

member from Regina Centre, all labour lawyers. The member 

from Regina Centre . . . I probably missed some but don’t feel 

too bad. Then they have the member from Saskatoon Fairview 

who thought people should vote for him because, as one of his 

election ads said, he worked for the international labour 

organization. 

 

And then there is the member for Regina Rosemont who said 

during the election campaign that he was working as a 

representative for the Retail Wholesale and Department Store 

Union. But that is not all, Mr. Speaker, that’s not all. We have 

the member for The Battlefords with his connections, he was 

the vice-president, Mr. Speaker, of the Saskatchewan 

Government Employees’ Union. 

 

And perhaps the real clincher, Mr. Speaker, that tells you that 

those people are of a party of big labour unions and not of farm 

families is shown by the background of the member for Regina 

North. His claim to fame, Mr. Speaker, is that he was a member 

of the executive of the Grain Services Union that has, on a 

number of occasions, held farm families hostage, just as they’re 

being held hostage today. 

 

A Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

What is the member’s point of order? 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I do not see the connection between these 

remarks and the subject of the discussion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member is speaking to the motion, 

and I’m sure that he must have some connection to the motion 

in his remarks, and I ask him to tie his remarks into the motion, 

if they so are pertinent. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Everything I’ve 

said today, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite would just 

listen, and not be disturbed, connects farmers and unions. 

 

So I ask them again, Mr. Speaker, explain how you can ask for 

this debate? How can you do this and then tell farm families 

that you have to stick up for financial backers in big eastern 

unions? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we would welcome the NDP turning over a 

new leaf in joining with us in protecting the average 

Saskatchewan family. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’m having a 

little difficulty listening to the member’s remarks which are 

obviously quite interesting because many members seem to be 

taking note of them. So, please, allow the hon. member to 

continue and refrain from interrupting. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — But they have to be sincere, Mr. Speaker. 

They have to be very sincere if they’re going to get their points 

across, and they haven’t been doing that today. 

 

We can take them very seriously about legislating the rail 

workers back to work when the most recent addition of  

their party newspaper just published the results of their policy 

convention. I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, after I read this there’ll be 

more points of order because they don’t like hearing this stuff. 

But they were quite proud when they passed this resolution at 

their own meeting. It’s one of those resolutions, Mr. Speaker. 

The resolution’s number was SJ26 which condemned the use of 

legislation to end strikes. Calling such action, and I quote, 

“unnecessary and politically inspired.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, tell me. Tell me, Mr. Speaker, what was the 

sense of them standing here today asking for government 

intervention? What was the sense of them doing that, unless 

they knew that when negotiations were finished there had to be 

legislation in place to end this here strike that the people in 

Canada cannot stand. 

 

So I think we can see who was acting on purely political basis 

when we see the NDP standing up today asking for an 

emergency debate and then we find out what they are passing 

for party policy behind the backs of the Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Elphinstone stated very clearly 

that he would all members here to vote for the main motion, and 

not for the amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I state very clearly that the amendment is the 

reason why we’re still talking here at 8 o’clock tonight. This is 

the main reason. Because we all on this side of the House, I’m 

sure everybody in this province, believes in negotiations. But 

this is not 1977, it’s not 1967, or ’57 or down. This is 1987, 

where we have a crisis in North America, where people, Mr. 

Speaker, are having financial implications that they cannot cope 

with. 

 

So if we have anything delaying the pocket-books of people; 

anything that affects them at all, Mr. Speaker, we have to deal 

with it. Now, no one believes more than me, Mr. Speaker, that 

there was a time for strikes. When the unions were first formed 

in this province, I believed in them, and I believe in them today. 

But I do not believe in them on ruling Canada. And that’s what 

they’ve got so strong that they’re taking over and want to be the 

big bosses of Canada, and that’s where they’re riding on the 

backs of the NDP, and they’re all together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to make it very clearly before I sit 

down that I’m asking them to decide before they vote tonight 

whose side are they on, the farmers or the big union bosses of 

this province, or this country of good Canada. Whose side are 

they on, Mr. Speaker? Because I’m going to vote for the 

amendment. And it was a pleasure to speak, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed I’m also happy 

to enter in this debate this evening, this emergency debate on 

the rail stoppage. I was interested in listening to the member for 

Arm River and I was afraid for a moment you might cut him off 

before he mentioned my three years on the bargaining 

committee and the executive of the Grain Services Union. I 

thank the member for Arm River for that, and I guess that gives 

me a very clear union tie having been serving three years there. 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2027 

 

But I can only assume from that logic that I am six times as 

qualified to speak for farmers of Saskatchewan because, Mr. 

Speaker, I spent 18 years on a co-op farm in Saskatchewan; and 

18 is six times what three years is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Indeed, Mr. Speaker, before I leave the member 

for Arm River, before I leave my comments on what the 

member for Arm River said, I just want to make a comment that 

it is not the wittiest speaker we’ve heard today. He’s a little bit 

short of that, only about half-way in fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re addressing tonight a serious subject, that of 

a work stoppage in the rail workers. And I want to point out to 

the hon. members that while there is a work stoppage, the rail 

workers have absolutely no income. None. Because there’s no 

wages paid when there is no work being done. So, no income, 

indeed, while this work stoppage is taking place, Mr. Speaker. 

That is providing an immediate incentive for the rail workers to 

get on with a negotiated settlement. That’s what the rail workers 

want; that’s what we want; that’s why we’re standing here and 

saying, let’s give the negotiation process the opportunity that it 

so richly deserves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the work stoppage, if it continues for an extended 

period of time, will indeed cause some export loss, some of 

which will be permanent loss. Some may be just deferred 

delivery or deferred purchases on the part of other countries. 

But I spoke earlier today to a high level person with 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and I was told at that time, Mr. 

Speaker, that there is currently roughly a 10-day supply of grain 

at Vancouver, at the west coast, and there is, indeed, more grain 

stranded en route now, on the railways. 

 

But as soon as the work stoppage ceases, that grain, some of 

which is already on the way, will just continue on and start 

arriving very, very shortly thereafter at the grain terminals on 

the west coast. So there’s a 10-day stockpile, if you like. 

There’s 10 days before we’re in a real crisis situation in 

Vancouver. And in Thunder Bay, we’re okay for a substantially 

longer period because there’s much greater storage in Thunder 

Bay. 

 

(2015) 

 

I was also told there is currently room in most prairie elevators 

for grains coming in, but the Canadian Wheat Board has not 

announced a delivery quota. They had not announced it before 

the work stoppage, and we were speculating on the telephone 

that they will not likely announce a quota now, either. So we’ve 

got 10 days, Mr. Speaker, before the impact of this work 

stoppage starts to seriously impact on our export market. 

 

I was also told in that conversation, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool very clearly is standing, along with 

the National Farmers’ Union, very clearly standing up and 

saying they want to give both parties an opportunity to reach an 

negotiated settlement. The reason for a negotiated settlement is 

then . . . 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. I think that, you 

know, for about the last hour or so, we’ve had interruptions 

from both sides of the House, and I would just like members, 

now, to kind of stop that and let’s allow this debate to continue. 

It’s a serious issue and we’re going . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate your 

comments to the members opposite. 

 

So the wheat pool and the farmers’ union want a negotiated 

settlement so that both parties will feel an obligation, and 

indeed they will want to make the settlement work. 

 

The mischievous political amendment is wrong-headed, Mr. 

Speaker. This political amendment that we’re debating right 

now removes this debate from an all-party emergency 

resolution which was put to this House in a reasonable manner 

so that all hon. members from every party here could support 

this and this motion go on in a unanimous manner to the federal 

government so that, as the Leader of the Opposition pointed out 

in his comments just moments ago, we would allow the federal 

negotiators, who know what they’re up against, we would be 

sending them a message that, yes, we want you to negotiate, 

and we want you to negotiate hard and fast. Get this dispute 

settled as quickly as we can. It’s a matter of extreme urgency to 

Saskatchewan and to Saskatchewan family farms. That was the 

resolution we put forward. Now there’s a mischievous 

amendment to it that just negates any opportunity of there being 

unanimous consent in this House and the motion being passed 

unanimously. 

 

So what’s the situation, Mr. Speaker, with the railways? After 

14 years of labour peace – 14 good years of labour peace at the 

railway – well with CN, in the first quarter of this year, they 

made a profit of very nearly $18 million. Canadian Pacific, in 

the first quarter, made a profit of nearly $24.5 million, and in 

their second quarter, CP made a profit of $61.5 million. Mr. 

Speaker, CN’s second quarter statement is not available. I’m 

not trying to withhold something from the Assembly, but I 

don’t have access to the second quarter CN earnings. 

 

The total profits . . . The point I’m making, Mr. Speaker, is the 

total profits for CN’s first quarter and CP’s first two quarters of 

this year are up from a total of $39.6 million in the same period 

in 1986 and they’re up to over $103 million in the same period 

in 1987. So despite the fact that railway profits are up more than 

150 per cent this year over last, over the same period last year, 

despite that, the railways are very clearly saying that they are 

not willing to discuss job security and pensions in any way with 

the rail employees, the rail workers. 

 

This is going on, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that 

rationalization of rail workers has been occurring for decades 

now, not just a few years, but indeed for decades. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, again, earlier today pointed out 

that railcar workers in numbers have gone from 14,000 to half 

that, or 7,000 workers over the past decade. It’s a very serious 

erosion of railcar workers’  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2028 

 

earning abilities because there’s only half as many of them 

working now. That means there’s 7,000 railcar workers that 

have now gone on and they are doing other things. Some of 

them may have retired, but many of them had to go on to other 

jobs. 

 

Saskatchewan family farmers will very much appreciate the 

problems faced by working men and women in the rail industry 

in their struggle to negotiate job security and pensions because, 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s family farms are disappearing at 

an alarming rate today, right now with the Conservative 

government. They’re disappearing because the federal and 

provincial Conservative governments have not addressed the 

very serious inadequate incomes that family farms have. 

 

And just as family farmers are struggling to maintain their 

means of livelihood, so rail workers are struggling to maintain 

their very means of livelihood. And the Conservative 

government’s attempts to pit farmers against workers, just 

simply put, will not wash any more – it doesn’t work. Rail 

workers have got family and friends and relatives that are 

farmers and farmers have sons and daughters and friends and 

other family that are working in the railroads. Both farmers and 

workers are being squeezed from their source of income and 

their source of job security – farm families squeezed from their 

farms; rail workers squeezed from their jobs, as they’re fired 

and let go, as the down-sizing of the rail employment continues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the loss of income for family farms in 

the agriculture industry and the rail workers and their families, 

and because the negotiated settlement is the favoured and the 

least acrimonious, therefore the most harmonious method of 

reaching a settlement, I cannot support the mischievous 

amendment to the motion. 

 

No farmer wants to be told that he or she must accept a forced 

settlement on any issue. In the same manner, no rail worker 

wants to be forced into a settlement if a negotiated settlement is 

possible. So we are urging the federal government to get 

involved in facilitating the negotiating process. We want the 

Minister of Transportation and the Prime Minister to get 

directly involved to work for a negotiated rather than an 

imposed settlement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have outlined why the rail strike will hurt rail 

workers through their total loss of income for the duration of 

the strike, and have outlined my concern, and I’m sure the 

concern is shared by many Saskatchewan family farms, as a 

lengthy work stoppage will lead to export problems at 

Vancouver within two weeks and at Thunder Bay some time 

after that. I have also outlined my support for the collective 

bargaining process as the much preferred method of reaching a 

settlement, so I’m in favour of the motion as put by the member 

for Regina Elphinstone and seconded by the member for Regina 

Centre. We are very much in favour of that motion, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And for the reasons that I outlined earlier, I oppose the 

politically mischievous amendment that attempts to pit farmers 

against workers when both are simply struggling  

to try and survive in these tough Tory times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the 

amendment, and if the amendment is passed, I will vote against 

the mischievously amended motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few brief 

comments on this very important motion, and the amendment to 

the motion. Let me first refer to the member from Regina North. 

 

Not two weeks ago, maybe three weeks ago, in this House, 

members of the NDP stood in their place for the first time, I 

think, in 40-some days, and that was their first agriculture 

question. And they said, please, Mr. Premier, phone the boys 

down in Ottawa and tell them to extend the quota. The Premier 

says, I’ll do what I can. And he phoned them after that question. 

And, in fact, there was an extension. 

 

Now here is the member from Regina North standing up and 

saying in this House: not to worry, if the trains don’t move for 

three weeks, well it will be okay; I talked to the guys in the 

wheat pool and they said it’d be okay. I can’t believe, Mr. 

Speaker, somebody in a province like Saskatchewan, I can’t 

believe somebody in the province of Saskatchewan who says 

that he was raised on a farm, co-op farm, to stand up and say, 

we can take a three-week strike, boys; it won’t be any problem, 

and what the farmers are telling me is, stand up for them, stand 

up for them poor railway workers. 

 

Well I don’t know whether he comes from the same part of the 

country that I do, but that’s not what the people are telling me. 

Mr. Speaker, what is really at stake in this particular issue? 

What is at stake, as I understand from press reports, is the 

members of this particular union want to have job security after 

having worked for the railway for four years. If they have four 

years employ in the railway, they cannot be laid off for no 

reason whatsoever, including downturn in the economy or 

anything else – four years. That’s like saying, get elected into 

this legislature; four years later you will have your pay for the 

rest of your life, whether you have work or not. That’s exactly 

the same thing we’re talking about. 

 

Now we know in this province that our farmers rely on the 

railroad to move the grain. And what we are talking about today 

is some union people that work on the railroad, whose average 

income exceeds that of our farmers by five times or perhaps 10 

times, and they’re standing out there saying, well we don’t want 

too big a raise – just a small raise. I heard a guy at supper time 

on the news; just give me a small raise, but give me that job 

security so they can’t let me go. 

 

And I suppose somebody’s going to go to our farmer and say, 

we’ll just give you a small raise this year and nobody can have 

. . . nobody can take anything away; you’re got security of that 

farm and that income for the rest of your life. Doesn’t work that 

way, Mr. Speaker. But the members opposite, when it comes 

down to picking and  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2029 

 

choosing, when they come down to picking and choosing . . . 

And you saw the Leader of the Opposition today – not one 

word about farmers. In a province like Saskatchewan, not one 

word about a farmer. What did he say? He said, we have to 

stand up and support the people that work for the railroad. 

They’re only asking for something that is job security. They’re 

only asking for – if he was really to tell the truth in this 

Assembly – they’re only asking for total security after four 

years of employment on the railroad. 

 

Now why should they have a better system than anybody else? 

Does that work in anything else that people are employed with 

in this province? Not on your life. And is it likely to? Not on 

your life. Then how can we, how can we as a society that has to 

go out into the world and compete . . . Our farmers have to 

compete on the world to sell their product. If the railway says, 

too bad, we want to keep putting the price up higher and higher, 

how do we compete and how do our farmers compete? 

 

And why, at some point, don’t the members opposite ask 

themselves that question? And it’s no different for the potash 

producer; it’s exactly the same thing if the price goes up, or the 

forest industry. We have to take our produce to the world 

markets, and very often that product must go on the railroads. 

Now what it has to be, Mr. Speaker, is it has to be relevant to 

where we are . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The member is certainly 

stating his remarks here with enthusiasm, but we can’t hear if 

we have a cross-fire going on between two other members. So 

I’d like to please ask you to respect that and allow the Minister 

of Justice to continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I appreciate, Mr. Speaker, your 

comment to the member from The Battlefords, who seems to be 

constantly doing that when that comes up. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, let me . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. What is the member’s point of 

order? 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I’m sorry that there’s been such an 

interruption to the hon. member. I was carrying one a dialogue 

with the member from Meadow Lake, who had instigated the 

whole thing, and I hope that you would take that into 

consideration when ruling on your point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’ve listened to the hon. member’s point of 

order. And I think the point of order simply serves to highlight 

again my asking of the co-operation of all members to just 

allow the Minister of Justice to continue with his speech, and if 

we allow him to that, we won’t have this sort of point of order 

having to be raised. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I have only a few more 

things to say. But let me put it to you this way, the members 

opposite in all their speaking today have not made one 

observation, they have not spoken one word in  

support of the farmer of this province, and that is sort of 

indicative of the way they look and feel toward the people of 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Let me conclude by saying to this motion, Mr. Speaker, what 

this motion is saying is to get on with the job, but it you don’t 

get on with the job and there’s no resolve of it, then don’t 

dilly-dally around for another two weeks, or three weeks. As 

the member from Regina North says, move on it. 

 

That’s what we are saying to Ottawa. Let’s tell Ottawa, solve 

this thing in the next three days or legislate this thing back to 

work. And that’s exactly what we should do. 

 

And I don’t suggest for a minute that it simply should legislate 

an arbitrator. It’s high time in this country that the parliament 

stood up and said, look at, there’s a dimension of the agriculture 

that’s at stake here and you should be cognizant of that. There’s 

a dimension of the resource industry that’s at stake and you 

should be cognizant of that. And no group is going to stand in 

the way of fairness that they have to compete on the world 

market. 

 

I say to the members opposite, you can vote against this 

amendment, you can vote against this amendment – you will 

vote against the amendment. I will challenge you to stand here 

in your place here tonight and vote on the motion as amended. 

Because I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, exactly what they are going 

to do. I can see it all now. What they are going to do: they will 

stand up and droll out in the next speaker, and he will droll and 

droll and droll past 10 o’clock so it never comes to a vote. 

Never comes to a vote, Mr. Speaker, because they are not 

prepared, at any point in time, they are not prepared at any point 

in time to stand against their union friends if it means standing 

in favour of the farms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those people stand against agriculture. If it comes 

to a challenge between the agriculture and the railroader, they 

will take the railroader each one, each time. And they will stand 

for the farmer never, except when it’s in the convenience of the 

NDP. Mr. Speaker, that’s why the farmers spoke against that 

group in 1982 and 1986, and if they continue this way, the 

farmers of this province will speak against those people into the 

year 2000 and beyond, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon Mr. Andrew: — If the members opposite cannot 

appreciate what a rail strike means to the farmers of this 

province, they should be ashamed of themselves. They have 

been too long in this dome; they have been too long in this city, 

Mr. Speaker. Agriculture is so fundamental to this province and 

the movement of grain is so fundamental to agriculture. 

 

I challenge the members opposite to stand in their place, to vote 

on the amendment as they wish, Mr. Speaker, but to bring that 

motion to the head, to a vote tonight so we can send that forth to 

Ottawa, give Ottawa the message where we stand. And we 

stand four-square behind the farmers of this province – always 

have and always will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2030 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 

pleased to have to rise tonight to speak in this debate, to speak 

in the debate on an amendment which was put forward by the 

government, engineered by the Deputy Premier . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — . . . for one particular purpose and one particular 

purpose only, and that is to bring partisan political politics to 

something which could have been a sign of unanimity to the 

federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the members opposite, and I 

want to remind the viewing public out there, of how this debate 

started. It started when the Leader of the Opposition moved a 

motion which would have been accepted by each and every 

member of this Legislative Assembly. Each and every member 

of this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, would have sent the 

message to Ottawa that we want the office of the Prime 

Minister to intervene in this railway strike, to allow the two 

parties to come together to reach a mediated and negotiated 

settlement which will serve the interests of the railway 

companies, which will serve the interests of the railway 

workers, and which will serve the interests of all people in 

Canada. 

 

But what did we get, Mr. Speaker, what did we get here? We 

had a partisan political amendment put forward by the Deputy 

Premier which would and will destroy the unanimity of the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan. And 

why? Why has it been moved? I think, Mr. Speaker, if we listen 

very carefully to what the member for Arm River said, if we 

listen very carefully to what the Justice minister just finished 

saying, we know exactly why they want to do it. Both members 

said, you in the NDP have a choice to make. Both of them said, 

you’ve got to pick either the farmers or you’ve got to pick the 

workers. That’s what they said, and that’s why they’re putting 

forward this partisan political motion. They say that it’s either 

the farmers or it’s either the workers. 

 

And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to say to the 

people of Saskatchewan here tonight, we pick the farmers of 

Saskatchewan here tonight, we pick the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, we pick the workers of Saskatchewan because 

we’re for our workers’ and farmers’ government here in this 

province which will solve the problems, not try to divide people 

like the members of the opposition have done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — It is a partisan, it is a mischievous, and it does 

absolutely nothing for the credibility of the government 

opposite – absolutely nothing at all. And it speaks very, very 

poorly for the political judgement of those members in the back 

benches who are like sheep going to vote for this amendment. 

 

Because if they want to talk about choices, Mr. Speaker, if they 

want to talk about political parties making choices, well then 

let’s talk about a few choices that the members of the 

government party have made. 

When it came to the Crow rate, when it came to defending the 

Crow rate, there was a choice that those members could make. 

They could stand up for the farmers of Saskatchewan, or they 

could stand up to the interests of the railway companies by 

destroying the Crow rate. What choice did they make? Who did 

they pick? They picked the rail companies over the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. And I don’t want to hear any hypocrisy out of 

them on choices. 

 

When it comes to variable freight rates and the introduction of 

variable freight rates in this province, there is a choice before 

the Legislative Assembly. There is a choice for those members 

to make. There were the farmers of Saskatchewan or there were 

the variable freight rates, and the rail companies which 

supported the introduction of variable freight rates. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, which side of the line did the 

members of the governing party pick? Did they pick the farmers 

of Saskatchewan? Did they? No. You’re darn right they didn’t. 

They picked the railway companies, again and again. It’s the 

CPR and the CNR over the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

When it comes to rail line abandonment, when it comes to rail 

line abandonment, the members of that party had a choice to 

make. They could stand up for the farmers of Saskatchewan and 

say our branch lines serve the farmers here. They make us 

competitively advantaged in terms of our communities; they 

make us economically viable in terms of rural Saskatchewan. It 

was a question of standing up for the rail companies who 

wanted to abandon those branch lines. Did they stand up for the 

rural communities of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Did they? 

No. No. They stood side by side with the CPR and the CNR, 

because Mr. Speaker, that’s the history of the Tories. Standing 

shoulder to shoulder with the companies against the working 

people, whether they work on the farm or work on the trains or 

work in the cities. They’ll pick the companies every time, Mr. 

Speaker, because they’re Tories, and they stand with the 

companies. 

 

When it comes to elevator closures, and the farmers of this 

province say, we want to maintain our elevators, what do the 

Tories say? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Variable rates. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Variable rates, branch line abandonment. But 

the companies say we want the Cargills and the Peavies. And 

the Parrish & Heimbeckers say, no we’re going to close down 

our elevators. There’s a choice to be made. There’s a choice to 

stand with the farmers of Saskatchewan, or there’s a choice to 

stand with the elevator companies. Where do they stand? Do 

they stand with the farmers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? No. 

They stand with the companies, shoulder to shoulder, with the 

Cargills, the Parrish & Heimbeckers, and the Peavies, against 

the farmers of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to hear 

any more hypocritical talk of it’s either workers or it’s farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2031 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Our party, Mr. Speaker, stands with the working 

people of this province against the companies that exploit 

workers and against those companies that exploit farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Mr. Lyons: — It is nothing but partisan political mischief and 

. . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker, but that’s a political tactic used 

again and again and again by the Tory red necks, who in the 

beer parlours and who in the communities; nudge, nudge, wink, 

wink, them union boys is making too much; we gotta put them 

in our place what do you say, Jake? That’s the kind of 

mischievous political rhetoric and political nonsense that we’ve 

heard out of the Tories – divide workers, divide farmers. 

 

And we heard the Justice minister to his shame – to his shame – 

stand here and try to peddle that same political garbage which 

pits worker against farmer in this province. And I say to the 

members opposite, take another look at this amendment folks. 

Take another look at this amendment. We could have unanimity 

going to Ottawa. We could have a unanimous resolution saying 

that the people of Saskatchewan are concerned about the 

railway workers, the people of Saskatchewan are concerned 

about the farmers, the people of Saskatchewan are concerned 

with the manufacturers. You can have that resolution going to 

Ottawa or you can try to get through your partisan political 

amendment which will not have the unanimity of this 

legislature. 

 

And that choice, Mr. Deputy Premier, is yours to make. And for 

once I ask you: please make a choice in the interest of all people 

in Saskatchewan, not your own little divide . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Because, Mr. Speaker, there is abroad in this 

land a perception of the kinds of political partisanship being 

played by the Tories not only here in Saskatchewan but also in 

Ottawa. And that perception is that the Prime Minister and the 

Tories are trying to somehow create situations, trying to build a 

situation in a confrontation between trade unions on the one 

hand and the government or the people of Canada on the other, 

so that Brian Mulroney, who has at the bottom of the heap in 

terms of the political opinion polls, so that Brian Mulroney can 

somehow put forward the image of being a strong leader – he’s 

a strong man, he’ll stand up to the unions. There’s that 

perception abroad, Mr. Speaker, and I, for one, hope that 

perception isn’t true. 

 

But when we look at the historical record of the last several 

years of this government and of the federal government, I want 

to tell you I’m not so sure it is true. We have seen just prior to 

the last provincial election, all of a sudden a manufactured crisis 

around the grain handlers strike, pardon me, the grain handlers 

lock-out initiated by the grain companies on the west coast. 

This was just prior to the last provincial election. 

 

What happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What happened after the 

election was over? Did we have the crisis on our hands? Was 

there a massive crisis in terms of grain  

handling on the west coast? No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it wasn’t. 

And why? Because there wasn’t a crisis in the first place on the 

west coast, nothing more than a manufactured political event to 

try to give the Tories out there in the country another excuse to 

try to pit workers against farmers. That’s the kind of political 

games that these people play, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’ve 

seen it here tonight. 

 

And we don’t have to go very far back, as far back to the grain 

handlers lock-out. We can look at the posties’ strike – the strike 

of the letter carriers. Here we had a situation in which the 

Government of Canada tried to manufacture a political situation 

which would pit the post office against the letter carriers, those 

big bad eastern union letter carriers who happened to live and 

work in our communities here in Saskatchewan. But what 

happened? The Conservatives tried to play partisan political 

politics with that labour dispute, having the . . . ordering the 

post office for the same reasons that we’ve heard from the 

members opposite – rationalization, international 

competitiveness, all the buzz words which means lay-offs, and 

loss of jobs, and cutting and slashing, the kind of buzz words 

that they’ve heard. 

 

Here we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Conservatives in 

Ottawa trying to manufacture a political crisis around the post 

office, except the postal workers weren’t going to have any of 

it. The letter carriers, who hadn’t been on strike for 19 years, 

said, we’re not going to get pushed around. We’re not going to 

be the pawns and victims in some Tory partisan political game. 

And they stood up to the post office and they stood up to Brian 

Mulroney. And guess who blinked? It wasn’t the letter carriers 

– they didn’t blink. But it was that strong, strong man who tried 

to manufacture that political crisis – he blinked. 

 

(2045) 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what does that say about this 

particular labour dispute? We have here a major Crown 

corporation which acts under the authority of the Minister of 

Transport, the Hon. John Crosbie, a Minister of Transport who 

said, we’re not going to get involved; I’m getting out of this 

thing; I’m going to be hands-off; who said he’s not going to get 

involved. 

 

We have the major transportation company, the Canadian 

National Railway, holding out against the demand for job 

security which it already has granted several of the unions in the 

associated railway union common front. It’s not a question of 

whether the companies are for or against job security, it’s the 

kind of job security which is at issue here. 

 

And that’s the kind of question which is best dealt with by a 

mediator, particularly a mediator of the stature of Bill Kelly, 

and not through partisan political games playing by the 

members opposite and pointing the 72-hour gun to the heads of 

the negotiator. Because the gun is pointed not only, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, at the union’s heads, it’s also pointed at the heads of 

the Prime Minister. So if the back-benchers over there realize 

what they’re voting for, they’re telling Brian Mulroney: Brian, 

you’ve only got 72 hours; get off your butt or legislate them 

back to work. 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2032 

 

And you know something? I tend to think that Brian Mulroney, 

that labour lawyer from Montreal, knows more about labour 

law and negotiating than the member for Arm River, judging 

from his comments, or the member for Kelvington-Wadena or 

the Justice minister. In fact, you know something, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? I tend to believe that Brian Mulroney, the labour 

lawyer from Montreal, knows more about labour law and 

collective bargaining, and getting disputes settled, than the 

whole bunch that sits across there. Because I can’t think of one. 

Not one of those members has been involved in the collective 

bargaining process. I can’t think of one. And if there are any, 

would they like to put their hands up. I see the Minister for the 

Environment has been involved in collecting bargaining. I 

assume it’s as a school trustee. I assume as a school trustee. 

And I’m sure that the Minister of the Environment knows that a 

72-hour, when he was dealing with his teachers, what when he 

was dealing with his teachers, that a deadline of 72 hours given 

to the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation would be nothing 

more than a road-block – would be nothing more than another 

obstacle to overcome to reach a mediated settlement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is despicable for the Deputy Premier to 

try to play partisan political games with this Legislative 

Assembly, with the members of his own party and all of us as 

hon. members here in the Legislative Assembly. And I think it’s 

despicable that he’d play partisan politics with the seriousness 

of this, that this railway dispute may become. And that for him 

to put forward a 72-hour deadline to the parties is nothing more 

than throwing another road-block, in fact, in trying to 

overcome, overcome the road-blocks that presently exist. And 

I’m sure that they don’t need another road-block, mister. 

 

I just want to speak for a couple more minutes, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It’s clear what the outstanding issues are. It’s clear that 

the . . . what the outstanding issues are. We have here a 

Leader-Post story, Monday, August 24, which outlines it very, 

very well and I think in a somewhat clear and objective manner. 

 

This is the first rail strike in 14 years. The last dispute was 

a series of rotating walk-outs which Parliament ended with 

a back-to-work order. The contracts were settled through 

arbitration. 

 

Settled through arbitration. 

 

Today, as in 1973, job security is a critical issue. 

 

We don’t have in that a question of wages which the Justice 

minister tries to raise. Trying to . . . saying that, yes, here’s 

those greedy union people versus you poor farmers. Because 

that’s the image that the Justice minister is trying to paint, much 

to his discredit – much to his discredit not only as a Justice 

minister but also as a legislator here in Saskatchewan. Because 

that doesn’t do anybody any good when you try to picture a 

union working person as somebody who makes five times more 

than a farmer. 

 

First of all, I’d like to find out what the Justice minister meant 

when he said that the farmer makes five times less  

than a railway worker. I know that the railway workers who live 

in Rosemont constituency who, on average, earn around $15 an 

hour – when they’re working, because they’re subject . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s high. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — That’s high, that’s high. But I’ve got shop craft 

workers and members of the running trades who live in the 

constituency. So the $15 an hour, if they work full time during 

the year, is a little less than $30,000 a year. And I don’t think 

that the farmers of Saskatchewan begrudge anybody – I don’t 

think that the farmers of Saskatchewan begrudge anybody for 

earning a little less than $30,000 a year. 

 

I suspect that the farmers of Saskatchewan, particularly the 

older farmers or those who’ve just left the land – and it’s their 

sons and their daughters who are earning a little less than 

$30,000 a year – I suspect those farmers say more power to 

them, because I think that they deserve the kind of life that I 

and my wife may never have had. I think that that’s the real 

attitude of the farmers of Saskatchewan, not the kind of 

red-necked insinuations and innuendo being put forward by the 

members opposite, not that kind of divisive person. 

 

But I know when I look at my own in-laws, my own in-laws 

who are retired farmers, and they don’t begrudge their daughter 

who earns more than $30,000 a year, they don’t begrudge her 

that. And she’s a teacher. And yes, she’s got tenure, she’s got 

seniority. She’s got seniority and she’s got tenure. And are the 

members opposite saying that the teachers of the province 

shouldn’t have tenure? Are they saying that the teachers of the 

province shouldn’t have that kind of job security? Is that what 

the members opposite are saying? It seems to me that’s what 

they’re saying. 

 

Yes, and I see the member from Rosthern is nodding his head, 

yes. So I’m quite sure that the teachers in the Rosthern 

constituency will like to know that come the next election that 

their member is against them having tenure and against them 

having job security. 

 

And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, if the member will stand on his feet 

at a later time, he’ll get into this debate. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’ve been listening intently to what the member from Regina 

Rosemont has been saying. And when he starts to draw me into 

his discussion when I’m having a private discussion here with 

the Minister of Justice and raises a point . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Allow the member to state his 

point of order and I will rule on it after I’ve heard his point of 

order. The member from Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — . . . and purposely is by direct innuendo 

insinuating that I do not believe that teachers should have 

tenure. I object to that very, very strongly, and I wish that he 

would withdraw those remarks. 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2033 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. It is . . . Order. 

The point of order is not well taken. It is a subject for debate 

and debate continues. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But I think it’s important that the people of this province realize 

that beneath all the gobbledegook, beneath all the slick phrases, 

beneath all the nudge nudge, wink winks of “what I’m saying is 

not really what I mean,” that beneath all that, the people of the 

province understand the political position of the government 

opposite. They’re against job security, whether it’s a teacher, 

whether it’s a coal miner, whether it’s a potash miner or an oil 

worker or a small farmer in this province, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

against that kind of tenure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, when the member from Weyburn 

talks about, we must become internationally competitive and we 

must economize and we must rationalize, I hope the farmers of 

Saskatchewan understand this: that he’s talking about you – that 

if you’re not internationally competitive with the big corporate 

farms in this province, you’re gone. That what the member 

from Weyburn really means. Do you understand that? That’s 

what he understands. 

 

There’s an old saying put forward during the Second World 

War, Mr. Speaker, by the Rev. Martin Nymoller. And he said: 

first of all, when they came for the Jews, nobody raised their 

voice, and they were taken away. And when they came for the 

socialists and they came for the communists, nobody raised 

their voice, and so they were taken away. And when they came 

for the liberals, there was nobody left. There was nobody left to 

raise their voice. Well what, Mr. Speaker, is happening in this 

case . . . what happens in this case, Mr. Speaker, is when the . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask members on both 

sides of the House to be quiet. Allow the member for Regina 

Rosemont to make his comments. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

I paraphrased the reverend because I paraphrased it to draw this 

point, because we can say it another way. This is what the 

Conservatives are saying: when they’re coming for your branch 

lines, we won’t speak up for you, and away they’ll go. When 

they’re coming for your elevators, we won’t speak up for you, 

and away they’ll go. And when they came for the Crown rate, 

we didn’t speak up for you, and away it went. And when 

they’re coming for your little rural post office, we didn’t say 

one word – not one word in 61 days of sitting in this legislature 

have the Conservatives raised one question about rural post 

offices. You can say that with a fact, Mr. Speaker: when they 

come for the post office, we’re not going to raise a word. 

 

And do you know why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s their 

attitude? It’s because they don’t stand with the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, and they don’t stand with the workers of 

Saskatchewan. They stand arm in arm, shoulder to shoulder, 

with the railway companies and with the banks  

and with the large manufacturing, particularly multinational 

corporations, who are the ones who are talking about the 

international competitiveness. 

 

And when they go to privatize the services of this province, 

which they’re presently doing, whether it’s health or education 

– and soon they’ll try to privatize potash corporation and the 

prescription drug plan, and so on and so forth – when they 

privatize this, it’s been all in the name of some great market law 

of international competitiveness. 

 

So I want to say this again to the farmers of the province: the 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan is raising a red herring. 

The railway workers of this country are not your enemy. Your 

enemy is the traditional enemy that has always been. It’s the 

banks who’ve been foreclosing your land; it’s the railway 

companies who are ripping your off when it comes to charges 

for your grain. It’s the railway companies who have been 

abandoning your . . . have been taking your branch lines, and 

it’s the elevator companies who have been doing you in. 

 

And it’s the Progressive Conservative party of Saskatchewan – 

that’s who they stand for; that’s who they’ve always stood for; 

and that’s who they’re standing for now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, obviously I will not be 

voting for the amendment. And I tell you . . . I’m asking the 

Deputy Premier here, without any recriminations whatsoever, 

will you please withdraw that amendment so that everyone in 

this House can support the main motion put forward. And you 

can put it forward in your name, for all I care. You can put it 

forward jointly with you and the minister . . . the Leader of the 

Opposition, for all I care. But if we can send united a message 

to Ottawa that this is a serious subject, then we’ll support it. But 

if you continue your political partisan games, let me tell you, 

the farmers of Saskatchewan are going to have something to say 

about that in three short years time. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

(2100) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of the original 

motion put forward by the Leader of the Opposition, the 

member from Elphinstone, and want to say clearly at the onset 

that this dispute must be settled, and it must be settled quickly, 

but it must be settled through the collective bargaining process. 

 

What we have here, Mr. Speaker, is a classic dispute where the 

parties are dug in. The union is holding its position in terms of 

job security, and they should. The railroads are holding their 

position in the name of profit, and they shouldn’t. And in 

between we have the farmer, the farmer who is struggling to 

survive, and the farmer who is caught in the middle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand all too well what it’s like to be a  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2034 

 

farmer in Saskatchewan struggling to survive these days. My 

family has farmed in this province for over 80 years, and I come 

from a farm background. My father and my brother and my 

sister are on the family farm today. Mr. Speaker, the cost of 

production per acre in our family farm is about $72. This year 

they will be making $62 on 25 bushels to the acre with the 

present price of grain. Before they’ve even sold the grain, they 

will have lost $10 on an acre of land. That’s a struggle, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a real struggle. And many farmers are in this same 

position. They are in the position that a year or two from now 

they may very well not be on the land because they can no 

longer afford to stay in farming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but I also understand what’s happening to working 

people in this province. I represent a constituency that for the 

most part is made up of working people and retired workers 

who are in a situation, Mr. Speaker, where their job security is 

threatened, they don’t know from one day to the next whether 

or not they are going to have a job. They are only one job away 

from unemployment. They are only one job away from the 

welfare rolls, and they are worried about their future as well, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so job security is emerging as a major bargaining issue in 

this day of collective bargaining – the major, major issue – 

because people, working people, have to be concerned about 

their future because they’re in a position where they are not sure 

whether or not they are going to have a job. And I understand 

that, Mr. Speaker; I represent those people. But I also 

understand, coming from a farm background and having family 

members who are farmers, the plight of the farmer. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand the position of the 

railroad. I do not understand that position. The railroad should 

be acting in the national interests of our country. But what are 

they acting in? They are acting in the interests of profit only. 

They want to maximize their profits. And I want to talk about 

what sort of profits the railroads have garnered this year. In the 

first quarter of 1987 the CNR grossed profit over $17.7 million. 

The CPR, the Canadian Pacific Railroad, in the first quarter 

grossed over $24.5 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the second quarter of 1987 they’ve grossed over $61.5 

million. With those kinds of profits, Mr. Speaker, do not the 

railroads have some sort of obligation to the working people in 

this country? Do they not have some sort of obligation to the 

people that work for these railroads in order that they can 

maximize those kinds of profits, because if it wasn’t for the 

working people of this country, Mr. Speaker, the railroads 

would not have those kinds of profits. And I think the railroads 

should be clear on that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — With those kinds of corporate profits I fully 

understand why workers want job security. I fully understand it. 

Mr. Speaker, the CNR plans to eliminate over 14,000 positions 

by 1990. That will reduce the work-force in that railroad by 

over 25 per cent. That’s why we have these striking workers 

who are worried about job security, because the worry is very 

real. The CNR has said very clearly that they want to reduce the  

work-force by 25 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we already have over a million people in this 

country who are unemployed. We have had a situation in 

Saskatchewan where over 2,000 workers have been laid off by 

our own provincial government, and they’re out looking for 

work. We have company after company that’s going bankrupt, 

and there are workers out looking for work. We have people 

who are on welfare, who have never been on welfare in their 

lives because of the present economic situation. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, we understand on this side of the House why 

it is that workers in this country, and workers in this province, 

are worried about their future in terms of job security. Wages 

are not the issue here. Job security is, and so it should be. So it 

should be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I resent, I resent, as a person 

who comes from a farm background and as a person who 

represents working people in this province, the political wedge 

that you people continually try and lodge between working 

people in this province and the farmer in this province. Their 

interests are not different. Their interests are not different. 

 

I want to ask those members, if they’re so pro-farmer, why is it 

that they did not stand up to oppose the Crow rate? Why didn’t 

you stand up? Tell me that. The Crow rate means larger 

transportation costs for farm families in this country – farm 

families who are in economic crisis. But they said absolutely 

nothing – absolutely nothing. 

 

Why is that that they had an opportunity to fight against 

variable freight rates in this country, and they didn’t utter one 

murmur? And that would have been in the interests of farm 

families. Why is that when post offices are threatening the 

possible closure of a post office in a rural community that they 

have absolutely nothing to say, and yet they say they’re 

pro-farmer. Quite frankly, I’m tired of that. The interests of 

working people in this country and farmers in this country are 

not different; they are the same. And the enemy in this situation, 

the enemy in this situation is the corporate profit of the 

railroads. That’s the enemy. They want to maximize profit, and 

that means doing away with the Crow rate; that means variable 

freight rate; and that means laying off 14,000 workers so that 

they can maximize their corporate profit. 

 

And I want the people to be very clear, the members opposite. 

We had lots and lots of rhetoric today about competition. 

Competition, as though somehow competition was going to 

save our country from disaster. Let’s understand what 

competition in this situation means. 

 

Competition means larger farmers . . . or larger farms and fewer 

farmers, that’s what competition means. Competition means 

fewer workers, job lay-offs; that’s what rationalization and 

competition means. And I think it’s really, really important that 

people understand that. Privatization means lower wages for 

working people, and working people in this country have seen 

their wages drop significantly. That’s what happens in this 

country. 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2035 

 

Working people are having a struggle just to make ends meet, 

Mr. Speaker. Working people have to pay mortgages; and 

working people have to put food on their tables; and now 

working people have to pay for drug costs up front; and 

working people have to pay higher power bills because of the 

political boondoggle that’s going to be happening in the 

constituency of Estevan and Souris-Cannington. 

 

Working people are struggling. And when working people say, 

we’re not talking about wages here, we’re talking about a job, 

Mr. Speaker, I can relate to that, and I think farm people can as 

well because most farm families have more than one or two 

children. Most farm families do not have all of those children 

taking over the family farm. Those children go to the towns and 

the cities and become workers. They make a living working 

shift work, and they make a living working from 8 to 5; they 

make a living doing all of those things that are necessary in 

order to keep this country running. And I think that it’s time 

that in the interests of those working people that job security 

was an important issue and it wasn’t something that we take 

very lightly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t possibly support this amendment that says 

that within 72 hours we will have to have some sort of 

legislative settlement here if the workers and the railroads can’t 

arrive at some negotiated settlement. I think we put the working 

people and the unions and the railroads and the arbitrator, Bill 

Kelly, in a terrible position; we put a gun to their head. And I 

think it’s important that we let the process take its course; 

re-evaluate this in three or four or five days. But at this stage 

they’re meeting tomorrow morning at 9 o’clock. 

 

I would urge the members to withdraw the amendment. Let the 

collective bargaining process take its course in the next day or 

two. Let’s not be rash. I think the collective bargaining process 

is important, and I don’t think it’s up to the Government of 

Saskatchewan to interfere in that process because really they’re 

little fish in the big game. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to enter this debate, particularly since a goodly number of my 

constituents in Saskatoon Sutherland are people who earn their 

living on the railroad. 

 

I’m also concerned in this debate for the plight of Saskatchewan 

farmers since I work with farmers professionally myself and 

have done so more than half of my professional career. The 

press reports that I’ve read, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have indicated 

that both parties in this dispute want a settlement; that both 

farmers and working people would look for negotiations to 

settle this dispute. I think that Saskatchewan farmers want to 

see their grain moving again. As anyone in Saskatchewan 

knows, the railroads are the lifeline for Saskatchewan people. 

They brought the settlers here to settle the Prairies and ever 

since they’ve shaped the prairie economy. We only have to go 

into the coffee row of small town Saskatchewan to know just 

how vital this lifeline is for  

Saskatchewan farm people. 

 

Farm people know the importance of work, and they know and 

appreciate the efforts of working people for that reason. They 

work hard. And I think when they see people on the railroad 

working on their behalf to ship grain, they can appreciate those 

efforts. 

 

I note with interest that in The Globe and Mail of August 19, 

CN Railroad laid off 19 yard workers in Winnipeg, sparking 

predictions that the railway could prepare to abandon its branch 

line rehabilitation project in western Canada. 

 

And I think this is symptomatic of the kind of issue that we’re 

discussing here tonight, and the kind of linkage there is between 

working people and farmers. Without rail line rehabilitation 

many small communities along the Carlton branch line for 

example, serving Laird and Waldheim and communities in the 

constituency of the member for Rosthern, would find 

themselves without rail service. Indeed that’s the issue right 

now. 

 

These rural people know what it means to have railroad workers 

rebuilding their line. And here we see that CN is laying them 

off. And indeed this is part of the issue involved in this dispute 

at the present moment. What Saskatchewan farmers don’t want 

is an artificial wedge driven between themselves and working 

people. They don’t need a railroad strike which polarizes them 

and railroad workers. 

 

I think Saskatchewan people want a co-operative approach, not 

a confrontative approach. They want and need a federal 

government that is prepared to sit down and roll up the 

shirt-sleeves and jaw-bone well into the night, if necessary, and 

into the next day, and maybe into the next day and the day after 

that, without the constraint of 72 hours for a legislated 

settlement hanging over their heads. 

 

And that’s why we need negotiations to settle this dispute. And 

that’s why the members on this side of the House are calling for 

negotiations in settling it, because we don’t want a 

confrontative, hard-nosed, blind sort of settlement imposed by 

legislation. We see that there is a role for the federal 

government and the Prime Minister himself to encourage and 

facilitate negotiation. 

 

(2115) 

 

This is the call for negotiation that was behind our introduction 

of this motion, the impetus behind the original motion itself. It 

recognizes that the possibility of settlement, real, meaningful 

settlement, is in constructive discussion and in consultation, to 

build understanding and sensitivity to the issues involved. 

 

And yet what we find in this amendment is the very opposite of 

that kind of consultation. It’s a call for a legislated settlement, 

typical of the kind of confrontative or stance or mind-set of this 

Devine government. It sees the solution in bashing railroad 

workers or working people back into work, just as they saw the 

solution to the deficit problem with cutting and slashing in 

heavy-handed fashion, without consultation of the  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2036 

 

people affected by programs like the drug program or the dental 

program. 

 

Legislation in this sort of labour situation will never give a 

lasting settlement because the parties themselves won’t feel part 

of the settlement, and they won’t, in fact, be a part of the 

settlement. In a democratic society where we entrust the people 

to come up with a settlement, this is no real, durable solution. 

 

It may be a Devine solution, or a PC solution, which is why it 

comes from the members opposite, but it’s not a democratic 

solution. And the New Democrat members on this side of the 

House don’t feel the need, at this stage in the game, for 

legislated settlement. 

 

We would sooner trust discussion, and the issues involved are 

the very sort that need careful discussion where people can hear 

one another out, with time to clarify their stances on the one 

side and on the other side. An issue such as job security isn’t as 

simple as it might have sounded or appeared to any of us here in 

the House. Security in the sense of contending with some of the 

pressures of down-sizing in the market-place and in the 

technological society isn’t a simple matter of just keeping 

people or letting people go. It’s a question more of how we 

integrate these technological changes and how we deal with 

these changes as a society constructively, respecting the people 

involved. And yes, respecting the profit of the companies that 

are managing the railroads at the same time but achieving a 

balance between these two objectives. And I think 

Saskatchewan farmers can appreciate that and do appreciate it. I 

think they can also appreciate when they’re under very 

threatening economic powers in terms of the world grain 

market, the need for pension protection for working people to 

give them some measure of security in the face of the 

insecurities in the market-place. 

 

So while job security and issues like pension protection are 

major issues in the face of down-sizing the railroads, it’s 

interesting to note that at the same time the railroads are 

enjoying record profits. The men and women who are working 

to move grain then, Mr. Speaker, are working to move grain 

from Saskatchewan fields and farms overseas to feed people 

who are hungry. Saskatchewan farmers know that; I think they 

can appreciate that. They’re looking for the movement of the 

grain again. I think they’re obviously looking for railroad 

workers to get back to work, but I don’t think they’re in any 

undue haste to force them back to work, particularly if it 

doesn’t lead to a durable, meaningful settlement, a real 

resolution of the issues involved. 

 

And that’s why, I think, that the amendment proposed is such a 

very dangerous amendment because it doesn’t really get at the 

crux of the issue. It forces a decision headlong, in headstrong 

fashion by way of legislation, but it doesn’t allow the very 

parties involved to integrate their attitudes and their insights 

with each other. 

 

And so I will be voting against the amendment and against the 

motion itself. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, want to 

join in this debate, this very important debate, to add a few 

words. I don’t intend to take a great deal of time, Mr. Speaker, 

but I think that the magnitude of what this particular debate and 

what this amendment has brought into what was a positive and 

constructive resolution is such that I think it impels me to make 

a few comments. 

 

And I say this, Mr. Speaker, as a member who represents an 

urban constituency where the people who vote in that 

constituency and live there and raise their families are working 

people who work for wages and salaries. I also rise as a member 

who used to represent a rural constituency for 11 years, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know, as has been said by many of my 

colleagues here today, that the feelings of the people who live 

on our farms and work hard on those farms under some extreme 

difficulties, and the feelings of people who work in the cities 

who are their children and their sisters and their brothers, is 

such that what this government is trying to do here today is 

totally and completely cynical and unacceptable. 

 

They understand, Mr. Speaker, the people on the farm 

understand the problems that people who work for the railways 

face when it comes to pay their mortgage, and the people who 

work on the railways understand what it’s like for their parents 

who live on the farm and are facing financial difficulties today, 

because governments like this government does not provide 

adequate programs to provide them with the kind of guaranteed, 

stable income that they should have. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re faced today with a situation which 

threatens to have some serious implications for Saskatchewan’s 

economy. And I say “threatens to have” because it is not the 

case yet. There may very well be a settlement to this dispute 

and this disagreement. We don’t know that. But we do know 

that with some actions that have been taken in Ottawa already, 

and the government opposite knew that, when they moved their 

amendment, that there is a mutual agreement by the railway 

companies and by the employees’ representatives to sit down 

and talk some more. And that is happening tomorrow. And with 

somebody like Mr. Kelly involved, somebody who has had as 

many successes as he has had, I think that it’s incumbent on this 

legislature to be able to say and give him the kind of 

opportunity to try to bring about a settlement without holding to 

his head, and the head of the Prime Minister and everybody else 

involved, the gun which my colleague from Rosemont spoke 

about. That is what I object to in the amendment that has been 

brought forward by the members of the government. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that one of the reasons why this dispute 

reached the impasse that it did has to lie at the doorstep of 

governments like we have had in Ottawa and Saskatchewan in 

recent years because of the kinds of policies and attitudes which 

they have developed. 

 

The members opposite try to make this as if it is only an 

agricultural problem, as serious as that is. And in 

Saskatchewan, because of the nature of our economy, we know 

how severely agriculture might be affected. But that is a 

simplistic approach. It is a simplistic approach that only a 

Conservative could possibly put together in trying to make their 

case. 

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2037 

 

The problem is greater than that, Mr. Speaker, and that is why 

we chose, as the members of the New Democratic party, to 

bring forward a positive resolution into this House at 2:30, 

because we wanted to give the members of the government an 

opportunity to join with us, and we would join with them, in 

taking some positive initiative to try to assist a settlement of the 

dispute that we have before us in this country today. 

 

If ever there was leadership needed in Canada on the part of our 

Prime Minister, it is now. There is no other issue that is so 

important as this one at this particular time. And we felt, and I 

think rightfully so, that we should urge the Prime Minister and 

indeed encourage him to take that initiative and provide that 

leadership. And I regret very much that the members opposite 

chose not to join in that and decided instead that their only 

objective was to try to create political mischief, which is what 

we have here in this amendment. 

 

They choose to take the same route as has been taken by the 

Minister of Transport in Ottawa who, instead of taking his 

responsibilities seriously, simply said that it’s up to the railways 

to manage their business the best way that they can, and that 

he’s not going to get involved. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is an 

abrogation of a responsibility that I think no one in 

Saskatchewan or Canada, be he farmer or worker or whatever, 

can accept or will accept. 

 

Governments are elected to govern. Governments are elected to 

take some initiative when it’s required. This Conservative 

government and the government in Ottawa has taken a different 

stance. They have decided that their only purpose is to gain 

power and benefit only a few, be it the railway companies, or 

the banks, or whoever it might be. And the way you do that is 

not provide government. We need government involvement. 

We need the leadership of our politicians at the national level to 

see if a solution to this can be brought about. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this amendment is unreasonable 

and it has one other objective which I’m not sure has been 

mentioned in this House yet today. It is intended to inflame the 

situation which exists in Canada today. And why do I say that? 

I say it because, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that that Deputy 

Premier or any of his colleagues on this side of the House want 

a settlement to be brought about because, as has been said by 

member after member . . . I was surprised that the Minister of 

Justice would get up and as clearly state what he said, because I 

have a certain amount of respect for him, in spite of his little 

airplane junkets. I was shocked and surprised that he would 

stand up in this House and say that it’s either the farmers or the 

railway workers. That’s not what it is, Mr. Speaker. The issue is 

not to make those kinds of choices. 

 

Now I know that the Conservatives and this government would 

prefer that they drive a wedge between people rather than do 

what has always been done in Saskatchewan, and that is draw 

people together so that they can build what is good and what is 

in the best interests of them and their families. We don’t accept 

the view of the Minister of Justice, or the member from Arm 

River or the member from Weyburn, or what all of them have 

said,  

that somehow is an either/or. 

 

And that’s why the resolution which we proposed was the 

nature that it was, a resolution which any reasonable member in 

this House could accept and adopt and be comfortable with, a 

resolution that urged the Government of Canada and 

particularly the Prime Minister, who, it is thought, has some 

negotiating skill because of his past experiences. 

 

We urged, through the resolution, that the Prime Minister take 

all of the channels available to him to bring, or help to bring 

about a settlement. To hang over him, Mr. Speaker, and to hang 

over the Parliament of Canada, a 72-hour deadline, as the 

members opposite want to do, can only be interpreted as an 

attempt to make sure that there isn’t a settlement so that 

somehow they can take the satisfaction of having to see back to 

work legislation so they can go out and say, we have divided 

groups of people. 

 

(2130) 

 

I find that, Mr. Speaker, as a legislator – and one who has spent 

some time in this House – very objectionable. That is not why 

we’re elected to this House. That is not what the people of our 

constituencies who voted for us expected us to be doing. They 

voted for us because they expected us to represent their overall 

general interests. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that although the 

members opposite speak of their great concern for the rural 

communities of this province, and their great concern for the 

farmers, they are only words. They’re only words, because 

while they speak of that, they move with a frivolous amendment 

which does not back up what they say. Farmers, I say, Mr. 

Speaker, should not be used as pawns in the Conservative Party 

political agenda. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — But that’s what’s happening; that’s 

what’s happening. Instead of trying to bring about a settlement, 

this Conservative government is hand in hand with people like 

Mr. Crosbie, going out of their way to try to make sure that 

there isn’t a settlement and using the farmers of this province 

and the workers throughout Saskatchewan and Canada as 

pawns for straight, cheap politics. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, we cannot support this 

amendment because this amendment does not live within the 

spirit of the original resolution. If the members thought that the 

original resolution was so inadequate, surely they would have 

changed the words in it. But they did not change the words in 

that resolution because they knew that it was adequate and they 

knew that they could have supported it. But they had to have 

another element because they were not convinced that they 

were quite ready for a settlement so that the people who work 

on our farms could feel confident that they wouldn’t have to be 

concerned about what might happen two weeks from now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to repeat many of the things that so 

many members of this House have said. I simply want to say 

that I, as one who has friends in rural Saskatchewan  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2038 

 

and has friends in urban Saskatchewan, would want to make it 

very clear that they are all important to me and this caucus in 

this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — We are not in the least bit interested in 

seeing if we can pit one against the other. We are interested in 

having them work together to build a better Saskatchewan as 

they always have in the past. We are interested in making sure 

that those destructive people over there, who are trying to tear 

down all our traditions that the Saskatchewan people have built 

up, are stopped, if they can be stopped. And come three years 

from now, this kind of gamesmanship will be remembered. And 

I can only repeat what my colleague, the member from 

Riversdale said when he said to the member from Weyburn that 

he was whistling past his political graveyard while there were 

many members on the government side of the House who were 

doing the same thing once again today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have said, I will not support this amendment. 

My colleagues will not support this amendment. If the members 

opposite can’t rise above their partisan politics to act in the best 

interests of all Saskatchewan people, so be it; so be it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 

please. Please allow the member to continue. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — But it’s a choice, Mr. Speaker, that they 

will make, and I only say to the back-benchers over there who 

yet may not know how this all works. I said so several months 

ago when I first spoke after the election – watch the treasury 

benches. They do not always tell you the best advice you should 

have. Use your conscience; listen to your constituents back 

home, and if any one of those members . . . Well the member 

from Canora laughs. If any one of those back-benchers can tell 

me that in recent weeks they’ve been able to go back to their 

constituency on the weekend and be welcomed with open arms 

by people who warmly say what great things they are doing, let 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. Order, please. I’d like to once more ask the hon. 

members to please refrain from interrupting the member from 

Regina North East who’s attempting to make his points in this 

House tonight. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that the members opposite don’t like to hear what the 

members on this side of the House have to say, but they’re 

going to have to, and they’re going to have to hear again when 

they get out into the country on all of these issues. But I have 

said what I wanted to say because I wanted to add my words to 

this debate. As I said, I’m going to oppose the amendment, as 

will the rest of my colleagues on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m very pleased to enter this debate. My  

remarks will be brief. 

 

I simply want to begin, Mr. Speaker, by noting that one of the 

central themes in the history of this province, Mr. Speaker, has 

been that the CNR and the CPR have operated in their financial 

interests and against the interests of both farmers and workers, 

particularly railway workers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

The railway companies have continuously sought to manipulate 

public policy in their own interests. And they’ve sought to 

rationalize services, not in the interests of rural communities, 

Mr. Speaker, and not in the interests of railway workers, but in 

the interests of railway company balance sheets. 

 

And all that we’re witnessing today in 1987, and this month 

with this railway strike, Mr. Speaker, is a continuation of the 

trend that we’ve seen in Saskatchewan for the past 50 years. We 

see today in 1987, Mr. Speaker, railway companies who have 

cut maintenance crews in half, thus jeopardizing rail service, 

not just to farmers, but to the potash industry and to the forest 

industry in this province. 

 

We see railway companies who want to abolish the caboose, 

Mr. Speaker, and the jobs of caboose men. And in doing so, Mr. 

Speaker, they jeopardize the safety of railway workers and the 

safety of everyone who lives in communities on railway lines 

that regularly carry hazardous products, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see today, in 1987, railway companies who consistently 

seek to rationalize services to rural communities, small rural 

centres, trying to cut service to those rural farm families by 

abandoning rail lines, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see those same railway companies today intent on 

introducing variable rates, essentially, Mr. Speaker, attempting 

to destroy the very fabric of rural Saskatchewan in doing that. 

And this month those same railway companies, Mr. Speaker, 

are intent on trying to push forward their measures to lay off 

thousands of railway workers in this province; in the case of 

CN, 25 per cent of the work-force over the next four years, or 

14,000 workers. 

 

It’s the same pattern again and again in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. The railway companies have consistently sought to 

attack rural communities by bringing forward variable rates, by 

abandoning rail lines, and by attacking workers in this province 

who work for those rail lines, Mr. Speaker, by laying them off 

and by putting their jobs in jeopardy. Now we say, Mr. Speaker, 

on this side of the House that it just happens that this month, in 

this particular debate, the issue is job security for railway 

workers. And we say, Mr. Speaker, that in the face of the kind 

of massive . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. The hon. 

member from Saskatoon University is attempting to make his 

points, but he can’t do that if he’s constantly interrupted. Earlier 

on in the evening the same thing was happening to the member 

from Arm River, and certainly he’s a man who seldom, if ever, 

interrupts other people, and I think the same could apply to the 

present speaker.  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2039 

 

So I think that we should pay him the courtesy of listening to 

him. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

I was saying, in the face of the massive job cuts that CN and CP 

want to introduce, it seems to me that railway workers have 

every right to negotiate job security without having every card 

in the deck being laid on the side of the railway companies, Mr. 

Speaker. And it appears that that’s what members opposite 

want. Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, have introduced the 

resolution, an amendment to the resolution, in which they say 

that if the strike is not settled in 72 hours there ought to be back 

to work legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say to them that what they are really saying to 

railway employees in this province and across Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, is that they want every card in the deck to lay on the 

side of the railway companies in Canada. They want them to be 

in a position where they hold all the aces, and the railway 

employees hold none, Mr. Speaker, because that is precisely 

what the effect of the amendment that the members opposite 

have introduced will be. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to note that the amendment 

fundamentally changes the intention of the original motion 

introduced by the Leader of the Opposition. The intent of the 

original motion is very clear. It urges the Prime Minister to use 

his good offices to achieve an immediate resolution of the 

dispute between the railway companies and their employees, 

and it clearly urges the Prime Minister to pursue a negotiated 

settlement. It makes no reference, Mr. Speaker, to back to work 

legislation because it’s our view the back to work legislation is 

not the vehicle to use in settling this dispute. The amendment 

put forward by the PC government essentially calls for back to 

work legislation. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that you cannot negotiate in a 

meaningful way under the threat of back to work legislation in 

72 hours. All that the threat of back to work legislation does is 

play into the hands of the railway companies who are intent on 

pushing through plans to eliminate the jobs of railway 

employees in this province and right across Canada. And we 

say, Mr. Speaker, that to do that is thoroughly unfair. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we will be opposing the 

amendment, and we urge all members of this Assembly to 

support the motion in its original form. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when I 

came here today, this afternoon, and I heard the original motion 

that was being presented by my colleagues, I thought it was a 

motion that we could all agree on in this House. And I knew it 

was a motion that would give much pleasure to the constituents 

in Saskatoon Centre, many of whom have expressed to me their 

concern about the divisiveness in the House, and the fact that 

there’s always so much contention and so little harmony and so 

little chance for agreement. 

And it seemed to me that the motion that we put forward today 

calling on the federal government to move quickly for a 

negotiated settlement would be a motion that we could all agree 

on, and we could put forth a position of harmony and a position 

of strength and a position of pressure to the federal government 

on this very urgent and important matter to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But the amendment that’s been brought forth – the amendment 

that’s been brought forth, which is basically a motion calling on 

the government to legislate workers back to work, strikes me as 

particularly ironic, and definitely one that I could not support. 

 

It’s ironic for workers to be told to go back to work when the 

very issue that they’re fighting is the fact that they may not 

have any work to go back to in the next four years. When over 

14,000 workers are threatened with losing their jobs, over 25 

per cent of the work-force in the railways will not have any jobs 

to go to. And that kind of lack of job security is something that 

the farmers can very much identify with because when the 

farmers of Saskatchewan, many of whom have mothers and 

fathers living in Saskatoon Centre constituency, and also sons 

and daughters, and many of whom are my friends in the area 

where we have our land, and around the province as I’ve gotten 

to know people, I feel like I have a lot of contacts with the 

farming community, and I realize and respect the very great 

importance that the farmers have in this province. 

 

And the farmers are fighting for job security; they’re fighting to 

stay on the land. The small farmers are very worried about their 

work places, their farms. And if legislation was to come 

forward forcing 14,000 farmers off the land, they’d be pretty 

upset. And they know perfectly well what’s happening to the 

railway workers, and that that’s not acceptable, and that while 

the acting Minister of Agriculture huffs and puffs about the 

need for change and change and change, farmers and workers 

know perfectly well that only somebody who is very secure in a 

job that can’t be changed would talk so flippantly about change 

in a time when we need security as much as we can face 

change. 

 

(2145) 

 

The farmers know what the railways have done to them. They 

brought in variable freight rates which have cost the farmers 

more money. Rail line abandonment has destroyed the rural 

communities. And nobody has talked more strongly and more 

forcibly about these issues than the New Democratic Party. 

We’ve spoken very strongly for those and supported any 

opportunity to keep the rural communities secure, because 

security is as much of a value as change, and is a very important 

dimension. But what we have now is more deregulation coming 

in, which will frighten and makes changes for the farmers even 

more, and will make all sorts of changes in the work place, 

changes which make the issue of job security even more 

important. 

 

I read in the Leader-Post today – and it was very interesting to 

read – that the railways claim that they stand to lose $20 million 

a day during this strike — $20  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2040 

 

million a day in revenues. If the railways want to lose that much 

money each day in a strike, they must certainly have something 

up their sleeves to preserve them because that’s an awful lot of 

money — $20 million a day would provide farmers with a lot of 

revenue; $20 million a day would provide 48,000 rail workers 

at a salary of $30,000 a year average, would keep them going 

for almost two years. 

 

Yet by supporting this strike and not negotiating the job 

security that’s so important to the workers, the railways are 

prepared to throw away $20 million a day in revenue at a time 

when we’re so suffering, when so many people are suffering, 

and so many people need money, the railways can just toss this 

money aside by not negotiating their settlement now. And it’s 

very clear, when you’re talking about that kind of money, that 

the railways will have to negotiate soon, and there’s no need to 

put in an amendment forcing workers back to work within 72 

hours. A negotiated settlement would be a much safer way to 

go. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please! 

 

Please allow the member from Saskatoon Centre to continue her 

remarks. You know . . . she’s been interrupted quite a bit, and 

I’m sure you’ll appreciate it’s difficult to speak under those 

circumstances. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My point is that it’s unreasonable not to settle with the workers, 

and I’m sure that the railways will have to move quickly to do 

so in a negotiated settlement. The workers will not have to be 

legislated back to work. I’m sure a reasonable settlement 

recognizing the very great importance of job security, how vital 

that is to people, will be recognized and will be settled. 

 

And I notice also how ironic it is that the PC government sneers 

at job security for workers and at the same time talks over and 

over again about the need for job creation. It makes no sense to 

support the idea of workers being put out of work at the same 

time as wanting to have job creation. We have good jobs in the 

railways. We have good jobs that people are doing, and at this 

point in time, when so many people are already unemployed, it 

seems even more important to save those jobs, and if there must 

be job change, to work it out sensibly and systematically with 

the workers and not force them into a situation where within 

four years 14,000 people will lose their work. 

 

I’m concerned that the next step that the railways will make will 

be deregulation. Competition from other modes of 

transportation will come in and raise the cost for farmers even 

more. And I’m sure that the PC party obviously are not 

supporting the need to regulate transportation costs, the need to 

regulate the costs of the freight rates, the need to regulate the 

way in which rail lines are abandoned, and the way in which 

communities are destroyed. 

 

They don’t believe in regulation; you don’t believe in job 

security; you don’t believe in support for small farmers  

and workers. You are on the side of the multinationals, on the 

side of the CN railways, and you sneer at that sort of challenge; 

but it’s very true and the farmers know it; they know you 

haven’t stood up for them. The workers know you’re not going 

to stand up for them, and you certainly are not going to form the 

government at the next election. 

 

I’m certainly opposed to the amendment that you have brought 

forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to participate in this 

debate for a few minutes this evening. 

 

When the Leader of the Opposition put forward this motion this 

afternoon, we had hoped on this side that for once, Mr. Speaker, 

we could put our partisan politics aside and present a motion to 

the Canadian government in the interest, Mr. Speaker, in the 

interest not only of the farmers of Saskatchewan but of the 

workers of Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, how it relates. 

 

The railway strike that is taking place will not just affect the 

farmers, it will not just affect the workers, it will affect all of us 

in Saskatchewan. It will affect all of us in Saskatchewan. And 

for once, Mr. Speaker . . . For once, Mr. Speaker, I had hoped 

that the Deputy Premier would have put his partisan politics 

aside and would have accepted the motion that we put forward 

so that we could have protected the interests of not only the 

farmers but everyone in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of us have come from the farms, and many 

of us, our parents are still farming, our brothers and sisters are 

still farming, and many of us have still a personal interest in 

farming. It’s not just the people on the other side. You’re 

talking about job security. We’re talking about job security for 

the daughters and sons of our farmers – of our farmers. We all 

have brothers and sisters who are workers, and why, for 

heaven’s sakes, do we on this side, as you people say, run down 

the farmers, and you on that side run down the workers? It 

doesn’t make sense. It really doesn’t make sense. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It does. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Well maybe you didn’t understand the speech 

that you were reading and someone else wrote the speech for 

you, but I listened to what you were saying. I was listening to 

what you were saying. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You weren’t here. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, I was in this House when you were 

speaking. And you had your opportunity to speak. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to say to the people of this House that 

we were very sincere in putting forward a motion that we felt 

was non-partisan. And if you look at that motion that was put 

forward, each and every one of you on that side would have to 

say, yes, I can support that motion – I can support the motion. 

 

I don’t understand why we had to do this again this afternoon. I 

listened to the member from Arm River and  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2041 

 

he asked the member from Kindersley if it wasn’t true, the 

comments that he was making. And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to 

say to the member from Arm River, if he has to rely on the 

truthfulness of the things from the member from Kindersley, 

then you haven’t got much ground to stand on, Mr. Member. 

Because we know what the member from Kindersley thinks 

about the truth in this House when he speaks about government 

airplanes and how they are used. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the members opposite that 

when you are speaking on this particular motion, they should, 

first and foremost, have the interest at heart of all the people 

that are going to be affected. And as the Leader of the 

Opposition indicated, we wanted a negotiated settlement. First 

and foremost we asked the Prime Minister, who is known as a 

labour negotiator, to use his office to try and settle this dispute. 

So what do the members opposite do? They put in an 

amendment to try and embarrass the opposition. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s simply isn’t going to work, gentlemen. It 

isn’t going to work because, Mr. Speaker, we know for example 

that this dispute that is taking place today is a dispute on job 

security. 

 

Let us look back. In 1960 we had a 190,000 people working for 

the railways. Today we have 65,000. We have 65,000, and they 

are recommending that another 14,000 workers’ jobs be done 

away with. I ask the members opposite – I ask the members 

opposite, place yourself in the position of those workers. How 

would you feel if in less than – in little over 20-some years 

two-thirds, well over two-thirds of your jobs had been done 

away with. Two-thirds of your jobs had been done away with. 

 

And I say to the members opposite, just like we put in 

legislation to protect the farmers in this province so that their 

numbers aren’t decreased, so at the same time we should have 

the interest at heart of the workers in this province. So we 

should have at heart the workers of this province. 

 

And I say to the members opposite that, please, we could have 

presented a motion to the federal government, we could have 

presented a motion to the federal government which would have 

received unanimous support – unanimous support from your 

side and from our side – if you would have withdrawn the 

amendment that you put forward. 

 

This amendment, Mr. Speaker, really negates any possibility at 

all of negotiating a settlement with the workers and the railways 

through the federal government. And why it was put forward, as 

I indicated before, was simply to try and make sure that they 

could put the NDP or the opposition in a position where we 

could not support the amended motion that was put forward. 

 

I want to say to the member from Weyburn, in his little speech 

that he made this evening, that we are opposed to change. He 

says, you are opposed to change. 

 

Yes, yes, Mr. Minister, I am opposed to change, some of  

the changes that you are making. I am opposed, I am opposed 

when you arbitrarily dismiss people that have 30 years of 

experience in this province. If you arbitrarily dismiss them, I’m 

opposed to that change. 

 

I’m opposed, Mr. Minister, to the change when you change this 

province from a have province to a have-not province. I’m 

opposed to that kind of a change. I say to the minister, I say to 

the minister, yes, I’m opposed to change. When you change this 

province from a surplus to a $3.4 billion deficit in four years, 

I’m opposed to that kind of change. I say to the member, to the 

Minister of Education, yes, I am opposed to change in 

education when you make those changes arbitrarily and you 

don’t consult. You don’t consult. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. Order, order, please. Order. 

 

I think that we have here a perfect display of things getting a 

little bit out of control. He’s a little bit off the topic, and I know 

he realizes that. And over here we have people hollering to my 

right, so let’s just allow the hon. member from Saskatoon South 

to carry on. 

 

I realize that we’re close to 10. It’s been a long day, but let’s 

finish the day. 

 

Order, please. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m asking, Mr. Speaker, for leave to 

deal with the question of this particular motion. This particular 

motion was raised, Mr. Speaker, as rule 13, a matter of . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Rule 39. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Rule 39, a matter of urgent and 

compelling nature. I’m wondering if we could have leave to 

stop the clock to deal with this matter until its conclusion. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that we can really 

do it at this point in time. There are other members on our side 

of the House that still wish to participate in this debate, and the 

member from Saskatoon South was on his feet, Mr. Speaker, 

and we do have other members who want . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Okay. Thank you. Okay. Obviously leave is 

not granted. I recognize the member for Regina South. Oh, 

sorry. Okay, okay. Okay, okay. Just a minute. 

 

Order. Let’s get this straight now. The House Leader, on a point 

of order, asked for leave to carry on with the vote. It wasn’t 

actually a point of order, but he’s basically asking for leave, so 

is leave granted? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

(2200) 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the Deputy 

Premier has requested leave. I’m certain that all members on 

this side of the House will give leave to the Deputy Premier on 

the condition that the Deputy Premier  

  



 

August 24, 1987 

2042 

 

withdraws the amendment so that we can deal with, Mr. 

Speaker, the motion that was put forward under rule 39. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 


