













































September 15, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

September 15, 1987 

  

 

2539 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to draw your attention, and the attention of all hon. 

members to the presence in your gallery today of a very special 

visitor from Australia. Miss Karen Forest is visiting 

Saskatchewan for a number of months as an exchange student, 

spending a good portion of her time in the community of 

Assiniboia, and I’ve had an opportunity to meet and to visit 

with here there. She is from Phillips Island in Australia, and she 

is accompanied today by her Regina host, Mrs. Darlene 

Elchuck, and I would invite all hon. members to join with me in 

welcoming both of them to our Assembly this afternoon, and 

wishing Karen, in particular, a very happy stay while she’s in 

Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my pleasure to ask you and all members of the 

Assembly to welcome my parents, Reg and Trudy Prebble, who 

are sitting in your gallery, to your left, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

delighted to have them visiting in Regina, and I’d ask all 

members to join me in welcoming them to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Free Trade Negotiations 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question, 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Economic Trade and 

Development, who has just returned back to the House from 

Ottawa, and it pertains to free trade. Mr. Minister, when the free 

trade negotiations began, your Premier described them in these 

terms: that we have everything to gain and nothing to lose. 

 

In the light of the softwood lumber fiasco, the cedar shakes and 

shingles fiasco, the potash anti-dumping fiasco and action, and 

in the light of the current state of negotiations which seem to be 

going nowhere: will the minister admit on behalf of the 

government now, that this initiative has been ill-conceived from 

the outset, bungled in its negotiations, and ought to be scrapped 

at this point? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. In response to the hon. member’s question, I think that 

shows and demonstrates the traditional approach of the NDP, of 

being totally against trade . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — A lack of understanding. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — . . . total lack of understanding of trade 

by Canada with the United States. 

Let me make this point, Mr. Speaker. Canada exports 77 per 

cent of everything that it exports to United States. In the latest 

figures, that’d be in 1986, Canada exported $90 billion worth of 

merchandise trade to the United States. The next highest trading 

partner, the next largest customer of our products out of Canada 

was Japan with something less than 6 billion. Now 90 billion is 

a very, very important market for Canada. I think the Premier, I 

think all the premiers, recognize that and want to find a 

mechanism by which we can assure ourselves of that continued 

market in United States of $90-plus billion. 

 

Now it’s easy for the opposition to say, no, don’t trade with the 

United States; go trade it someplace else. But 37 per cent of all 

our trade is in automobiles, and I would challenge anybody to 

suggest where we might sell Canadian manufactured 

automobiles other than to the United States and Canada. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the 

Minister of Economic Trade and Development. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s not that the members on this side are against trade. To the 

contrary, we’re for trade everywhere including the United 

States. 

 

What we are against, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, is the way 

this initiative has been so badly handled from the beginning, 

now approaching its apparently unsatisfactory conclusion. Part 

of the bungling, sir, is the fact that nobody can get a straight 

answer from your government as to what issues are or are not 

on the table. 

 

And my question to you, therefore, is this: for example, in some 

quarters it is said that agricultural issues are not on the table, yet 

your very Premier says that’s not true, that farming and 

agriculture is on the table. 

 

Will you please tell the House and the farmers of this province 

of Saskatchewan: is agriculture on the free trade table; and if so, 

how do we know that Prime Minister Mulroney will not, in a 

desperate attempt to get a last minute deal, do away with the 

Canadian Wheat Board and other orderly marketing agencies? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, it is true that the hon. 

member absolutely knows nothing about what is being dealt 

with in the trade negotiations, as he absolutely knows nothing 

about agriculture. 

 

Now the premiers and the Prime Minister met yesterday for an 

extended period of time with Simon Reisman, the chief 

negotiator for Canada. Clearly the decision of the premiers and 

the Prime Minister was not to go out into the world and start to 

tell everybody exactly what was and was not on the table. It 

would simply tie the hands of our negotiator in the last three 

weeks of the negotiations to the point where it would not be 

possible to probably consume a deal, if one is possible now. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister 

of Economic Trade and Development. I readily admit that I 

don’t know all of the aspects pertaining to the  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2540 

 

negotiations on free trade. In fact, I’d go so far as to say that 

nobody in Canada knows what’s being talked about in free 

trade. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would even go so far as to say that 

the Premier and this government doesn’t know what’s going on 

in free trade. 

 

And my question to you therefore is simply this. In the light of 

the fact that all of these discussions have been in secret, in view 

of the fact that we don’t want a spirit of Meech Lake applying 

to free trade with the possible negative consequences, can you 

not tell the farmers and the people of this province clearly, 

today, that the Canadian Wheat Board and orderly marketing 

and farm issue are not on the table? How about giving us that 

assurance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, there is nobody at that 

table of the 10 first ministers and the Prime Minister that knows 

more about the issue of agriculture than the Premier of 

Saskatchewan. And I don’t think that is a debate, even amongst 

the 10 first ministers, that would suggest that. 

 

The hon. member from Riversdale likes to make the allegation 

that somehow the Canadian Wheat Board is what we’re talking 

about in the free trade negotiations, or medicare is what we’re 

talking about, or whether we’ll have the CBC, all the classic 

yesterday old-fashioned issues that he always wants to talk 

about. Not about how we: (a) assure ourselves access to the 

U.S. market, number one; and (b) how do we have a mechanism 

that can deal with disputes in a meaningful way represented by 

both countries, so that we avoid the anti-dump action that we 

see in potash, or the countervail action that we see in soft wood 

lumber, and the security of supply legislation that we see in 

uranium. 

 

Each of those industries are very critical to our province. And I 

quite frankly find it hard to understand why the member from 

Riversdale, who has ambitions to become the premier, would 

not have a concern about (a) the jobs, and the nature of the 

income that we could receive from those fundamental resource 

industries that are so fundamental to the economic well-being of 

this province and of this country. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary question to the 

Economic Trade minister. Mr. Minister, quite frankly I’m 

shocked – not totally surprised – at your description about our 

concern about Canadian Wheat Board and orderly marketing 

being something as an old-fashioned issue. Because I want to 

tell you frankly, if that is the characterization, then indeed we 

are old-fashioned, because this side does support the Canadian 

Wheat Board and orderly marketing. Make no mistake about 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I want you to tell this House, and this is my 

question: how do we know that when the eleventh hour of the 

negotiations are here – and they’re not here – when the 

negotiations are coming to the crunch, how can we be assured, 

that some sort of an arrangement  

that might protect, for example, the auto trade in Canada is 

made, but made only at the expense of Saskatchewan and 

Canadian farmers, such as the Canadian Wheat Board. Can you 

tell me clearly that the Canadian Wheat Board and agricultural 

issues are off the table? Something which you have refused to 

do today and your Premier continues to refuse to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, let me make it very clear, 

two points. Number one, western Canadians – not only just 

Saskatchewan people – western Canadians will not stand by 

should the situation arise where somehow we were traded off 

against the auto pact. That would never happen, nor should it 

ever happen. And number two, the Canadian Wheat Board is 

not at dispute in these trade negotiations. To my knowledge it 

never has been, and I don’t believe any of the 10 premiers 

would even suggest that they would even discuss it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board is a fundamental 

institution in this country, supported by this government, and 

we will defend, and the Premier of this province will defend, 

the wheat board, stronger, I would suggest, than any elected 

politician in this country. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to 

the minister. The minister in his last answer to me, sir, used the 

words – and you will recollect them of course – words to the 

effect that say, so far as I know, so far as we know, the 

Canadian Wheat Board is not on the table, or so far as my 

knowledge pertains, the Canadian Wheat Board is not on the 

table. 

 

Look, Mr. Minister, I have a simple question for you. You were 

at that meeting. Did not you, or at the least the Premier of this 

province, get up and ask the Prime Minister a simple, 

straightforward question to assure the farmers of Saskatchewan 

that it’s not on the table? What in the world were you doing 

there in Ottawa? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this 

province has defended agriculture, has defended the Canadian 

Wheat Board as a model by which the world could market its 

grain and market its wheat. The Canadian Wheat Board has 

never been an issue at the table. I simply say, to my knowledge, 

because I don’t actually sit at the table with the premiers as you 

should full well know, so from that point of view, the Premier is 

not prepared to deal with the Canadian Wheat Board, nor is the 

Prime Minister, nor are the other 10, or other nine premiers. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — One final question, a new question, if I 

might, of the minister, Mr. Speaker, and this has to do with 

respect to the question of the United States motions with respect 

to the anti-dumping so-called in potash. According to the 

Leader-Post on Saturday, an unnamed trade official of the 

delegation of which you, sir, is the responsible minister, is 

quoted as saying that the Premier and you would go down to 

these conferences keeping in mind what the Americans had 

done to the Saskatchewan potash industry on their anti-dump. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

2541 

 

 

My question is this: did you or the Premier take advantage of 

the special relationship that the Premier has with Mr. Mulroney 

and urge Mr. Mulroney and his special advantage with the 

President of the United States to specifically raise the issue of 

what the Americans have done to Saskatchewan and Canada on 

potash. And it’s not only Saskatchewan; it’s softwood lumber 

and everything else. 

 

Did you raise this specifically and say to the Prime Minister of 

this country, look, Prime Minister, we say to the President of 

the United States the following: stop that United States 

anti-dumping action on the potash to save our potash families 

and towns, or we walk out of these free trade talks? Did you at 

least do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, let me say this: 

I welcome the first question from the member from Riversdale 

on the issue of potash. I’m glad that he has now taken an 

interest in this dimension of the debate as it relates to potash. 

 

The Premier will be in the House tomorrow, but I can assure 

you that the Premier not only laid the lumber to the people in 

New York, I understand as well . . . I understand that . . . The 

members opposite do not wish to see the Premier walking at the 

national . . . or the international stage, but the Premier was in 

New York, and the Premier delivered the message in New York 

that we are playing, and we’re going to playing hard on the 

potash question. 

 

The Premier also delivered the message to the recent premiers’ 

conference, and I am advised that he delivered that message 

yesterday in the meeting with other first ministers and the Prime 

Minister, and he delivered it with a great deal of force. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Alleged Patronage Appointment at Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the minister in charge of the Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, a few months ago PCS fired 

approximately 180 employees, and at that time PCS indicated 

the reason for the firing was that the potash markets were 

simply too poor to maintain the staff level. 

 

I notice now that the American president, Chuck Childers, has 

begun rehiring again. And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is 

this: can you confirm that a Katrina Forrest has been hired by 

the PCS as the U.S. liaison officer? Katrina Forrest, Mr. 

Minister, is the daughter of Chuck Childers. 

 

Would you tell me, Mr. Minister, was this position advertised, 

and how many Saskatchewan residents applied for this 

position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I am advised by the  

potash corporation that the individual was hired, not by the 

potash corporation but by PCS (Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan International) (sales) International. I’m not aware 

. . . Well, you know, the hon. members don’t understand the 

distinction. However, having said that, I think I’m giving the 

hon. member a more precise answer to the question than the one 

that he asked. And secondly, I am not aware that there was any 

competition for it. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — It’s not surprising, Mr. Speaker, a 

supplementary question. It’s not surprising that there wasn’t any 

advertising or competition. Mr. Minister, may I remind you that 

PCS International is not an offshore marketing . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, it is an offshore . . . 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — . . . Or is an offshore marketing agency. Would 

you mind telling me what the qualifications were for Katrina 

Forrest; and if Mr. Chuck Childers is an American, certainly he 

knows the American market situation. What contribution can 

Katrina Forrest make in an advisory capacity or as a liaison 

officer to Mr. Childers? Would you mind telling the House this? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll take notice, Mr. Speaker. I do not have 

the individual’s resume, but I will get the qualifications for the 

hon. member. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

while the minister is taking notice of this, would he also mind 

asking the PCS International how much is being paid to Katrina 

Forrest; and if you could indicate to me, were there any other 

people interested in the position at that particular time? Did you 

do a search within the people who have been fired, of those 180 

people that were fired. There are a number of people, not only 

in Saskatchewan but also in my own constituency, who I think 

could have qualified for that particular job. Would you bring 

that information back to the House tomorrow? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m certainly prepared, Mr. Speaker, to 

supply the income positions of the senior officials in the 

traditional manner of the Assembly. I’ve indicated that I’ll get 

the qualifications for the hon. member. The assurance I have 

from the officials that she was a highly qualified individual. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, another supplementary question to 

the minister. Would the minister tell me if Mr. Chuck Childers 

did not do the direct hiring. Was the chairman of the board, the 

defeated PC candidate, Paul Schoenhals involved in the hiring 

of Katrina Forrest, directly or indirectly? Directly did he do the 

hiring then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I will have to try and get the 

information from the hon. member. The only advice I have is: 

one, that she was hired; that it was PCS (sales) International; 

and that the individual was highly qualified, as I’ve indicated. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2542 

 

Special Security Section of Property Management 

Corporation 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

my question is directed to the minister responsible for the 

property management corporation of Saskatchewan. It deals 

again with the special security unit that the government has 

created within this corporation. 

 

I thought perhaps the Deputy Premier wanted to get a word in 

there. It deals, once again, with the special security unit that the 

government has created within the property management 

corporation. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have said that this five-person security unit 

will provide increased security to cabinet ministers. I want to 

know, Mr. Minister, do you honestly expect Saskatchewan 

people to believe that the Premier and his cabinet ministers 

require bodyguards over and above the adequate service already 

provided by Wascana police? Or is the real reason for this 

security unit to further insulate the Premier and cabinet 

ministers from the public of Saskatchewan to give you another 

excuse for avoiding listening to the public’s complaints about 

your incompetence and uncaring policies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I realize the question 

was asked yesterday when I was out in Yorkton, Saskatchewan 

with 250 people in small business, without any security, 

listening to their concerns. 

 

However, in reply to your question, Mr. Member, this is the 

continuation of the Vital Points agreement that was brought to 

this province on behalf of the federal government and the 

federal RCMP in 1981. That’s when the Vital Points agreement 

first was taken between Saskatchewan and the federal 

government. So let me indicate to you, from that, in 1983 a 

Vital Points agreement and service was instituted in this 

province. 

 

There are some people that have been hired, highly qualified, to 

execute that. But for you to rise in this House and lead in your 

question about trying to insulate oneself from the people of 

Saskatchewan, to try and let on some innuendo that is simply 

not correct, when yesterday when you questioned on this I was 

exactly in Yorkton, Saskatchewan by myself with 250 people 

that were darn glad I was there to listen about small business 

interests . . . Now if that’s insulating this government from the 

people of Saskatchewan, I’d like to hear your viewpoint on that. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a new 

question to the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation and, in doing so, remind him of rule 

25, which deals with needless repetition and useless repetition. 

 

Mr. Minister, since your government came to office, we have 

seen computerized security posts installed in the legislative 

buildings. For the first time ever the public can’t move about 

this building on their own. Access to this building is controlled 

24 hours a day. Public demonstrations have been banned from 

this most public of all building in Saskatchewan. This 

legislature has been  

turned . . . this legislature, Mr. Speaker, has been turned into 

fortress Saskatchewan. Now you want bodyguards. Now you 

want bodyguards. 

 

How can . . . Mr. Minister, how can the minister possibly justify 

this kind of expensive attempt to insulate his government from 

public criticism? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I listened with 

amazement again to the inflammatory type of statements from 

the member opposite. It’s strange for me to see the member 

opposite who once occupied the chair that you’re in today, a 

respected chair in this legislature, who realizes full well that the 

security within this Legislative Chamber and within this 

building is under the direction of the Board of Internal 

Economy; it seems strange to me that a member who was a 

high-ranking member in that government, the Speaker, who 

realized that when they were the government they got the start 

on the vital points program – it was in agreement with your 

government. 

 

Now I can’t see how a person can stand in this Chamber and 

say there’s any type of insulation, any type of personal 

protection. There is a unit within the SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation) that will provide 

surveillance of building should we go out of this building to 

hold a meeting. And if the members on the opposite side – as I 

said to the member of the press the other day that interviewed 

me – if the Leader of the Opposition or the aspiring leader of 

the opposition feel that they want that type of service, it’s 

available to you. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, a final question to the 

minister, since he’s neatly avoided answering the last question I 

asked him. Now the minister should answer this question. It’s 

about the mandate of this new security unit which is answerable 

only to you and your cabinet colleagues – not to the Speaker, 

not to the Sergeant-at-Arms, not to Wascana police, but to you, 

Mr. Minister, and your cabinet colleagues, in secret. 

 

Over the last five years a number of civil servants have been so 

disgusted with your government’s patronage and incompetence 

and unfair policies that they have leaked information to the 

media and others. Are information leaks part of this unit’s 

mandate; is it a plumbers’ unit assigned to plug the 

embarrassing leaks of information to taxpayers; and will the 

minister table the report’s vital points? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, to many of the things that 

he asked me: first about any types of leaks; there’s no 

relationship to that at all. It comes out of a system from across 

Canada – across Canada – advocated to all legislatures in 

Canada by the federal RCM Police and the federal government, 

a Vital Points program to put a minimal amount of security 

available to members of the legislature. 

 

You should know, and if you have forgot I’ll remind you, that 

the security of this Chamber and this building is under Mr. 

Speaker and the Clerk of the legislature. I offer to you, I offer  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

2543 

 

 

to you or any other member, the same type of security from the 

property management Crown that is available to me or anyone 

else. All you have to do is ask for it, and it’s available to you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill 01 – An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities 

 

Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before moving Bill 

No. 01, I would like to take a few moments to make a few brief 

comments. 

 

It is my very distinct pleasure to rise in this Assembly to move 

second reading of a private member’s Bill regarding the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. This 

legislation has been presented for consideration of this 

Assembly to allow the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities the statutory authority to operate their own 

liability insurance system. 

 

Members of this Assembly may recall that about three years 

past, insurance companies began raising premiums and 

premium rates to municipalities for basic liability insurance. In 

response to this concern, 299 rural municipalities in this 

province, who are members of the Saskatchewan association, 

stopped to investigate the feasibility of operating their own 

liability insurance system to cover the needs of our rural 

municipalities. 

 

I’m advised by the association that upon Royal Assent of this 

proposed Bill they are in a position to commence a liability 

insurance program October 1 of this year. I’ve also been 

advised that 211 rural municipalities have indicated their desire 

to participate in the plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation represents an historical occasion, I 

think, for the province of Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities is believed to be the only 

provincial organization which has been able to develop a 

self-insurance program approved by the majority of its 

members. 

 

And this is a typical attitude of the leadership evident in rural 

councils across the province. They did not come running to the 

government to ask for money to solve their problem, nor did 

they ask the provincial or federal government to solve their 

problem for them. In their tradition, of course, of 

self-sufficiency that always has made rural Saskatchewan 

strong and vibrant, these municipal leaders looked for a 

resolution to the problem on their own. 

 

And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that for the benefit of all 

members, that the proposed coverage under the self-insurance 

plan provides more coverage than is available or was available 

in the market-place. It now includes a provision for $500,000 

worth of environmental damage protection. That protection 

simply cannot be purchased anywhere through the commercial 

insurance programs. 

Mr. Speaker, the rural municipalities have an excellent record 

over the past years for claims under the liability policies. It’s 

certainly the position of the Saskatchewan association of 

municipalities that if they didn’t cause the rising claims and 

subsequent rising premiums that have become evident in 

liability insurance market, like world-wide, the associations 

have certainly taken the position that if they didn’t cause the 

problem, why should they pay for it? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the proposed legislation, I think, is 

straightforward, requires little or any further comment, I think, 

at this time. And I would urge all members to support this 

historic legislation. And it’s my pleasure to move second 

reading of Bill No. 01, An Act respecting the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities, and at this time refer Bill 

No. 01 to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to just say a 

word or two on this Bill. First, I want to indicate that I and my 

colleagues will be supporting the Bill. 

 

Secondly, I want to compliment the Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities, their executive, and Lorne Wilkinson, 

their past executive director I believe his title was, certainly 

chief executive officer, for the work that they have done on this 

project. It shows an outstanding amount of initiative of the sort 

of thing we have come to expect from the SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities). 

 

I was disappointed that they had to launch what is, in effect, 

their own insurance company. I would have felt it better if the 

public insurance company, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance) had been able to offer a liability coverage on a 

reasonable premium based upon loss experience here or on the 

Prairies and not in Bhopal or Baltimore or wherever else the 

accidents have been happening which have driven up liability 

insurance premiums. 

 

I would also have thought that our public insurance company 

might have offered the environmental hazard insurance which, I 

was advised, was simply not obtainable by rural municipalities. 

 

But leaving that aside, we can have an opportunity to debate 

those issues on another occasion. My purpose now is to 

compliment the SARM for their initiative, for the work they 

have done in organizing the large number of rural 

municipalities across the province, explaining the benefits of 

being self-insurers, and this legislation as a result of their 

initiative. And on that basis, I will be supporting it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Bill No. 02 – An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the 

Briercrest Bible College 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2544 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure today to move that Bill No. 02, An Act to 

amend An Act to incorporate the Briercrest Bible College, be 

now read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee 

on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Bill No. 03 – An Act respecting Our Lady of the Prairies 

Foundation 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Before moving second reading of this Bill, I 

want to say a few words about the Our Lady of the Prairies 

Foundation. I think the foundation really needs no introduction 

to most people in this province. It is a charitable foundation 

which deals a lot with religious groups and does try to 

accomplish its objectives mainly in that particular area, but not 

exclusively. 

 

The objectives of the foundation are set out very clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, in section 4 of this Bill, and I think if we go through 

those very quickly, it will indicate to the members here that 

everyone, I think, can support those objectives: 4(a) says one of 

the objectives of the foundation is to: 

 

(a) propagate the Christian faith and gospel as taught by 

the Roman Catholic Church; 

 

(b) promote a greater devotion to Mary the Mother of God 

. . . 

 

(c) assist and provide scholarships or bursaries to any 

deserving person intending to become a priest, brother or 

sister in the Roman Catholic church; 

 

One other objective is to: 

 

(d) found, create and make payments in the nature of 

scholarships, bursaries, prizes or otherwise to deserving 

students, regardless of race, colour or creed, to further 

their education; 

 

(e) assist, aid or contribute to works of charity, educational 

institutions, missionary institutions or religious institutions 

in Canada or elsewhere; 

 

(f) do acts of mercy and contribute to, aid or assist, in 

Canada or elsewhere, any person engaged in the 

advancement of, or in a pursuit which would tend to 

advance, the objects of the Foundation; 

 

And lastly, Mr. Speaker:  

 

(g) do any and all other things that are incidental or 

conducive to the attainment of the objects and purpose of 

which the Foundation is established.  

 

I think all members in this House would find that those 

objectives are laudable objectives, and we could  

certainly support those. And I think in that sense it is not a 

controversial Bill. I think it is worthwhile to point out that the 

trustees of the Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation, the trustees 

are Joseph B. Leier, James A. Leier, and their sister, Patricia J. 

Sikler, and two other trustees may be appointed. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of a Bill 

respecting Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the House Leader of the 

Opposition and myself have agreed to an arrangement whereby 

we could simply stand everything up to motions for returns 

(debatable) on page 21 and deal with the motions for return 

(debatable), Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 16 

 

Mr. Prebble moved, seconded by Mr. Hagel, that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 16 showing: 

 

Regarding the Premier’s early 1986 announcement of 

plans to build a new College of Agriculture at the 

University of Saskatchewan: (1) the current estimate of the 

total cost of the project; (2) the portion of the total cost 

that will be contributed by: the provincial government, the 

University of Saskatchewan, the federal government and 

the general public; (3) the amount that the provincial 

government has spent to this point on this project; (4) the 

date construction is to begin and the date the project is 

scheduled to be completed. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 16 

showing: 

 

Regarding the Premier’s early 1986 announcement plans 

to build a new College of Agriculture at the University of 

Saskatchewan, we would like to know: (1) the current 

estimate of the total cost of the project; (2) the portion of 

the total cost that will be contributed by the provincial 

government, the University of Saskatchewan, the federal 

government, and the general public; (3) the amount that 

the provincial government has spent to this point on the 

project; (4) the construction schedule and the date the 

project is scheduled to be completed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that this is straightforward 

information that ought to be available to all members of the 

public, all members of the Assembly. The question of support 

for this project is certainly not in dispute. I think that all 

members of this Assembly are anxious to see the project 

proceed as quickly as possible. It’s to the credit of  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

2545 

 

 

the government that it is proceeding. It’s not to the credit of the 

government that it’s proceeding so slowly, Mr. Chairman, and 

we look forward to receiving this information and seeing 

firsthand what kind of a financial commitment is going to go 

into the construction of this province from the provincial 

government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll move that, seconded by my colleague, the member for 

Moose Jaw North. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 199 

 

Mr. Anguish moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for a return showing: 

 

For the period April 1, 1986, to the date this return was 

ordered, a list of all highway construction projects 

tendered by the Department of Highways and 

Transportation, including: (a) a full description of the 

work involved in each project tendered; (b) the names of 

all bidders and the total amount bid by each bidder on each 

project; (c) the name of the successful bidder on each 

project; (d) where applicable, the reasons why the low 

bidder was not awarded the contract. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was wondering if I 

could have leave of the House to deal with both motions at the 

same time, Mr. Speaker. One is for the . . . the one that we’re 

dealing with now is for the period from April 1, 1986 to the 

date of this return . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — We’re going to give them both to you, 

so just move them both. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Okay, I understand from the House Leader 

that they’ll both be provided. 

 

So that I would move that an order of the Assembly do issue a 

return: 

 

For the period April 1, 1986, to the date this return was 

ordered, a list of all highway construction projects 

tendered by the Department of Highways and 

Transportation, including: (a) a full description of the 

work involved in each project tendered; (b) the names of 

all bidders and the total amount bid by each bidder on each 

project; (c) the name of the successful bidder on each 

project; (d) where applicable, the reasons why the low 

bidder was not awarded the contract. 

 

I so move, seconded by the hon. member from Cumberland. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1445) 

 

Motion No. 200 

 

Mr. Anguish moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 200  

showing: 

 

For the fiscal year 1985-86, a list of all highway 

construction projects tendered by the Department of 

Highways and Transportation, including: (a) a full 

description of the work involved in each project tendered; 

(b) the names of all bidders and the total amount bid by 

each bidder on each project; (c) the name of the successful 

bidder on each project; (d) where applicable, the reasons 

why the low bidder was not awarded the contract. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the hon. member from Cumberland, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue a return showing: 

 

For the fiscal year 1985-65, a list of all highway 

construction projects tendered by the Department of 

Highways and Transportation, including: (a) a full 

description of the work involved in each project tendered; 

(b) the names of all bidders and the total amount bid by 

each bidder on each project; (c) the name of the successful 

bidder on each project; (d) where applicable, the reasons 

why the low bidder was not awarded the contract. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 201 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Prebble, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 201 showing: 

 

For the period March 1, 1984 to the date this return was 

ordered: (1) the amounts paid to the firm of Mercury 

Printers Limited by each department, board, commission, 

Crown corporation and agency of the Government of 

Saskatchewan; (2) in each case, the nature of the work 

performed. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 201 showing: 

 

For the period March 1, 1984 to the date this return was 

ordered . . . the amounts paid to the firm of Mercury 

Printers Limited (for) . . . each department, board, 

commission, Crown corporation and agency of . . . 

Government of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case, the nature 

of the work performed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the reason for moving the motion is that I 

have heard some dissatisfaction voiced in the business world 

about the manner in which the printing of this government is 

allotted. Let me give you an example. Some printing plants are 

running idle, not having a full work-load. Other printing plants 

are backed up with government orders and have other 

government orders coming in. 

 

So I’m concerned that there is a more equitable distribution of 

the government printing in the province of Saskatchewan, and I 

think with this question and subsequent ones we should be able 

to determine that.  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2546 

 

And this is seconded by my seat-mate, the member for 

Saskatoon University. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move a minor 

amendment that will just clean this up a little bit and still 

provide the information that the hon. member has asked for to 

do the comparisons that he has indicated that he wants to do. 

 

This amendment will simply kind of cut down a little bit on the 

amount of work that’s going to have to be done, because the 

way the motion reads, he wants an itemization of each of the 

departments of the government with each of the . . . in 

subsequent motions, each of the agency’s name. And we’re 

providing all of the information with the exception of that 

itemization. The amendment would be as follows: 

 

That return no. 201 be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “showing” and substituting: 

 

For the period March 1, 1984 to the date this return was 

ordered, the amounts paid to the firm of Mercury Printers 

Limited by each department, board, commission, Crown 

corporation and agency of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I move that, seconded by the Minister of Health. 

 

The effect of that amendment is simply to eliminate the 

requirement for itemization on each one of those categories. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t wish to unduly 

burden the government with extra work in providing the 

answers to these questions. However, I think it’s quite clear that 

these questions have been on the order paper for months and 

months and months and have not been dealt with up until this 

time. 

 

And I don’t see that the request in the original motion, which 

said . . . which the minister by his amendment is deleting, in 

each case the nature of the work performed, is a difficult feat to 

perform, since the people who will be researching the answer 

for this particular question will have that information readily 

accessible to them. And I would urge the members to defeat the 

amendment that’s been offered by the minister and pass the 

motion in its unamended form. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 202 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 202 showing: 

 

For the period March 1, 1984 to the date this return was 

ordered: (1) the amounts paid to the firm of Brigdens 

Photo/Graphics Limited by each department, board, 

commission, Crown corporation, and agency of the 

Government of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case, the nature 

of the  

work performed. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, with great trepidation I rise 

to move that order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 202. 

I see the Deputy Premier shuffling through his papers. No. 202 

is similar to a previous motion which was dealt with by this 

Assembly, and it provides that information be produced: 

 

For the period March 1, 1984 to the date of this return . . . 

when this return was ordered: (1) the amounts paid to the 

firm of Brigdens Photo/Graphics Limited by each 

department, board, commission, Crown corporation, and 

agency of the Government of Saskatchewan; (2) in each 

case, the nature of the work performed. 

 

And I do so move, seconded by the member from Cumberland. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, without advancing the 

argument, because it would be repeating the identical argument 

of the passed . . . immediately passed motion, I move, seconded 

by the Minister of Health: 

 

That return no. 202 be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “showing” and substituting: 

 

For the period March 1, 1984 to the date this return was 

ordered, the amounts paid to the firm of Brigdens 

Photo/Graphics Limited by each department, board, 

commission, Crown corporation, and agency of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 203 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 203 showing: 

 

For the period March 1, 1984 to the date this return was 

ordered: (1) the amounts paid to the firm of Roberts and 

Poole Advertising Corporation by each department, board, 

commission, Crown corporation and agency of the 

Government of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case, the nature 

of the work performed. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 203 showing, seconded by the 

member from Cumberland. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Minister of Health: 

 

That return no. 203 be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “showing” and substituting: 

 

For the period March 1, 1984 to the date this return was 

ordered, the amounts paid to the firm of Roberts and Poole 

Advertising Corporation by  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

2547 

 

 

each department, board, commission, Crown corporation 

and agency of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 204 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 204 showing: 

 

For the period March 1, 1984 to the date this return was 

ordered: (1) the amounts paid to the firms of Dome 

Advertising Limited and Dome Media Buying Services 

Limited by each department, board, commission, Crown 

corporation and agency of the Government of 

Saskatchewan; (2) in each case, the nature of the work 

performed. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 204 showing: 

 

For the period March 1, 1984 to the date this return was 

ordered: (1) the amounts paid to the firms of Dome 

Advertising Limited and Dome Media Buying Services 

Limited by each department, board, commission, Crown 

corporation and agency of the Government of 

Saskatchewan; and (2) in each case, the nature of the work 

performed. 

 

And I might say, in moving this motion which is seconded by 

the member from Cumberland, that I would hope that the 

Deputy Premier will not take the opportunity to amend this by 

deleting “the nature of the work performed” because I suspect 

that the work performed by this agency is of a, by and large, a 

high political order. And as a consequence, we would like to 

know precisely the nature of the work performed. 

 

And it’s with a great deal of pleasure that I move that search for 

information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Minister of Health: 

 

That return no. 204 be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “showing” and substituting: 

 

For the period March 1, 1984 to the date this return was 

ordered, the amounts paid to the firms of Dome 

Advertising Limited and Dome Media Buying Services 

Limited by each department, board, commission, Crown 

corporation, and agency of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 205 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 205 showing: 

 

With respect to one Dave Tkachuk, what salary, contract 

payments, expenses, or fringe benefits did he receive from 

the Government of Saskatchewan or any of its 

departments, Crown corporations, boards, agencies, or 

commissions during the 1985-86 fiscal year, including in 

each instance: (1) the amount of the payments; (2) the 

purpose of the payments; (3) his exact duties and 

responsibilities respecting each payment; (4) where 

applicable, whether or not the work in question was 

awarded public tender. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move than an order of the 

Assembly . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I suppose you’re going to tell me this 

one is political. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Do you want to make your speech before 

me? 

 

I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 

205 showing: 

 

With respect to one Dave Tkachuk, what salary, contract 

payments, expenses or fringe benefits did he receive from 

the Government of Saskatchewan or any of its 

departments, Crown corporations, boards, agencies, or 

commissions during the 1985-86 fiscal year, including in 

each instance: the amount of the payments; (2) the purpose 

of the payments; (3) his exact duties and responsibilities 

respecting each payment; (4) where applicable, whether or 

not the work in question was awarded by public tender. 

 

And I do hope that all members of the Assembly will joint me 

and the member from Cumberland who seconds this motion, in 

obtaining this information. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 206 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 206 showing: 

 

With respect to one Dave Tkachuk, what salary, contract 

payments, expenses, or fringe benefits did he receive from 

the Government of Saskatchewan or any of its 

departments, Crown corporations, boards, agencies, or 

commissions during the period April 1, 1986 to the date 

this return was ordered, including in each instance: (1) the 

amount of the payments; (2) the purpose of the payments; 

(3) his exact duties and responsibilities respecting each 

payment; (4) where applicable, whether or not the work in 

question was awarded by public tender. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move than an order of  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2548 

 

the Assembly do issue for a return no. 206 showing: 

 

With respect to one Dave Tkachuk, what salary, contract 

payments, expense, or fringe benefits did he receive from 

the Government of Saskatchewan or any of its 

departments, Crown corporations, boards, agencies, or 

commissions during the period April 1, 1986 to the date 

this return was ordered, including in each instance: (1) the 

amount of the payments; (2) the purpose of the payments; 

(3) his exact duties and responsibilities respecting each 

payment; (4) where applicable, whether or not the work in 

question was awarded by public tender. 

 

And I take great pleasure in moving this motion, seconded by 

the member from Cumberland. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 207 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 207 showing: 

 

With respect to D-Mail Services Inc., what contracts did 

this company receive from April 1, 1986 to the date this 

return was ordered, from any departments, Crown 

corporations, boards, agencies, or commissions of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, including in each instance: 

(1) the amount of the original contract; (2) the amount of 

any contract cost over-runs; (3) the purpose of the 

contract; (4) the work performed by the company; (5) 

whether or not the work in question was awarded by 

public tender. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 207 showing: 

 

With respect to D-Mail Services Inc., what contracts did 

this company receive from April 1, 1986 to the date this 

return was ordered, from any department, Crown 

corporation, board, agency, or commission of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, including in each instance: 

(1) the amount of the original contract; (2) the amount of 

any contract cost over-runs; (3) the purpose of the 

contract; (4) the work performed by the company; (5) 

whether or not the work in question was awarded by 

public tender. 

 

This is return no. 207 showing. And I take great pleasure in 

moving this to determine whether there is any political 

favouritism in Saskatchewan, seconded by the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1500) 

 

Return No. 208 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 208  

showing: 

 

With respect to D-Mail Services Inc., what contracts did 

this company receive in the 1985-86 fiscal year from any 

departments, Crown corporations, boards, agencies, or 

commissions of the Government of Saskatchewan, 

including in each instance: (1) the amount of the original 

contract; (2) the amount of any contract cover overruns; 

(3) the purpose of the contract; (4) the work performed by 

the company; (5) whether or not the work in question was 

awarded by public tender. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 208 showing. 

 

And this particular motion, Mr. Speaker, deals with the same 

incorporated company for the fiscal year 1985-86. And I look 

forward to the Assembly passing this motion moved by myself, 

seconded by the member from Cumberland. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 209 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 209 showing: 

 

For the period April 1, 1986 to the date this return was 

ordered, a list of the executive motor vehicle purchased by 

the Central Vehicle Agency, including in each instance: 

(1) the make, model and cost of the vehicle; (2) the name 

and location of the dealership from which the vehicle was 

purchased; (3) the name and position of the individual to 

whom each vehicle was assigned. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 209 showing. And I’m joined 

by the member from Cumberland for seconding this particular 

order. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 210 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 210 showing: 

 

For the 1985-86 fiscal year, a list of the executive motor 

vehicles purchased by the Central Vehicle Agency, 

including in each instance: (1) the make, model and cost of 

the vehicle; (2) the name and location of the dealership 

from which the vehicle was purchased; (3) the name and 

position of the individual to whom each vehicle was 

assigned. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move than an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 210 showing. I’m joined by 

the member from Cumberland in seconding this order of the 

Assembly. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

2549 

 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 211 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 211 showing: 

 

With respect to executive motor vehicles for the use or 

benefit of the Premier: (1) the number of vehicles assigned 

to the Premier personally or to the Premier’s office; (2) 

when these vehicles were purchased, the cost, and when 

they are due to be replaced; (3) the current guide-lines 

respecting the make, model and cost of executive motor 

vehicles which the Premier may select for his use, and 

when these guide-lines were last revised; (4) the specific 

revisions made to the guide-lines at that time. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move than an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 211 showing, seconded by the 

member from Cumberland. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 212 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 212 showing: 

 

For the period April 18, 1985 to the date this return was 

ordered: (1) the departments, Crown corporations, boards 

or agencies of the Government of Saskatchewan by which 

Terry Leier was employed; (2) in each instance of 

employment, the exact duties and responsibilities; (3) in 

each instance of employment, the total remuneration, 

separated according to: basic pay, expenses, fringe 

benefits and perquisites; (4) in each instance of 

employment, the dates on which employment commenced 

and concluded. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 212 showing: 

 

For the period April 18, 1985 to the date this return was 

ordered: (1) the departments, Crown corporations, boards 

or agencies of the Government of Saskatchewan by which 

Terry Leier was employed; (2) in each instance of 

employment, the exact duties and responsibilities; (3) in 

each instance of employment, the total remuneration, 

separated according to: basic pay, expenses, fringe 

benefits and perquisites; and (4) in each instance of 

employment, the date on which employment commenced 

and concluded. 

 

And it’s seconded by the member for Cumberland. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 213 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 213 showing: 

 

For the 1985-86 fiscal year, a detailed list of the flights 

taken by the Government of Saskatchewan’s executive 

aircraft, including in each instance: (1) the purpose of the 

flight and the minister who authorized it; (2) a list of all 

passengers; (3) all destination points on the flight; (4) the 

date of the flight; (5) to which government department, 

Crown corporation or agency the cost of the flight was 

charged, and the amount of that charge. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I do move that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 213 showing: 

 

For the 1985-86 fiscal year, a detailed list of the flights 

taken by Government of Saskatchewan’s aircraft, 

including in each instance: the purpose of the flight and 

the minister who authorized it; (2) a list of all passengers; 

(3) all destination points on the flight; (4) the date of the 

flight; (5) to which government department, Crown 

corporation or agency the cost of the flight was charged, 

and the amount of that charge. 

 

This particular order for return is seconded by the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, just to bring this request 

into line and to be consistent with the form in which these 

questions have been answered previously and in keeping with 

the tradition of this House, I’m going to move an amendment 

that will have the effect of deleting the requirement for the list 

of the passengers and substituting the number of passengers on 

each flight. Aside from that, all of the information asked for 

will be provided. 

 

I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Minister of 

Health: 

 

That return no. 213 be amended by deleting the words “a 

list of all passengers” and substituting: 

 

the number of passengers on the flight. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the sensitivity 

of the Deputy Premier on this particular inquiry about the 

executive aircraft and the use thereof. His sensitivity comes 

about honestly. He not only has been through the James Garner 

episode, but he’s been through the more recent episode of the 

minister who comes from Kindersley. And I can understand 

why the Deputy Premier wants to shield people who may be 

using the executive aircraft. 

 

Now the assumption was made some time ago that the people 

that use the executive aircraft have a legitimate use and have 

nothing to hide. Mr. Speaker, the minister is prepared to tell us 

the number of people that used the aircraft, but who it is that 

used it will remain a mystery. And I’m sure this adds to the 

flavour of this government, which it has been established over 

the recent past, that it’s a  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2550 

 

government of secrecy. It’s a government that wants more 

security. It’s a government that wants to buffer itself from 

inquiries from the public. 

 

And this amendment that the Deputy Premier offers, illustrates 

that point in spades. I think the motion, as it was originally put 

forward, is quite in order. It’s quite in order that the people that 

ride on the executive aircraft should not be offended should 

their names be public. 

 

And I realize the sensitivity, as I said, of the Deputy Premier on 

this matter. However, the public need overrides the sensitivities 

of this government and the Deputy Premier. 

 

We don’t know, we don’t know, Mr. Speaker, who will be next 

over there to be using the government executive aircraft. All we 

want to do is to protect the resources of the people of 

Saskatchewan, to make sure that the executive aircraft is not 

used to fly off to weddings in Calgary, or to fly other people 

around the province of Saskatchewan at great taxpayers’ 

expense to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This government says we’re in difficult economic times, that 

it’s critical, and is certainly critical when the Minister of 

Finance can’t get within $700 million of what the deficit of this 

budget will be. There are serious financial problems around the 

province of Saskatchewan, created by this government. 

 

And this government intends to hide – hide more information 

from the public; to retreat back into fortress Saskatchewan, as 

they’re establishing; to retreat back into the cabinet room, rather 

than out here in the Assembly; to not provide to the people of 

Saskatchewan the kind of information the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve. 

 

And therefore I’m opposed to this amendment, and I would ask 

all members to vote against the amendment and pass the motion 

in its original form. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 214 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 214 showing: 

 

For the period April 1, 1986 to the date this return was 

ordered, a detailed list of the flights taken by the 

Government of Saskatchewan’s executive aircraft, 

including in each instance: (1) the purpose of the flight 

and the minister who authorized it; (2) a list of all 

passengers; (3) all destination points on the flight; (4) the 

date of the flight; (5) to which government department, 

Crown corporation, or agency the cost of the flight was 

charged, and the amount of that charge. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move that another attempt 

here to get further information from the  

Government of Saskatchewan with regard to use of the 

executive aircraft, and I move that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for return no. 214 showing: 

 

For the period April 1, 1986 to the date this return was 

ordered, a detailed list of the flights taken by the 

Government of Saskatchewan’s executive aircraft, 

including in each instance: (1) the purpose of the flight 

and the minister who authorized it; (2) a list of all 

passengers; (3) all destination points on the flight; (4) the 

date of the flight; (5) to which government department, 

Crown corporation, or agency the cost of the flight was 

charged, and the amount of that charge. 

 

And in moving this, Mr. Speaker, it would confirm, without a 

doubt, who the passengers were on the aircraft that the member 

from Kindersley took from Regina to Calgary to attend a 

wedding, and whatever else he did while he was in Calgary. It 

would confirm who was on the aircraft. And that will be 

confirmed by the second part of the order of the Assembly 

which lists all the passengers that rode on the aircraft. And that 

in turn will serve to protect the people of Saskatchewan from 

incidents of this kind in the future. 

 

And I do so move, seconded by the member from Cumberland. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Minister of Health: 

 

That return no. 214 be amended by deleting the words “a 

list of all passengers” and substituting: 

 

the number of passengers on the flight. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what the Deputy 

Premier has done has reinforced the very statement I made on a 

previous motion about secret government. This government 

doesn’t want to tell us who is riding on the executive aircraft at 

the people’s expense. 

 

The minister, in moving this amendment which deletes a list of 

all passengers from the period April 1, ’86 to date, has 

effectively prevented the people of Saskatchewan from 

knowing who rode with the member from Kindersley to the 

wedding at Calgary; who were the passengers that accompanied 

him on the trip. 

 

And he’s effectively prevented the people of Saskatchewan 

from finding out that information to which they are entitled. 

And therefore I am opposed to the amendment and in favour of 

the original motion. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 215 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 215 showing: 

 

For the 1985-86 fiscal year, a detailed list of the  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

2551 

 

 

aircraft chartered by each department, Crown corporation, 

or agency of the Government of Saskatchewan, including 

in each instance: (1) the purpose of the charter and the 

minister who authorized it; (2) the name of the individual 

or company who provided the charter; (3) the total cost of 

the charter and the name of the government department, 

Crown corporation, or agency to which that cost was 

charged; (4) a list of all passengers; (5) all destination 

points on the flight; (6) the date of the flight. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 215 showing, and this 

order reads as follows: 

 

For the year 1985-86 fiscal year, a detailed list of the 

aircraft chartered by each department, Crown corporation, 

or agency of the Government of Saskatchewan, including 

in each instance: (1) the purpose of the charter and the 

minister who authorized it; (2) the name of the individual 

or company who provided the charter; (3) the total cost of 

the charter and the name of the government department, 

Crown corporation or agency to which the cost was 

charged; (4) a list of all passengers; (5) all destination 

points on the flight; (6) the date of the flight. 

 

(1515) 

 

The variation between this motion and the previous motion, 

which the Deputy Premier amended to delete the names of 

passengers, was that this particular motion deals with chartered 

aircraft as opposed to the executive aircraft. And I would expect 

that the Deputy Premier would have no objection to giving us 

the names of the passengers who fly on chartered aircraft. 

 

And I would therefore move the motion, seconded by the 

member from Cumberland. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Minister of Health: 

 

That Return No. 215 be amended by deleting the words, “a 

list of all passengers” and substituting: 

 

the number of passengers on the flight. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not intimidated. 

However, I realize that the government has an absolute majority 

and they shall have their way in amending any orders of the 

Assembly that are issued here, or any motions. And I realize 

unless something unusual happens in the next few moments, the 

people of Saskatchewan will not be able to find out who the 

passengers are that ride on chartered aircraft which is paid for 

by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

They will know the number of people. And I don’t know if 

government cabinet ministers are riding on there with split 

personalities, whether they’ll count two rather than one, or not. 

But that’s something we can sort out later. 

 

And it’s unfortunate that the Deputy Premier has chosen  

to shield the public from this information which is theirs by 

right, because they pay the money that pays for the chartered 

aircraft, and they’re entitled to know who rides on that 

chartered aircraft. 

 

And therefore I would oppose the amendment and ask the 

members to vote for the motion in its original form. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 216 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Hagel, that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 216 showing: 

 

For the period April 1, 1986 to the date this return was 

ordered, a detailed list of the aircraft chartered by each 

department, Crown corporation or agency of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, including in each instance: 

(1) the purpose of the charter and the minister who 

authorized it; (2) the name of the individual or company 

who provided the charter; (3) the total cost of the charter 

and the name of the government department, Crown 

corporation or agency to which that cost was charged; (4) 

a list of all passengers; (5) all destination points on the 

flight; (6) the date of the flight. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — It’s with extreme regret this is the last 

motion I’ll be able to put forward for seeking information, Mr. 

Speaker, but I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for 

return no. 216 showing. 

 

And this deals with the use of chartered aircraft by the 

Government of Saskatchewan from the period April 1, 1986 to 

the present, and requests the usual information which I have 

requested on previous motions, some of which has been denied 

by the Deputy Premier, such as a list of all passengers that were 

flying on these chartered aircrafts. And it’s with a great deal of 

pleasure that I move this motion, seconded by the member from 

Moose Jaw North. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the 

Minister of Health: 

 

That return no. 216 be amended by deleting the words “a 

list of all passengers” and substituting: 

 

the number of passengers on the flight. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 352 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Last private members day we had a 

fairly, I think, good arrangement worked out in dealing with 

particular categories of returns all in one lump, as it were. And 

we’re into a category here where up to, I think from 352 to 394 

inclusive, are of the same except they  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2552 

 

call for information from different departments, agencies, and 

so on. 

 

What we propose to do is drop all of them up to 393 inclusive, 

and amend no. 394 to give all of the information that is being 

asked for in the previous numbers so that we can do it all in one 

return. 

 

The amendment that I would propose on no. 394, assuming that 

the previous numbers would be dropped, is: 

 

That no. 394 be amended by deleting the words “the Sask 

Expo ’86 Corporation” and substituting therefor the 

words: 

 

all government departments and Crown corporations 

 

And by deleting all the words after the word “instance” 

and substituting: 

 

the date on which the contract was entered; (2) the amount 

of the individual’s salary; (3) a brief description of the 

service to be provided under the contract. 

 

Copies of the contracts have not in the past been disclosed, and 

these are confidential at the option of the individual. And they 

are also arguments relative to . . . and I don’t claim authorship 

for the argument; this is credited to the member for Riversdale. 

These are internal departmental documents subject to 

non-disclosure in accordance with past practices of the House. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I’m suggesting is that we drop up to 393 

inclusive and move that amendment on 394. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What the Deputy Premier states about the 

agreement we had the previous day is correct. So just to go over 

it briefly so the mover of the motion understands, it was agreed 

previously that the mover of the motions for returns would 

agree to drop all of the motions as indicated by the Deputy 

Premier, except for the final motion which she would move, or 

he would move, and then the amendment would be moved to 

that final motion. 

 

So I ask now the member for Saskatoon Centre if she is 

agreeable to that with her motions, which would mean that all 

motions up to 393 would be dropped and she would move no. 

394. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will agree to the amendment 

if it reads: 

 

By each government department and Crown corporation. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Ms. Smart: — No? Dropping the motions, but not . . . okay, 

then I’m not approving any of those amendments. Okay, now I 

agree to dropping them. 

 

Return No. 394 

Ms. Smart moved, seconded by Mr. Van Mulligen, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 394 showing: 

 

For the 1985-86 fiscal year, the name of each person 

whose services were retained under a personal services 

contract by the SaskExpo ’86 Corporation, which entitled 

the individual to be paid an amount of $5,000 per month 

or more, including in each instance: (1) the date on which 

the contract was entered into and, where applicable, the 

date on which it was terminated; (2) the experience and 

qualifications of the individual retained under contract; (3) 

the terms and conditions of employment, including salary, 

fringe benefits and perquisites; (4) the duties and 

responsibilities of the individual retained under contract; 

(5) signed copies of the contract documents. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I want to move an order of the 

Assembly issuing return no. 394 but before I do, I want to speak 

briefly to it. And I want to make sure that people understand 

that this return, and the 42 returns that have preceded it, is 

asking for information regarding the personal services contracts 

that have been paid out by the various government departments 

and Crown corporations to individual people. 

 

We want to know specifically about all the contracts for 

services which entitle people to be paid an amount of $5,000 

per month or more, including their salary, their fringe benefits, 

and their perquisites. And for people who don’t know the 

meaning of the word “perquisites”, it means profits or payments 

received in addition to a regular wage or salary, especially a 

benefit expected as one’s due. 

 

That’s a lot of money – $5,000 minimum per month – form the 

taxpayers’ point of view, for people to be receiving. And it’s 

particularly, I know, important from the point of view of many 

of the constituents in Saskatoon Centre, which I represent here 

in the House, who have a very great concern about the amount 

of money that’s being spent for people’s personal services on 

salaries that are very high compared to what people in my 

constituency have. 

 

The money that’s being spent by these personal service 

contracts is money that belongs to the people of Saskatchewan. 

It’s taxpayers’ money. They deserve to know how the money’s 

been spent and who it’s been spent on. 

 

And it seems particularly ironic to me that this government 

opposite, which has been tooting and hooting its horns about 

entering the information age and the knowledge-based 

industries, has just completed a number of amendments on 

these motions for return which cut out the opportunity for 

people to get the kind of information that they need in order to 

know just what the government is going with its money in many 

different ways. 

 

And I think if they’re going to talk about the information  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

2553 

 

 

age, they’re going to have to justify to their constituents why 

they’re denying them this information, why they’re not letting 

them how their money’s being spent. 

 

A minimum of $5,000 per month is a $60,000 a year salary – as 

I say, a hefty amount of money, especially from the perspective 

of the people I represent, many of whom are receiving only 

$123 a month for their food, their clothing, and their personal 

services and personal needs. 

 

We want to know who got the contracts, what their 

qualifications and experiences are for the jobs they got, given 

the record that this government has for blatant patronage 

appointments. We are concerned that people may be getting 

contracts who don’t have the qualifications for the job – just 

because of who they know and what membership they have in 

the PC Party. We want to know what kind of work was done 

and what sort of projects were funded. 

 

As critics of a government which consistently funds its friends 

and gives money to those who are already wealthy, we need to 

know how many of these projects were legitimate and how 

many of them were make-work projects for those already well 

heeled. 

 

I can’t help but wonder if maybe the money would have been 

better spent providing a decent wage for those who are doing 

the hard physical labour of cleaning up the Meewasin Valley, 

for example, and other essential tasks that are being done by 

people who are working on minimum wage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel very strongly that this province is becoming 

more and more divided between those who make large amounts 

of money, including on government contracts such as the ones 

we want the information for, and those who are being forced to 

live on minimum wage or lower. And I say this is not 

acceptable, and it’s not acceptable not to get the information 

that we require so that people can know how the government’s 

money’s being spent. 

 

Therefore I’m moving, seconded by the member from Regina 

Victoria, that an order of the Assembly do issue a return no. 394 

showing: 

 

For the 1985-86 fiscal year, the name of each person 

whose services were retained under a personal services 

contract by each government department and Crown 

corporation, which entitled the individual to be paid an 

amount of $5,000 per month or more, including in each 

instance: the date on which the contract was entered into 

and, where applicable, the date on which it was 

terminated; the experience and qualifications of the 

individual retained under contract; the terms and 

conditions of employment, including salary, fringe 

benefits, and perquisites; the duties and responsibilities of 

the individual retained under that contract; and (5) the 

signed copies of the contract documents. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Minister of Health: 

That return no. 394 be amended by deleting the words “the 

SaskExpo ’86 Corporation” and substituting therefor the 

words “all government departments and Crown 

corporations” and by deleting all the words after 

“instance” and substituting: 

 

(l) the date on which the contract was entered; (2) the 

amount of the individual’s salary; (3) a brief description of 

the service to be provided under the contract. 

 

(1530) 

 

I move, seconded by the Minister of Health. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I first of all 

want to indicate that we have agreed to an omnibus or an 

all-encompassing motion to replace the large number of 

motions that are before us because we wish to expedite the 

workings of the House. 

 

I am somewhat concerned about the amendment which the 

minister, the hon. House Leader on the government side, has 

proposed in that in those amendments a very substantial amount 

of information is being withheld – information that I really do 

not understand why it needs to be withheld. There are no 

conceivable reasons for the purpose of confidentiality, or name 

it whatever you will, why some of that information can’t be 

provided. 

 

I think – and I will give the minister the benefit of the doubt – I 

think that he inadvertently missed out in his first part of the 

amendment, when he said: ‘services contracted by the 

departments of government . . . all departments of government 

and Crown corporations, the word “agencies, because 

essentially without that being including there are a number of 

agencies who would then not have to be required. 

 

I’m sure the member will when I’m . . . let me finish and then 

you can . . . sir. I’m sure the minister will concede that and 

make that change. I’m sure it’s just a simple oversight, so I 

bring that to your attention, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And secondly, the amendment which talks about the date on 

which the contract was entered into . . . and then the minister 

deletes “where applicable the date on which it was terminated.” 

I don’t know why that should be not included in this because it 

is of some importance to know that if a contract was given on 

day one and terminated on day 15, and that the payment was 

$100,000 – and I may be exaggerating a bit – that there is 

something peculiar about that arrangement. So I would hope 

that the minister will reconsider and continue to include in his 

amendment “where applicable the date on which the contract 

was terminated” so we know in fact if it has now been ended or 

if it still exists. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, when the minister proposes that his 

amendment only include the salary, he then does not provide to 

the House other payments that the individual or individuals 

involved may have received. They may very well have received 

$60,000 in salary, but without the fringe benefits and 

perquisites being provided to us,  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2554 

 

we might not know if that individual may have been paid 

another $100,000 for something else, not called salaries. And so 

I would hope that the minister would consider changing the 

word “salary” to at least “total remuneration” because then that 

would provide the full payment that was made under these 

contracts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I would have to have leave to get back 

into this, or I’d be out of order, but I recognize that agencies 

should be included, and it was an oversight. It should read: 

departments, agencies and Crown corporations. And with leave 

of the Assembly I would add to the amendment: where 

applicable: the date of termination of the contract. And if the 

motion can be returned to me I’ll add that. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 395 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, once again we have 

another group that is virtually identical to the previous group, 

except that it’s asking for a different time period. This is to the 

date of the return being ordered. And this group takes us from 

395, up to and including 439. So to follow the pattern that’s 

already been established, I would suggest that we agree to drop 

up to 438 inclusive, and then I would offer the identical 

amendment that was offered to the last ones. So it would 

require the member for Prince Albert and the member for 

Regina Victoria’s consent to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I would consent to that. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I consent as well. 

 

Return No. 439 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen moved, seconded by Ms. Smart, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 439 showing: 

 

For the period from April 1, 1986 to the date this return 

was ordered, the name of each person whose services were 

retained under a personal service contract by the 

Saskatchewan Expo ’86 Corporation which entitled the 

individual to be paid an amount of $5,000 per month or 

more, including in each instance: (1) the date on which the 

contract was entered into and, where applicable, the date 

on which it was terminated; (2) the experience and 

qualifications of the individual retained under contract; (3) 

the terms and conditions of employment, including salary, 

fringe benefits and perquisites; (4) the duties and 

responsibilities of the individual retained under contract; 

(5) signed copies of the contract documents. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — I will be moving an order of the 

Assembly to issue a return. But before I do that I just want  

to say that with respect to this order, it’s recognized that the 

government has a well-qualified civil service to administer the 

work of the government. It’s also recognized that from time to 

time a government may deem it feasible and advisable to 

engage certain individuals to do specific work for the 

government which the civil service may not be qualified to do 

because it does not have the qualified people to do specific 

types of work; or it may not be in a position to undertake the 

work because of commitments in which they are engaged. 

 

Having said that, certain questions arise for the public and for 

members of the House, and that is the reason for asking the 

questions that we do – questions such as: are there too many 

people performing certain functions that are being engaged by 

the government on this type of contractual basis? If that is the 

case should we as a government, as an Assembly, be 

encouraging the development of that type of expertise within 

the civil service, recognizing that if we’re to pay for that kind of 

work to be done, then it makes sense to have that kind of 

expertise in-house? 

 

Other questions also arise. It’s recognized that in the 

government engaging individuals in this matter on a contractual 

basis, the potential for abuse of the system exists in so far as the 

government may be tempted, from time to time, to engage 

people to do work for which perhaps they are not qualified; but 

the reason for engaging those people to do that work, or perhaps 

not to do any work, is simply to reward them for political 

favours which those people have shown the government. 

 

And I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that that potential for abuse 

does exist; that as members of the Assembly, and I think the 

public, want to make sure that that kind of abuse, that potential, 

is simply not there. And that is the reason for asking these 

questions: one, is the civil service being bypassed, and should 

perhaps the civil service be more involved in doing the kind of 

work that the government is now having done on a contractual 

basis? Secondly, we want to make sure that any potential abuse 

is curbed so that we can have a better, more effective 

government in Saskatchewan. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by my 

colleague from Saskatoon Centre, that an order of the Assembly 

do issue for a return no. 439 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Minister of Health: 

 

That return no. 439 be amended by deleting the words “the 

Sask Expo ’86 Corporation” and by substituting therefor: 

 

all government departments, agencies, and Crown 

corporations. 

 

And by deleting all words after the word, “instance” and 

substituting: 

 

(1) the date on which the contract was entered; (2) the 

amount of the individual’s salary; (3) a brief description of 

the service to be provided under the contract; and (4) 

where applicable, the date of  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

2555 

 

 

termination. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — On a point of order. It seems to me that 

what we really have are two amendments, one which is a 

friendly amendment, that is, replace all the various departments, 

agencies and Crowns and to provide for an omnibus motion. 

And I think that’s something that can be agreed to and was 

agreed to. 

 

But the second part of the amendment seeks to restrict the 

amount of information which will be forthcoming from the 

government, information which I have indicated that the public 

needs and that the members of the House need so as to ensure 

that the government is doing its work properly and that there is 

no potential for abuse. I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that what 

we have, in effect, are two amendments. 

 

And I would ask, Mr. Speaker, if it’s possible, for us to vote on 

the separate parts; that is the first part to delete “Sask Expo ’86 

Corporation” with the words “all government departments, 

agencies, and Crown corporations”, to make that as one 

amendment. And then to discuss the . . . or to vote on the other 

part of the amendment as a separate entity, Mr. Speaker. And 

I’m wondering if that’s possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Okay. According to the rules, that is in fact 

possible. So the first amendment will end with the word, 

“Crown corporations” – that’s two words – “Crown 

corporations”. 

 

(1545) 

 

According to Beauchesne’s rule 415, a motion which contains 

. . . I will just read the ruling; that will be the simplest. Citation 

415(1): 

 

A motion which contains two or more distinct propositions 

may be divided so that the sense of the House may be 

taken on each separately. The Speaker has a discretionary 

power to decide whether he should divide a motion. 

 

And I believe that we will divide this one. 

 

So the first question ends with Crown corporations and then the 

second amendment will begin right after that. So the question 

before the Assembly then is – the amendment, the following 

amendment: 

 

That return 439 be amended by deleting the words “the 

Sask Expo ’86 Corporation” and by substituting therefor 

the words: 

 

all government departments, agencies and Crown 

corporations. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Okay, the second amendment then will read 

as follows: 

 

By deleting all the words after the word, “instance” and 

substituting: 

(1) the date on which the contract was entered; (2) the 

amount of the individual’s salary; (3) a brief description of 

the service to be provided under the contract; and (4) 

where applicable, the date of termination. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question on that amendment? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to get into the 

details of the amendment per se but I do want to convey my 

sense of concern, and I’m sure that of the public, that what the 

government is attempting to do with this amendment is to 

restrict the amount of information which will be made available 

to the public, through this Assembly, about individuals who are 

hired by the government on a contractual basis, outside of the 

civil service, to do certain kinds of work. 

 

We had asked about the experience and qualifications of these 

individuals, the terms and conditions of their employment, the 

duties and responsibilities of those individuals. The government 

proposes to provide what is called a “brief description.” 

 

We can get into a semantical argument by what’s meant by a “a 

brief description”, but I have no great faith in this government 

showing their predilection in the past year to obfuscate, to hide 

information from the public that they will be anything but brief, 

and very brief at that. So therefore I would express my very real 

concerns and those of my colleagues that the government, 

again, is attempting to hide information from the public view. 

 

The government may take the position that somehow they are 

helping their own cause by hiding information, and therefore by 

somehow limiting the amount of accountability that they have. 

By I would suggest to them that every attempt that they made to 

somehow limit, in their view, accountability, does nothing to 

enhance their credibility. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would assure you that this side 

of the House will not support that amendment. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This amended motion 

is similar to the one that was done under my name, and I just 

want to make very brief comments about my dissatisfaction in 

the amendment. And I feel it’s a very bad motion now because 

we can’t find out exactly the total remuneration paid to 

individual people from the government for contract work; nor 

can we find out the experience and qualifications of the 

individuals retained under this contract. That is vital 

information in determining how valuable this work is, and the 

people who’ve been doing it. 

 

And therefore the motion has lost a lot of its power, a lot of its 

ability to provide the information to the people of Saskatchewan 

– information that they need in judging the difference between 

$5,000 a month salaries to people, plus, plus, plus, versus the 

kind of assistance and amount of money that other people have 

to live on. So I really am opposed to this. 

 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2556 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 440 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We have here another category, if you 

like, dealing with two time periods: one the previous fiscal year, 

and the second deals with to the date the order was returned – or 

the return was ordered, I should say. And so in keeping with the 

practice of the day, as it were, if we were to drop no. 440 to 524 

inclusive and amend 525, it would give you the information that 

is required. The return no. 525 would be amended as follows: 

 

That the names, titles, and remuneration of all non-clerical 

staff employed in, or assigned to, ministers of the 

Government of Saskatchewan for the period April 1, 1985 

(which goes back to the beginning date of the previous 

fiscal year) up to the date that this return is ordered. 

 

And that covers the full time period, and all ministers’ offices, 

and all those assigned to ministers. 

 

So what I’m suggesting is that we drop 440 to 524 inclusive and 

amend 525 to effectively cover all of those previous. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake 

agrees? Then they’re dropped. 

 

Return No. 525 

 

Mr. Lautermilch moved, seconded by Mr. Goulet, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return 525 showing: 

 

The names, titles, duties, salaries, fringe benefits and 

perquisites of all non-clerical staff employed in, or 

assigned to the office of the minister responsible for the 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan during 

the fiscal year 1985-86. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 525 showing: 

 

The names, titles, duties, salaries, fringe benefits and 

perquisites of all non-clerical staff employed in, or 

assigned to the minister responsible for the Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan during the 

fiscal year 1985-86. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Minister of Health: 

 

That return no. 525 be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “showing” and substituting: 

 

The names, titles, and remuneration of all non-clerical 

staff employed in or assigned to the minister’s offices of 

the Government of Saskatchewan for the period of April 1, 

1985 to the date this return is ordered. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, once again the amendment is 

not what we would call a friendly  

amendment, because the amendment, the way it has been 

placed, omits some information that would be very valuable for 

the people of Saskatchewan to know; specifically, the duties 

that the people . . . or the information that is required, and also 

the perks, any fringe benefits that the people hired under this 

condition may be. So we would oppose the amendment under 

that basis. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Address No. 1 

 

Mr. Romanow moved, seconded by Mr. Brockelbank, that an 

humble Address no. 1 be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor praying that His Honour will cause to be 

laid before this Assembly: 

 

All correspondence during the period January 1, 1984 and 

December 15, 1986 between the Minister of Health and 

the federal Minister of Health and Welfare, dealing with 

proposed changes to Canadian patent legislation and their 

impact on the price of prescription drugs. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

move, seconded by my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 

Westmount, that an humble Address no. 1 be presented to His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor praying that His Honour will 

cause to be laid before the Assembly: 

 

All correspondence during the period January 1, 1984 and 

December 15, 1986 between the Minister of Health and 

the federal Minister of Health and Welfare, dealing with 

proposed changes to Canadian patent legislation and their 

impact on the price of prescription drugs. 

 

And before I take my place, if I could find a member, on the 

other side preferably, but even on this side, to make a small 

amendment so that the correspondence be from the period 

January 1, 1984 to the date of the humble Address, up to date to 

the passage of this order, then it would be more current. 

 

This has been on the order paper for quite some time and thus 

the need for an amendment, if I can persuade any of my 

colleagues to so prepare. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I would like to follow up on the invitation of 

the member from . . . my colleague, the member from 

Riversdale, by moving an amendment to item 194: 

 

Deleting the words in the first line “December 15, 1986,” 

and substituting therefor the words: 

 

and the present date 

 

so that it will read: all correspondence during the period 

January 1, 1984 and the present date. 

 

Seconded by my colleague from Saskatoon South. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

2557 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have no strong feeling 

one way or another on the amendment. I do however have a 

strong feeling as it relates to the motion for any time period, 

whether it’s in the amended form or in the original form. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it is not proper to be tabling 

correspondence in this House as has been suggested. 

 

And once again, maybe it’s because from time to time I’m a 

little lacking in original thought, and so I go back to the history 

and tradition of this House and look for arguments that have 

already been presented. And I found one, Mr. Speaker, and it 

came once again from my very good friend, the hon. member 

for Riversdale, when he said, Mr. Speaker, that it is simply 

wrong, simply a wrong principle to do this, to tabling. We never 

have done this before. These are internal documents which are 

used by the government and the department in the formulation 

of policy, etc. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the amendment, I think, is not the issue here at 

all. Whatever time period we’re talking about isn’t important; 

it’s the principle of tabling this kind of correspondence. And it 

will be essentially the same argument for item no. 195 and item 

no. 196, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So while I have no strong feeling, as I say, on the amendment, I 

will be urging all members to vote against the main motion, or 

the motion as amended, whatever it may be. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to listen to 

the Deputy Premier’s comments on this particular issue. He 

takes a very high and principled stand, but really what is the 

issue here, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The issue is patent legislation and a correspondence which may 

have flowed between this government and the Government of 

Canada. This government has been telling us that this is good 

for Saskatchewan. It’s good for Saskatchewan people that if this 

legislation is passed, there will be all kinds of money flowing 

around Canada for research, the price of prescription drugs will 

drop, and other benefits will flow to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1600) 

 

Now the Premier and the Deputy Premier and the Minister of 

Health and others in this Assembly, other members of the 

Executive Council, have been saying far and wide in 

Saskatchewan and elsewhere that this is good legislation; we 

should support it – when in fact this is a sell-out to the big drug 

companies who have exclusive rights on patents. 

 

We want to find out what the exact argument of this 

government is with regard to patent legislation. We want to be 

able to determine if this is in the best interests of Canadian 

people. 

 

We have learned through bitter experience in this Chamber that 

you can’t trust what this government says. And I suggest to you, 

taking an issue very similar to this, the question of free trade, 

there was no greater exponent of that than the Premier of 

Saskatchewan. And he’s gradually backing off. Yesterday in 

New York, it was  

50-50; today the headline in the Leader-Post says, “. . . doubts 

(if) free trade legislation will ever fly.” 

 

We want to know what’s good for the people of Saskatchewan 

and why this government is taking this stand on prescription 

patents. We want to see the information. If we do not get it, Mr. 

Speaker, we have been again denied information which is 

rightfully the property of the people of Saskatchewan. The 

people of Saskatchewan keep this government in office; they 

pay the bills. They should have the right to decide whether the 

legislation, whether the money that this government is spending 

to defend the federal government’s patent legislation is 

well-spent money. 

 

And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the amendments are not the 

kind of amendments that should be passed by this particular 

Chamber. We should have the information that this government 

has within its hands that shows the exchange of information 

between this Executive Council and the federal government. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Address No. 2 

 

Mr. Romanow moved, seconded by Mr. Brockelbank, that an 

humble Address no. 2 be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor praying that His Honour will cause to be 

laid before this Assembly: 

 

All correspondence during the period January 1, 1984 and 

December 15, 1986 between the Minister of Health and 

the federal Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs, 

dealing with proposed changes to Canadian patent 

legislation and their impact on the price of prescription 

drugs. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 

by my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Westmount, that 

an humble Address no. 2 be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor praying that His Honour will cause to be 

laid before the Assembly: 

 

All correspondence during the period January 1, 1984 and 

December 15, 1986 between the Minister of Health and 

the federal Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs, 

dealing with proposed changes to Canadian patent 

legislation and their impact on the price of prescription 

drugs. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Address No. 3 

 

Mr. Romanow moved, seconded by Mr. Brockelbank, that an 

humble Address no. 3 be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor praying that His Honour will cause to be 

laid before this Assembly: 

 

All correspondence during the period January 1, 1984 and 

December 15, 1986 between the Premier and the Prime 

Minister, dealing with proposed changes to Canadian 

patent legislation  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2558 

 

and their impact on the price of prescription drugs. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will move in a 

moment, at the conclusion of just a few brief remarks, that an 

humble Address no. 3 be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor praying that His Honour will cause to be 

laid before the Assembly: 

 

All correspondence during the period January 1, 1984 and 

December 15, 1986 between the Premier and the Prime 

Minister dealing with proposed changes to Canadian 

patent legislation and their impact on the price of 

prescription drugs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before I take my place for the members to 

debate the motion or to dispose of it as they will, I wish to make 

a couple of very quick points. 

 

First of all, the Deputy Premier’s precedent of a government not 

tabling documents requested is a precedent based on, as I heard 

him read it, internal communications between departments to 

other departments within the provincial government, or if you 

will, flowing up from the officials to the ministers. Those, I 

candidly admit, are of a privileged nature. I think that a 

government must have the opportunity and the freedom to be 

able to get the best advice from its advisers that is possible. And 

that means the good and the bad of policy considerations. And 

those ought not to be made – as a general rule; there may be 

exceptions – to be made public. 

 

That’s not what is being asked for here however, Mr. Speaker. 

What’s being asked for here is communication by the 

Government of Saskatchewan, presumably reflecting a policy 

decision had and taken with the Government of Canada, an 

external agency, presumably also on a decision had and taken. 

That is to say, it’s a question of a decision already being 

debated; having been debated internally; the memoranda having 

been considered internally; and the Government of 

Saskatchewan adopting a position either for or against the 

matter which is being debated. In this particular case the issue is 

whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan adopts a 

position for Mr. Mulroney’s drug patent legislation or whether 

it adopts a position in opposition to it. 

 

As you will recall, Mr. Speaker, the genus of these motions is 

very simple, that back in December when this session first 

began formally, a number of questions were asked by various 

members of the Legislative Assembly, especially on this side of 

the House, asking what the government of the day in 

Saskatchewan’s position was on the prescription patent plan, 

the drug patent plan of Mr. Mulroney’s. 

 

We were told a certain series of answers to those questions. But 

when we asked them to back that up with the documentation, 

that was not forthcoming. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sad to say that 

this motion is important to lay before the Legislative Assembly 

because the government, with the greatest of respect,, has fallen 

into, I think, a very tardy habit of simply blandly giving us an 

assurance that a representation has been made – presumably a 

verbal representation, maybe on occasion a written  

representation – but never backing that up with the kind of 

proof that I think an Assembly is justifiably correct in seeking. 

And if you will, never backing it up with the kind of evidence 

that those of us who are concerned about the federal drug patent 

legislation, the kind of evidence that we’d like to have to know 

that our government is in our corner to make sure that drug 

costs don’t balloon up even higher. 

 

And this is an important matter in Saskatchewan as we know, 

because we have now fundamental changes to the drug 

prescription plan of Saskatchewan which has resulted in very 

fat increases to everybody paying for drugs. It would be a 

double injustice and a double hardship, Mr. Speaker, if as a 

result of the federal drug patent legislation, there were yet even 

additional substantive increases for drugs and payments of 

drugs to patients, and to those who require prescriptions. 

 

We argue on this side that that’s exactly what the result of that 

federal legislation is going to do. And we argue that the federal 

government’s action is wrong. And we argue that the provincial 

government’s seeming silence, in this case refusal, outright 

refusal, to back up those concerned Saskatchewan people about 

our health care and medicare system, by refusing to table these 

documents, is yet further evidence that the administration in 

Saskatchewan is singing the Hallelujah Chorus behind the 

administration in Ottawa as they systematically attack what I 

think has been heretofore a very progressive, comprehensive, 

prescription program in Saskatchewan, and if you will, a very 

comprehensive and very excellent program for the 

manufacturing and the invention and the dispensation of drugs 

under the drug patent legislation. 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, before I take my place, I’d be 

the happiest member in this House or at least as happy as 

anybody else in this House, if the Deputy Premier would get up 

and say that I’m wrong. Or the Minister of Health – here is the 

correspondence showing our opposition; we weren’t successful 

in persuading Mr. Mulroney to our point of view. If that takes 

place we understand you can’t win every argument with the 

federal government. I’d be the happiest person if that took 

place. 

 

But the purpose of this address is, let there be no mistake about 

it, Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this address is to say that we 

have a major initiative federally before us; the government will 

have now fought out its position. It now communicates its 

position in the public domain to the federal government and the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I say to the Deputy Premier, tell us that you’re behind the 

ordinary people of Saskatchewan and Canada and that you’re 

opposed to this drug patent legislation. It will be some small 

relief to the horrendous changes with the terrible consequences 

that you’ve wrought as a result of your own fundamental 

program changes to the prescription plan. So, Mr. Speaker, I see 

absolutely no reason whatsoever to deny this request for those 

reasons. 

 

(1611) 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 20 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

2559 

 

 

Blakeney Prebble 

Brockelbank Romanow 

Tchorzewski Rolfes 

Mitchell Solomon 

Kowalsky Atkinson 

Anguish Goulet 

Hagel Lyons 

Lautermilch Trew 

Smart Van Mulligen 

Koenker Goodale 

 

Nays — 26 

 

Muller Duncan 

McLeod Andrew 

Berntson Lane 

Taylor Maxwell 

Schmidt Hodgins 

Gerich Klein 

Meiklejohn Martin 

Toth Sauder 

Johnson McLaren 

Hopfner Swenson 

Martens Baker 

Gleim Neudorf 

Kopelchuk Britton 

 

Return No. 526 

 

Mr. Brockelbank moved, seconded by Mr. Prebble, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 526 showing: 

 

Regarding rooms 131 through 141 in the Legislative 

Building of Saskatchewan, a list of all renovations, 

furnishings, and fittings contracted for or purchased 

between April 1, 1986 and the date this return was 

ordered, in each instance detailing: (1) the work or 

purchase undertaken, including the reason why each 

expenditure was required; (2) the cost of each renovation 

or purchase; (3) the date each renovation project began 

and ended, and the date each purchase was made; (4) the 

name of the government department which paid for each 

renovation or purchase; (5) whether or not the renovation 

or purchase in question was tendered, and if not, the 

reasons why not; and in all cases where the renovations 

and or purchases were tendered, whether or not the lowest 

tender was awarded the work or contract, and if not, why 

not; (6) the name of the company or individuals who 

undertook the renovation work or from whom the furniture 

or fixtures were purchased. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, in rising to move this order, 

I may reconsider my entry into the leadership race. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — You’ll notice it got a lot of applause. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the Assembly do  

issue for return no. 526 showing, and this is seconded by my 

seat-mate, the member for Saskatoon University. And I’m sure 

the amount of applause that I received was due solely to the fact 

that this is the last one on the order paper. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move an 

amendment that will just clean up the motion for return up a 

little bit. The kind of detail that the hon. member is asking for is 

to ask for every nail and pail of paint and two-by-four, etc. Now 

we’re going to clean it up, to make it easier to provide for the 

information that he’s asking for, and I therefore move, seconded 

by the Minister of Health: 

 

That return no. 526 be amended by deleting all the words 

after “showing” and substituting therefor: 

 

Regarding rooms 131 and 131A through 141 in the 

Legislative Building of Saskatchewan, the purpose of the 

renovations; (2) the nature and extent of the renovations 

which took place between October 20, 1986 and the date 

that this return was ordered (and I don’t know what’s 

magic about October 20); (3) the cost of the renovations; 

and (4) who paid for these renovations; and if any of the 

renovations were tendered, were they awarded to the 

lowest bidder? 

 

I move, seconded by the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move the 

adjournment of this particular item so that I can have an 

opportunity to look at the amendment which the Deputy 

Premier has offered. 

 

So I therefore move the amendment to this particular item . . . 

or adjournment. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. Hopfner: — With leave of the Assembly, I’d like to 

welcome some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, you’ll notice in your gallery, the 

Speaker’s gallery, there’s a tour group here from the United 

States, and I would wish that this Assembly would take note. 

They’re from Iowa and, I believe, from Minnesota, and I would 

ask all members to give a good, hearty Saskatchewan welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Science and Technology 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 15 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I, just before 

the minister . . . I realize this is slightly out of order. I notice our 

American visitors have some perplexed looks  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2560 

 

on their faces, and they’re wondering what we’re doing right 

now. And just by way of brief explanation, we’re entering into 

the study of estimates on a particular department of 

government. And each member in the Assembly has the 

opportunity to question the minister and his officials that are 

before the Assembly now, and ask them any detailed questions 

they wish about the estimates of that particular department. So 

this may guide you in understanding what’s going on today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am 

pleased to introduce to you, and to the members opposite, the 

officials from my department that are here today. Beside me I 

have Richard Letilley who is the acting deputy minister; and 

directly behind me, Roman Visvanathan from administrative 

services; and Mr. Bob Mills who is with industrial 

development; and Leanne Gerrard from the communications 

division. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I want to begin this afternoon by saying a few 

words about the priority that I and my colleagues on this side of 

the House place on science and technology – not just that it’s 

the key to the future, which it certainly is, but the sense in 

which it’s already determining present developments here in 

Saskatchewan society and across the world. 

 

I think, for example, of the information age that we live in, the 

micro-electronics developments. I think, for example, of 

technological change and how that affects working people in 

the work place, of industrial and economic strength that is so 

important across the world and so dependent on science and 

high technology, and also of the important social and ethical 

issues that flow from technological development – biotech, 

medical technology, the application of agricultural technology 

here in this province to strengthen rural life. 

 

All of these are examples of why we as New Democrats believe 

that no one in society today can afford to isolate themselves 

from discussions of public policy which involve science and 

technology. We’re learning that these questions affect all of life. 

And so we welcome on this side of the House the opportunity to 

review the department’s work this afternoon. 

 

We’re also aware that along with some of the promise that 

science and technology holds for the world community, there 

are also some problems – problems which concern the very 

future of the world as we learned from the Chernobyl accident 

last year where we saw technology go astray. We saw last year 

also the Challenger accident, another example of how we can 

invest large amounts of money in science and technology and 

have them proceed apace, suddenly to find out that things aren’t 

quite what we thought they are. 

 

I think also the aspects of medical research, when we consider 

the AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) epidemic 

across the world today, point to the important dimensions of 

proper applications of science and technology. 

 

And so when it comes to estimates of science and  

technology today, I think the big questions are not, should we 

have technology, but rather what kind of science development 

do we want? What kind of technology do we want for the future 

of Saskatchewan, for the future of the world? What sort of 

society are we heading to? 

 

And these aren’t just academic questions for us here in 

Saskatchewan. I myself stood at the campus of the University of 

Saskatchewan about two or three years ago and heard the 

Premier of the province stand before a group of students and 

faculty and advocate the participation of Saskatchewan firms in 

the high-tech community, particularly in the U.S. star wars 

program. And that certainly is one option, and one that the 

Premier advocated on that occasion in the fall on the university 

campus. 

 

But there is another option for Saskatchewan firms. I think for 

example of the federal government’s initiatives in terms of 

verification satellites, the PAC-SAT project that Joe Clark has 

been working with. And I think those are the kinds of projects 

that Saskatchewan companies could well be involved with, and 

make a real contribution to the global peace and security, rather 

than escalating the arms race by developments of U.S. space 

stations funded by the Pentagon with Canadian complicity in 

military projects. 

 

So I say: will Saskatchewan engage in science and technology 

work that meets real needs, the real needs of the world 

community, of Saskatchewan farmers and small-business 

people, of the resource industry, that will protect Saskatchewan 

people from the cycles in the agricultural economy or in the 

research economy? Or will we become subject to the plays of 

the larger market-place, the investment community, and 

multinational companies offshore, such that the profit picture 

becomes the only motive for science and technological 

development, which places us at the prey of larger corporations 

who can shut down Saskatchewan aspects of their business at 

the snap of a finger? 

 

(1630) 

 

We have the opportunity here in Saskatchewan to have a 

constructive technological development, a technological and 

scientific advancement which facilitates dealing with 

environmental waste; which increases and enhances human 

well-being; which provides meaningful long-term employment. 

And correspondingly, we have the other choice of engaging in 

scientific work which wastes the environment, which displaces 

workers and endangers health, which doesn’t protect human 

well-being. 

 

And so those are some of the general comments that I would 

like to make this afternoon before we get into particular 

questions. And as my first particular question, I’d like to ask the 

minister if he can supply the information that I requested by 

letter on August 4, 1987. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would say at 

the outset how I appreciate the remarks that the hon. member 

has made with regard to the support on that side of the House in 

so far as advanced technology is concerned, and the 

recognition, of course that we do, in  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

2561 

 

 

fact, live in that global society today. And we know that there is 

a tremendous need for advancing many areas in our society, 

whether we’re talking about medical research or better ways of 

doing things within manufacturing or whatever the case may be. 

 

And I would indicate that during the last few months in some of 

the debate that has gone on within this House, we know the 

economic situation as it exists in Saskatchewan today – that we 

are in a situation where we can no longer rely solely on the 

revenues from our traditional products of potash or uranium or 

wheat, whatever the case might be. And at the same time, we 

still have that increased need for services. 

 

And it’s through advanced technology that we’re going to be 

able to meet the competitive problems that we’re faced with 

today and generate new revenues through diversification. What 

we have to consider, of course, is what the situation was here 

not that long ago in the province in so far as the advanced 

technology industry was concerned, and a plan that was put 

forward back in 1982 to address this problem. 

 

The hon. member has indicated the fact that we do have a lot of 

people within this province that have good ideas. We’ve got 

companies that are very actively involved in many areas of 

research, and it was a recognition of this potential that we have 

in the province, made by the government on this side of the 

House, that this was the way, in fact, in which we were going to 

be able to expand our economic activity. 

 

And following that plan in 1982, the strategy was developed to 

put this into practice. And in 1984 the department came into 

being – the first province, of course, in Canada that developed a 

Department of Science and Technology. 

 

And I firmly believe, Mr. Chairman, that if we are going to be 

able to reach our goal of a diversified economy, that we must 

develop our advanced technology and be able to transfer it to 

various industries. And we will be addressing such areas – as 

the member has indicated, opposite – whether we’re talking 

about medical research, but probably even more importantly the 

whole area of agriculture. 

 

We have a tremendous opportunity in this province right now to 

show leadership in such areas as biotechnology. We know that 

we’re showing and providing leadership in the area of space 

technology and telecommunications, ranking third in the 

country behind Ontario and Quebec. And this of course not only 

means increased revenues for the province, but it also means 

more jobs – more jobs for our young people. 

 

There’s no doubt about it that the department has a very major 

role to play today in ensuring that we do build a very strong, 

advanced technology industry in this province. And I think if 

we look back over the record of the past few years, we can see 

that in fact our industry has grown tremendously. You consider 

the fact that back in 1982 there were only about 39 companies 

involved in advanced technology in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that has grown today to over 170 different 

companies  

that are very active. 

 

There are specific areas that still have to be dealt with, and yet 

we recognize the fact that we’re talking about an industry that 

has a great deal of risk with it. We know certainly that not all of 

the industries or the ideas that are put forth are going to be 

successful. And when one considers the fact that probably only 

3 or 4 per cent of all the ideas put forth by inventors are going 

to be at some time successful, we can see indeed that it is a very 

high-risk industry. 

 

Sometimes I know that people get a little bit impatient with the 

fact that some of the companies that are coming onstream are 

not always successful, or maybe it takes a long time before 

they’re in a position where they can sell their products, and we 

have to recognize that. Even though times are changing very 

rapidly, it still may take two to four years for an idea from the 

time it’s conceived until a company is ready to put products on 

the market. So I think we have to recognize that too. 

 

And I think the member opposite will understand that when we 

consider some of the companies that we have in this province 

right now where maybe they haven’t moved along as quickly as 

some might have liked. 

 

We have to keep working along with the industry in developing 

what we’ve got here and also promoting new businesses. We’re 

very fortunate of course with the facilities that we have within 

the province as far as doing advanced research, whether we 

look at our universities and our research councils and the 

industry that’s out there in itself. 

 

So there’s a lot of potential here, and it’s something that’s been 

recognized by this government, and we are going to do the best 

that we can in these difficult times to promote as much as we 

can, as much economic activities, so we will have added 

benefits that we can pass on to the residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

With regard to the request that you had, some of that 

information has been provided to you. And as we go through 

the estimates, we can provide more of that to you, and we’ll 

ensure that you’ll get all of it. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I haven’t received anything yet 

from any of your officials or the department. I’m wondering if 

there isn’t a problem on that end or whether it was in fact sent 

to me, and if so, when? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the information 

has been sent to the member. Possibly he has not received it. I’ll 

be willing to send it over to him right now. He will be getting 

another copy as well in the mail. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I’d like to continue in these estimates then by 

saying, Mr. Minister, I think you work under a very distinct 

disadvantage, and this is no reflection on you personally. The 

disadvantage I speak of is the disadvantage of working under a 

Premier who does not practise what he preaches. 

 

I think we have in the Department of Science and Technology a 

classic case of Progressive Conservative  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2562 

 

hyperbole. And I’ll say that I haven’t heard that from you 

yourself, but I certainly have heard it from the Premier. I want 

to say that I think you are working under a disadvantage and 

that the Premier pays lip-service to high technology but he 

doesn’t put his words into action. And he has consistently failed 

to do so. 

 

And so what we have, and what you have to contend with and 

what your departmental officials have to contend with, is a 

departmental legacy of a whole lot of hype about high tech but 

very little real help compared to the hype. Certainly there is 

help there; I don’t question that at all. But relative to the hype 

and the hyperbole coming from the Premier himself, there’s 

really very little help, and I dare say that that puts you at a 

disadvantage. 

 

I think, for example, and I’d like to ask you about the mythical 

$50 million over the next five years for assistance for 

Saskatchewan high-tech firms that was announced during the 

October election campaign on Friday, October 10 in Saskatoon. 

The minister announced what he called a new high-tech 

strategy, committing $50 million to help struggling high-tech 

firms in Saskatchewan, develop new products and find markets. 

And we haven’t heard anything about this high-tech strategy. 

And I’m wondering if you can give us some information. It’s 

been almost a year now since he made that announcement on 

October 10. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite can indicate all he wants that the Premier doesn’t 

practise what he preaches. But let me simply point out to him 

that the fact that we have a minister in charge of a separate 

Department of Science and Technology, and probably the only 

province in Canada where this in fact exists, I think says 

something as to the importance that the Premier puts on science 

and technology. 

 

I think as well if we look at the moneys and the commitment 

that have been put forward over the last five years, we look at 

the development as far as the number of companies, the 

assistance that has been given to them, whether it’s with the 

initial research or whether it’s helping them at the end of the 

line selling that first product, that there has been indeed a 

commitment made by this government and it has been kept. 

 

As well, if you consider the last budget – and you’re indicating 

that it is nearly a year ago since this particular promise was 

made – I think if you consider the budget and the moneys that 

have been put forth there in so far as development of economic 

activity, a lot of which can be attributed to advanced 

technology. 

 

We’ve got other areas, of course, other than science and 

technology, where moneys are being expended on research and 

development. If you consider the fact that this year we have the 

economic diversification and investment fund with $22 million 

in, there is no doubt about it that is . . . a good portion of that is 

going to go towards the advanced tech area. But I think also you 

have to consider the fact that in the agricultural development 

fund, that you’re got $30 million, part of which is being spend 

on research and development and diversification. 

I think also you have to consider the fact, Mr. Chairman, that in 

the neighbourhood of $100 million is being spent on research 

and development by the various government departments. So I 

don’t think that we always want to simply isolate the 

Department of Science and Technology and try to promote the 

idea that that’s the only department that is expending money on 

research and development. 

 

So if you look at the total picture, we do have a good amount of 

the budget that is being spent on science, and research and 

development, and on advance . . . some of it certainly on 

advanced technology. We are still committed to spending more 

money on advanced technology and as it applies to the 

technological transfer to other businesses. And I might point out 

that this was a promise of $50 million over the term of this 

government, which we still have up to another four years to go. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, all I can say is, I still say 

you’re working under a disadvantage. You say that the minister 

is in charge of a separate Department of Science and 

Technology, and this indicates the Premier’s priority. You, of 

all people, have to be aware that it’s a shrinking department. 

 

You talk about the amount of money that the department spends 

or that the government spends, and the budgetary program – 

those funds are shrinking as well, and I’m going to be getting 

into that later. You talk about the economic development fund 

as basically a false juggling of figures there, and it amounts to 

less money being spent by the provincial government in that 

regard. The agricultural development fund – we’ll talk about 

these things later. 

 

I want to know, though, when are we going to hear the details 

of this $50 million a year . . . $50 million over the next five 

years. He said the next five; we’ve already lived one of those 

five years. When are we going to hear the details of the 

Premier’s high-tech strategy? Has he shared that information 

with you? Have you discussed it with him? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I pointed out 

the fact that the commitment is still there, and moneys are being 

expended on the advanced technology area for this current year. 

But I think we have to recognize the fact that because of the 

economic situation as it is, that we have to balance off the 

government’s responsibility insofar as the fiscal situation is 

concerned as to the amount of money that can be put towards 

economic development, and in this particular case through 

advanced technology. 

 

(1645) 

 

There’s no doubt about it that some of the plans may have to be 

deferred for the present time, but the commitment is still there, 

and as time goes on, we will still be looking at this. Plans are 

being of course developed by the department in consultation 

with the industry, and these announcements are going to be 

made as time goes on. Some of the development, of course, is 

already taking place, and I’m sure that over the next few 

months, as far as this current year is concerned, that more 

announcements  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

2563 

 

 

will be made as they’re developed. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Given the spending that we have in the most 

recent budget, we have a long way to go to get to the $10 

million per year in seed money that the Premier said would be 

given or allocated for high technology firms in this province. 

We have a very long way to go, indeed. And what galls me 

particularly, Mr. Minister, is that your Premier, in his Speech 

from the Throne as recently as December 3, continues to play 

on this large accumulations of funds that are going to be handed 

over to assist Saskatchewan high-tech firms. 

 

Aware that the health and growth of (the province’s 

small-business) sector depends on the application of the 

most effective, efficient technology available, my 

ministers have already announced a commitment to 

provide $50 million over the next five years to assist 

Saskatchewan small business to equip itself. 

 

We have the hyperbole, the rhetoric, but we don’t have any 

funds. A budget comes down six months later, a full six months 

later, and there’s no plan, there’s no indication of any plan to 

share these funds with Saskatchewan firms. And all I can say is 

they’re waiting, and I think they’re looking to you to provide 

some kind of pressure on the Premier to spring these funds 

loose. 

 

I don’t know whether we’re going to get much further on that 

question. I guess, as you say, we’ll have to wait and see. Maybe 

a year from now we won’t be at the same juncture on this same 

question. 

 

A related concern, Mr. Minister, related to the legacy of hype, is 

the legacy that your department has had ever since its inception, 

and that legacy is consistent fiscal restraint, consistent fiscal 

restraint on the Department of Science and Technology to the 

point where it’s, in some sense, gutted in this most recent 

budget. 

 

And the figures there tell the story. In spite of all the rhetoric, if 

we go to the record of public accounts, we find that ever since 

the Department of Science and Technology was first established 

back in 1983, it’s consistently been the apparent victim of 

government deception, and what I would call a hidden agenda 

of overestimating the amount of money that’s going to be spent 

on science and technology at budget time, and then consistently 

failing to spend it and to allocate it. 

 

And I blame this, not on you, you weren’t around during the 

first several years of the department. I blame it on the Premier 

and the former minister for overbudgeting, underexpending 

consistently, in a way that really makes a mockery of having a 

department that has a strong commitment to science and 

technology. 

 

I think it says a lot about what this government preaches and 

what it practises, using science and technology for political 

advantage, and then trimming actual expenditures after the 

budget is revealed. The rest of the year, the name of the game is 

to hold the line on research and development work, to hold the 

line on government spending in this important area. You talk 

about the goal of economic diversification; that we must 

develop advance  

technology. That’s happening to some extent, certainly, but not 

the extent that the government indicates in its budget speeches, 

because it doesn’t spend the funds allocated. 

 

And I believe the Premier has no real intention of backing up 

these commitments for scientific research and technological 

development. I can only draw, and I think the public can only 

draw, one conclusion: that the Premier is fundamentally 

dishonest; that he deceives the public; and there’s duplicity in 

his fiscal allocations as opposed to what he actually spends. 

 

Now I want to say that throughout rural Saskatchewan for many 

years there is an old saying that goes something like this: 

“Figures don’t lie, but liars sure know how to figure.” 

 

Well I can share with the people of this province that some of 

the figures in Science and Technology set out by the very 

Premier of this province . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. The Minister of Human 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — On a point of order. The member for 

Saskatoon Sutherland has indicated to this committee that the 

Premier is fundamentally dishonest. I submit that is 

unparliamentary, and he should be asked to withdraw that 

remark, and particularly in the absence of the Premier. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I find the point of order well taken: 

“(4) to impute to any member or members unworthy motives 

for their actions in a particular case” – page 104, paragraph 

319(3); and page 23, rule 26: “nor shall he use offensive words 

against the Assembly or against a member thereof.” 

 

So I would ask the member from Saskatoon Sutherland to 

apologize for those remarks. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I beg your pardon, I didn’t hear the last part 

of your remarks. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I would ask the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland to withdraw those remarks and apologize to the 

House. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, I was listening very closely to 

what the member from Sutherland was saying, and he did not 

clearly, in my view, say that person X or Y was guilty of any 

particular action, and I would ask the chairman to please review 

the record before this is ruled upon. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The member from Saskatoon Sutherland 

used the words: “the Premier is fundamentally dishonest.” I find 

that unparliamentary, and I would ask the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland to apologize to the House and retract his 

statement. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I’m quite prepared to retract that statement, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — And I ask you to apologize to the 

Assembly. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2564 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m quite prepared to 

apologize to the Assembly as well. 

 

I think that now we might as well turn to the facts, or the 

figures, which will not lie. And I start by looking at the public 

accounts departmental budgets for Science and Technology in 

these last few years, and we find that they’ve been consistently 

budgeted . . . consistently more has been budgeted for this 

department than has been spent. And that lo and behold! for two 

of the three years in public accounts there are huge gaps, 

impossible gaps in government spending. 

 

In one year, for example, over a million dollars is estimated to 

be spent and the department is underexpended by some 800 

million. The second year the department . . . there’s a fairly 

close correspondence between what was budgeted and what was 

expended. But then when we get ready for an election in ‘85-86, 

we note that on a budget of $1.5 million, almost a third of it, 

almost a half of a million dollars is not expended in the 

departmental budget itself. And I think that tells the story. 

 

And I won’t ask the minister to defend those kinds of actions, 

those of his predecessor or those of the Premier. I don’t think 

that that would be fair. But I will go on to point out to the 

public that it’s this kind of dishonesty that doesn’t stop just with 

departmental figures. It gets worse when we look at related 

figures for Science and Technology funding through the 

Heritage Fund – far worse. 

 

And what do we find here from the government’s own figures 

supplied in Public Accounts? Well, in ’83-84 the PC 

government estimated they would spend $5 million for research 

and development. And how much did they actually spend? 

One-tenth of that – 552,000, and that’s no lie. In 1984 and ’85 

the PC government estimated they would spend $5 million 

again for research and development. And what did the PC 

government actually spend? – 1,469,000, not even a third of 

what was budgeted for research and development work in this 

province. 

 

Three strikes and you’re out, they say in baseball. Well let’s 

look at the third pitch that they gave the public of Saskatchewan 

in ’85-86. The PC government of Saskatchewan estimated that 

they would finally cut from previous estimates of the previous 

two years, $5 million a year. They estimated that they would 

actually spend $1 million less – $4 million for research and 

development work in Saskatchewan. And that was subsequently 

revised downward even from that $4 million figure to $3.3 

million. 

 

But did that help close the gap between fact and fiction in terms 

of what was actually spent? No, I don’t think it did. We have 

$2,830,000 that was spent – almost a half a million dollars still 

out in terms of expenditures. 

 

Now when we come to research and development spending for 

this year, what do we find? Yet another million dollars less for 

research and development. We started with $5 million in 

’83-84; another $5 million in ’84-85; we go down to 3.3 million 

in ’85-86; and we’re  

down to $3 million for ’86-87. And your guess is as good as 

mine as to how much will actually be spent. 

 

And I’m not going to ask you, Mr. Minister, to defend this 

record of deception and betrayal of research and development 

work that I’ve just outlined, but I do think it’s fair to ask you, 

however, how did you as minister arrive at the figure of $3 

million for research and development work for this present 

fiscal year? How did you arrive at the $3 million figure, and do 

you feel that that’s accurate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. 

member should know full well that this was a new department 

that came into being on January 1, 1984, and when the budget 

for that particular year was established, there were 39 

companies – or, sure, maybe slightly higher than that – that 

were in operation. And of course the moneys that are put forth 

in the budget are there for companies to request for whatever a 

case it might be, whether it’s research and development or 

getting a prototype developed, right on up through the applied 

research and also to the sale of that first product. 

 

The moneys are there then for request by the companies. The 

Department of Science and Technology is not going to be going 

out to the companies and saying, you must take this amount of 

money. We operate on the basis of companies putting forth their 

proposals, making application to the department, and then the 

officials examining them and taking it from there. 

 

You have to consider the fact that the research and development 

was not introduced until November of 1984 so the programs 

really were only effective for a six-month period, and that can 

account for the small amount of money that was spent that first 

year. 

 

If you go on through, then, the ’84-85 year, the total amount of 

money – or the ’85-86 year – was $4 million, I believe, that was 

budgeted that year for research and development. And that was 

$2.87 million were spent on research and development that first 

year which was up considerably over the year prior to that. And 

the main reason for that was the fact that the departmental 

programs became that much better known and also the number 

of companies there were in operation was increasing. 

 

(1700) 

 

The following year, of course, you had $4 million in the budget, 

and out of that, 3.65 million were spent. So the amount that was 

being expended each year was increasing, but that simply, 

again, goes out to the request of the companies. It’s not 

something that the government goes out and says, this is the 

amount of money you’ve got to take. You can have the money 

in the budget, but if it’s not requested, then how do you blame 

the government for that? 

 

Now you’re talking about – the latter part here in this current 

year, there was a 25 per cent cut in the amount of money 

expended for the current year. So from $4 million, a 25 per cent 

cut gives us 3 million for this current year as far as research and 

development. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

2565 

 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, you feel that there presently is 

no need to spend, or allocate any more than that $3 million on 

research and development work in the province. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I point out to 

the hon. member that we would certainly be happy to have 

much more money than that. But I think that you have to 

consider the fact that with the economic situation as it is and the 

shortfall in our revenues, that it becomes necessary to balance 

off the amount of money that we can expend for research and 

development and economic development, against what we 

would term as fiscal responsibility. 

 

While we might well want much more money, we have to 

balance off. And we were prepared to make our cuts in the same 

way as other departments had to. Certainly, we would like to 

have much more money. At the same time, we can’t overlook 

the fact that there are other moneys that are being expended. 

There’s money through the diversification as I indicated, and 

also now we have the western diversification fund, which we’re 

also going to be triggering into, and I’d be prepared to discuss 

that more at a later time. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well I think maybe it’s time that we should 

get into the estimates for spending within the departmental 

budget itself. I note that the estimates forecast spending of 

$1,954,200 by your department this year. But I wonder if this 

isn’t just more eyewash as was the case in 1985-86 when you 

announced a budget of more than 1.5 million and you only 

spent $1.1 million of it. Will you only be spending two-thirds of 

what you’re bragging about spending for this year, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the figure that 

the hon. member refers to, the $1.954 million, is in reference to 

moneys that will be spent on the administration, and we 

certainly anticipate spending all of that money. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well the proof will be in the pudding a year 

from now in terms of whether the department has another 

eyewash or a real substantive increase and commitment in 

funding to science and technology. 

 

I notice that in the budget for 1985-86, the budget boldly set out 

the Devine government’s intention to allocate 1.538 million to 

the Department of Science and Technology. But of course that 

was at a time when we were heading into a provincial election 

and the Premier was anxious to shore up some of his support, 

particularly for candidates in Saskatoon. But come to the end of 

the year and what do we find was actually spent? Not one and a 

half million, not even close to it, but actual spending was 1.135 

million. 

 

Do you anticipate coming closer than that, Mr. Minister, in this 

upcoming year with respect to the figure that we have, the $1.9 

million figure for Science and Technology? Do you really 

expect to come close to that figure? That that is a realistic that a 

year from now we will look at and say, yes, the minister has 

been far more accurate than his predecessors. 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the 

member’s question, I would simply point out again, as I did a 

few minutes ago, that we’re talking about an administrative 

expense. We are also dealing with estimates, and one cannot 

always expect to be dead on. 

 

But we would anticipate from this point that we will in fact be 

spending the $1.954 million for the current year. But that’s an 

administrative expense and that’s really nothing to do as far as 

the research and development of the programs are concerned. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I note that in the Public 

Accounts for the fiscal year ending March 31, ‘85-86, there was 

substantial underspending under the administrative part of the 

budget. The figure budgeted was $443,000; only $402,000 was 

provided. When we look at the government research component 

of the departmental budget we note that 347,000 was budgeted; 

313,000 was spent. 

 

We look at industrial development, industrial development in 

this province – the very thing that you opened your remarks 

saying was so important to this province – $420,000 was 

budgeted, and $256,000 was actually spent. We look at the 

fourth and final aspect of the budget, research co-ordination – 

$326,000 budgeted; an expenditure of $163,000. 

 

How is it possible to miscalculate so badly at the outset of a 

fiscal year? Or were the figures just purposely inflated because 

we were heading into an election? How do you explain that 

kind of consistent miscalculation in a relatively small budget 

that deals with a department that is relatively small, of only 

some 15 people? How can those kinds of errors be made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the figures that the 

member opposite is quoting are strictly to do with 

administration, and in the year 1985-86 the department was still 

in the growing stages and those were moneys that had been 

estimated that would be spent on staffing. And they simply 

were not all spent. I suppose that not as many people were hired 

as they had originally intended might be needed to carry out the 

programs. But again, this is simply to do with administration. It 

has nothing to do with the programs. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well obviously it has to do with the 

departmental administration. I look at the figures in the 

Estimates book for ’87-88, Mr. Minister, and I look at the 

figures provided in previous Estimates from ’84-85 up to the 

present, and I note that the number of staff in the administration 

component of your department has remained relatively 

constant, at 6.3 person-years, right basically from the beginning 

of the department. 

 

Now this year the staff numbers in administration are almost 

doubled to 11.3. Can you explain this sudden jump in the civil 

servants required to administer what is really a relatively small 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the reason for the 

increase in the administration area from 6.3 to 11.3 simply takes 

into consideration the fact that prior to this current year the 

departmental staff, in other words my  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2566 

 

office, were not included within the budget of Science and 

Technology. So the increase of five in that particular area this 

year then is to do with the inclusion of my office, the minister’s 

office, being put into the Science and Tech budget. 

 

I would also want to point out, Mr. Chairman, I think when we 

reflect back on the previous question and the concern that the 

member opposite has with regard to the fact that the 

expenditures were actually considerably less than the estimates. 

I think that that speaks well of the efficiency of the department 

in the way that they were able to carry out their duties and get 

by possibly with fewer people than they had originally 

intended. So I think that that speaks well of the departmental 

staff. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. It being near 5 o’clock this House is 

recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


