


















































October 26, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 October 26, 1987 
 
 

3507 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you, and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, some guests we have visiting here from Germany; Mr. 
Herman Heister, from West Germany, and Christel Schwatz. They 
are sitting in the visitors’ gallery accompanied by Del Bain from 
the economic development. 
 
I had met Mr. Heister three weeks ago in Cologne at the world’s 
biggest food fair. And Mr. Heister is in wholesale distributing 
business; he’s also helping to promote wild rice in Europe for us. 
And with your permission I’d like to just welcome him in German. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in German.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, would you please help me welcome these two people 
to Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Special Inquiry into Collapse of Pioneer Group 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister for 
Consumer Affairs, my question is to the Minister of Finance. Are 
you aware that the Government of Alberta has now requested their 
provincial Ombudsman to launch a special inquiry into the Alberta 
government’s role in the failure of the Principal Group of 
Companies, and that Premier Getty has said that this special 
inquiry is being set up because the public inquiry, now under way 
in Edmonton, will not be looking closely enough at the 
government’s failures? 
 
In light of Alberta’s decisions, will your government now have the 
courage to ask Saskatchewan’s Ombudsman to undertake an 
inquiry into the operations of the Saskatchewan government and 
its regulatory agencies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated on several 
occasions that, although we haven’t ruled out the possibility of an 
inquiry, the province of Alberta being the main jurisdiction, 
obviously there are a number of actions being proposed. But I do 
note, Mr. Speaker, the report of the inquiry in the province of 
British Columbia which basically tells us nothing new, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They did find that investors were misled, I think we all are aware 
of that. And, Mr. Speaker, I am not convinced that any other 
inquiries in other jurisdictions would be anything other than 
redundant, and I hope that we will be able to assess the situation 
once we have the Alberta report. 

Ms. Smart: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps if we had an 
inquiry here in Saskatchewan, we would know whether there’s 
any issues here for the people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, your government has constantly 
claimed that Saskatchewan didn’t need a separate public inquiry 
into the collapse of these companies because Alberta’s public 
inquiry would answer any questions that Saskatchewan people 
might have. But now even the Alberta government doesn’t support 
that view, and it’s requested a separate investigation by its 
Ombudsman. 
 
My question to you is: why won’t you follow Alberta’s lead and 
ask for a full inquiry here in Saskatchewan to investigate the 
weaknesses in the Saskatchewan government’s investment 
regulations and your role in failing to protect Saskatchewan’s 
investors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well all can advise the hon. member, Mr. 
Speaker, is that when we look at what happened in the province of 
British Columbia with its inquiry, one of the recommendations, for 
example, is that consideration should be given to requiring that the 
absence of CDIC (Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation) 
insurance coverage be displayed in bold print immediately above 
the space provided for the signature of the applicant. 
 
Now it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that in the investment contracts 
in the province of Saskatchewan that was put out in bold print, and 
the requirement was already there, Mr. Speaker. So I am not yet 
persuaded, as I’ve advised the hon. member, that another inquiry 
will do anything other than duplicate what is already being done in 
the province of Alberta. And if one takes the evidence of the 
British Columbia inquiry, then there really is nothing new as a 
result of that particular inquiry, and it would simply be a waste of 
the taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The people in 
Saskatchewan want to know what’s been going on here in 
Saskatchewan. The B.C. government had at least the courage to 
have a public inquiry, and we should have one here. And I want to 
know why you continue to sit on your hands, incompetently and 
negligently, and do absolutely nothing to help the people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the British Columbia report 
indicates exactly what we have been saying, that the report and the 
inquiry is of absolutely no help to the investors, Mr. Speaker. We 
should be concerned about two things: one, what can we do to 
assist the investors, make sure that they get fair hearing in the 
province of Alberta; and secondly, Mr. Speaker, we should be 
aware that the hon. member is again, in effect, asking . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 
would just like to bring to the hon. member’s 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3508 
 
 

attention that while quoting from reports is acceptable, quoting 
them in a manner which might suggest them being an exhibit is 
not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 
Finance, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, in Alberta it has been 
found that the inquiry earlier mounted dealt with relations between 
Principal and its customers. And that inquiry said that it did not 
have the jurisdiction to deal with whether or not the Government 
of Alberta had acted properly. The Premier of Alberta said, fine, 
we’ll have our Ombudsman look into that. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is very simple: why do you not want 
the activities of the Government of Saskatchewan revealed to the 
public? Why are you unwilling to cast the light of public glare on 
the activities of your government and your failure to protect the 
investors in Principal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons we 
don’t have an inquiry at this stage is because we are quite satisfied 
with the actions of the department, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I advise the hon. member that there are several aspects in Alberta, 
certainly one on the actions of the province of Alberta. It’s 
interesting that the inquiry in the province of British Columbia 
took the more realistic . . . and that is to try and find out what 
could be done to help the investors. 
 
It’s very interesting that, other than the request for the bail out, Mr. 
Speaker, which has been ruled out, that the NDP opposition have 
not raised one question to help the investors. They’re more 
concerned about trying to score some political points, Mr. 
Speaker. I find that a highly inappropriate way when some people 
were affected as a result of their investments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, do you not recall that the Minister of Justice had 
mounted an inquiry in order to get information that would assist 
the investors? And do you not acknowledge that after he made that 
announcement, we haven’t heard one word from the Minister of 
Justice? And I fancy we won’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If you want to hear from the Minister of 
Justice, Mr. Speaker, have the courage to ask some questions 
about free trade. 
 

No-hunting Corridors in the North 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I direct my 
question to the Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture. And it 
deals with the no-hunting corridors which he has created along 
roads and highways in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Last week I had asked the Premier about his unfair policy. His 
answer was totally unsatisfactory and, I might add, not accurate. 
What I am asking you to do, Mr. Minister, 

will you stop this policy which violates the treaty rights of many 
northern people, and which denies them the right to hunt for food 
for their families along hundreds of miles of northern highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
hon. member for bringing the subject up again. I’m aware he 
asked on Friday, and as the members of the opposition would be 
aware, he also asked it in estimates, and it was answered at some 
length. 
 
Let me say this. In 1982 we had 32,000 moose in this province. 
Today we have about 40,000 moose. By 1992 we hope to have 
about 60,000 moose. And one of the reasons we’re going to have 
those numbers, and we have the numbers that we have today, is 
because we’ve had the courage to implement this particular 
program which has widespread support throughout Saskatchewan, 
including the president of the fur trappers’ bloc, who wrote to me 
just recently, asking me to institute more road corridors from the 
very member’s own seat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
want to ask you about this policy and how it is being applied. You 
have created no-hunting corridors along Highway 155 in my 
constituency from Green Lake north, and that’s north of Meadow 
Lake. However, there is no such corridor along Highway No. 4 
between Meadow Lake and Glaslyn, which just happens to run 
through your constituency and the constituency of the member 
from Meadow Lake, the Minister of Health. 
 
Can you explain the difference in policy, since both these 
highways run through the same kind of forested regions and are 
surrounded largely by unoccupied Crown land? Why the different 
treatment for people in the North versus the people in the South? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve never been asked to put 
a road corridor along that highway. I definitely thank you for 
bringing the suggestion up. I’d be pleased to have the biologist 
check it and do it. 
 
He mentions 155 north. Mr. Speaker, 56 moose were shot in the 
space of one month on that particular highway he’s talking about, 
just north on 155. And that’s one of the reasons we put a road 
corridor on there. 
 
Let’s be clear. What does a road corridor mean? It means that 400 
metres either side of a highway or a road, there’s no hunting. You 
have to walk through the bush before you can begin to hunt. Most 
people in Saskatchewan, I would submit, Mr. Speaker, are not 
particularly alarmed or perturbed about being asked to get out of a 
vehicle and walk through the bush in order to shoot a moose 
instead of shooting them on the side of the highway. 
 
What’s more, 97 per cent of all of the commercial forest in this 
province is still available for hunting. 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3509 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, once again you indicate that there is a difference 
between the North and the South. 
 
Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that there are clearly two different 
policies — you have created new no-hunting corridors from 
Meadow Lake north, but not south of Meadow Lake — will you 
withdraw this new corridor policy until there has been proper 
consultation with northern residents, especially with the chiefs in 
the band councils in the North? And will you show at least some 
sense of fairness and do that today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, we have been fair with 
everybody in this province. This program is not aimed against 
anything, it’s aimed for something, and that something is to 
preserve the mandate of this department, which is to conserve, 
enhance, and manage our wildlife. And there is no distinction 
between North and South, and if the hon. member takes a look at 
the map and the areas that are affected, it is being applied equally 
throughout the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Group Studies on Health Cuts 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Health. Would the minister confirm today that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has paid a Toronto market research firm called the 
Summerhill Research Centre to undertake a series of sophisticated 
market research meetings across the province called focus groups, 
where you’ve been bringing together small groups of people and 
asking them what they think about your cuts to health care. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you confirm that your government has 
undertaken this, and will you tell the taxpayers of the province 
what it’s costing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of the details 
of the question that the member asked, but I’ll take notice of the 
question and bring an answer back forthwith. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, then, new question to the minister. 
He’s taken notice on that question. Would he also then, while he’s 
exploring that, confirm that the Summerhill Research Centre is 
associated with the Coopers & Lybrand consulting company, that 
company which has been hired by this government for $3 million 
to study government reorganization. Would he confirm that when 
he confirms the other? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I would take 
notice and all the details surrounding it. I’ll certainly take notice of 
the question. 

 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again to the Minister of Health. 
Well I’m told, Mr. Minister, that this national research marketing 
firm charges their clients 3 to $4,000 for each session. And so will 
you find out and report to this House how many of these focus 
group sessions you have instituted and, again, what they’re going 
to cost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I have taken notice of the 
question that the member raises, and the supplementaries keep 
coming. But certainly I said I’d take notice and I will bring back 
an answer. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, when you’re cutting back on the drug plan and the 
school-based children’s dental plan, while saying that your 
government doesn’t have the money to maintain health care 
services, how can you justify spending tens of thousands of 
Saskatchewan dollars on PC party polling? 
 
Why don’t you read your mail? Why don’t you answer your 
telephone calls? Or why don’t you call some of the 100,000 
people who have formally registered their opposition to your 
health care cuts? Why don’t you do all of those things instead of 
hiring some Toronto-based market research group? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would take that 
the simplistic analysis brought forward once again by the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana is based — if you were to take the 
question — is based upon the question asked by her colleague, to 
which I took notice. So I will just leave it at that, Mr. Speaker. I 
have taken notice of her colleague’s question. I will bring back an 
answer, and I’m not sure how much in order this simplistic 
analysis of hers could be.  
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. I can assure the Minister of 
Health the people of this province are not simple or simplistic, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you confirm that these focus 
groups are trying to gauge public reaction to some of your future 
plans for health care, including the privatization of our hospital 
system and deterrent fees for medicare? Can you confirm that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I have already taken notice 
of the question relating to this whole issue, but I would say to the 
member, I agree with her on this point: the people of 
Saskatchewan are not simplistic in their analysis of this as they 
look forward in the future, the 1990s and the year 2000. What I 
said very clearly and what I repeat again, the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana has been very simplistic in her analysis of the 
whole health care enterprise over a period of some months. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3510 
 
 

Adoption Policies and Christian Counselling Services 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question to the Minister of Social Services and it deals with the 
experiment he has launched into private adoption agencies in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, some weeks ago you signed a pilot project contract 
with a group called Christian Counselling Services in Saskatoon. 
Last week a new coalition made up of the United Church, 
Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers, adoptive parents, 
and others, expressed some concerns about that experiment. They 
asked, Mr. Minister, whether the Christian Counselling Services 
will be allowed to discriminate against any adoptive parents who 
do not share this group’s particular religious beliefs. 
 
And I ask very specifically, Mr. Minister, will this experiment 
mean that any of the thousand or so Saskatchewan adoptive 
couples on the waiting list to adopt an infant are going to lose their 
place in line if their religious views do not conform to those of this 
particular group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Speaker, the answer is no.  
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
may say that, but I want to know then if there is a guarantee that 
can be counted on to back that up. Do you have a guarantee in 
your pilot project agreement with the Saskatoon group, Christian 
Counselling Services, that they will not discriminate on the basis 
of religious beliefs? Do they have a written guarantee that those 
who are from other Christian denominations, or who are of the 
Jewish faith, or who may not have specific religious beliefs will be 
treated equally by this private adoption agency? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, those people who do not 
wish to deal with the Christian Counselling agency can deal with 
the government in the same way they always have. And I can’t see 
why any coalition should be against Christian counselling. I can’t 
see why anyone should be against Christians. Even people who 
are not Christians are not against Christians. I can’t see why 
anyone should be against counselling, and I can’t see why the 
NDP should be against choice. So nothing much has changed 
other than there is an alternate service available that will try 
something new and different. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, there 
are some 1,000 Saskatchewan couples who would like to adopt an 
infant in this province who do have concerns about their equal 
access in order to be able to do that. And you know as well as I 
that the waiting lists in Saskatchewan sometimes range up to eight 
or nine years. 
 
The new coalition is also concerned, Mr. Minister, and in order to 
alleviate the concerns of this coalition, but more importantly the 
concerns of a thousand Saskatchewan couples who would like to 
have an infant into the homes, Mr. Minister, will you table the full 
agreement 

signed between your department and the Christian Counselling 
Services to show just exactly what protection you have provided 
for those thousand couples on the waiting list to adopt an infant in 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the Department of Social 
Services has not changed its waiting list. If it get shorter, that 
would be good. And if it gets longer, so be it, because we are not 
in the business of providing babies. We are in the business of 
caring for those babies that need to be cared for, and we’re very 
pleased to adopt them out when they are available. If they’re not 
available, certainly we’re not going to encourage the people to go 
out and have babies just so that they can be adopted. It’s not been 
part of any government’s policy. 
 
So it seems to me that there is nothing wrong with a mother 
having some choice in whether she wants her child adopted to a 
Christian family or to a family of another religion. And so we have 
a list, as we always had, at Social Services; and in addition, 
Christian Counselling will have some people on their list, and it is 
not preventing anybody from doing anything. It’s adding to what 
there now is. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, further supplementary. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Final supplementary. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
ask you simply this: are you saying that those thousand couples 
who are waiting to adopt an infant into their home now will not be 
entitled to receive an infant through the adoptions provided by 
Christian Counselling Services unless they specifically apply 
through that agency and are approved on that list? Is that what 
you’re saying to those thousand couples in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well what I am saying is that the 
Department of Social Services will take people on a first-come, 
first-served basis, as we always have; and we will, as we always 
have, try to match the available children with the types of families 
that the mother desires, as we have always done. We will try to 
match. Nothing has changed. 
 
In addition, families in this province may apply to Saskatoon 
Christian Counselling, and should a mother choose a family to 
which they match the criteria, then they may get a child sooner if 
the mother is approving or requesting that family or a family in 
that category. So I don’t see why there should be a coalition 
against this. Why don’t you . . . I mean why do you keep 
organizing these coalitions against everything? Why aren’t you for 
something for a change? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cut in Grants to Cosmo Day Care Centres 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I hate to turn away from such a ludicrous 
remark, Mr. Speaker, but I’ve a question for the Minister 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3511 
 
 

of Education. Last week, Minister, you took notice of a question 
regarding your government’s unfair cut of a $1,300 a month from 
the Cosmo Day Care for special needs children in Saskatoon, and 
from a similar day care in Lloydminster. Can you tell the House 
today, Mr. Minister, why your department, which spends upwards 
of $65 million a month, couldn’t find the $1,300 a month to 
provide day care for these special needs children? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I took notice of that 
question last week, and since I had the question I’ve asked my 
officials to investigate and find out if in fact the details are as such 
as been presented and to bring back a response to the legislature. I 
do not yet have that report from my department, but as soon as I 
do I will answer the hon. member’s question and the other 
opposition member’s question as well. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I’ll try and ask the supplementary, Mr. Speaker, 
which I think the minister can answer without regard to his 
officials. The Cosmo Day Care was helping these special needs 
children so that they’d be better prepared to enter the public school 
system. Now how are you saving money, Minister, by cutting 
back on that help today when these children will simply need 
more special help when they enter the public schools? Isn’t that a 
short-sighted way to approach a long-term need? Now there’s a 
question that I don’t think you have to take notice of. I think you’ll 
be able to answer yourself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that question 
suggests that the details are as he would have us believe them. I’m 
not so sure they are, and because I want to bring back accurate 
information, I’ve asked my officials to investigate and to give me 
a report on it. And when I get the answers, I’ll bring them back to 
this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I’ll try again, Mr. Speaker, with a supplementary 
that the minister ought to be able to answer. Isn’t this the kind of 
cut, Mr. Minister, to day cares for special needs children, isn’t this 
kind of cut symbolic of what you people are all about? You claim 
that every penny counts and that you can’t afford $1,300 a month 
for a day care for special needs children, but your department 
gives $1 million a month to one advertising agency — one 
advertising agency, Dome Advertising. 
 
Now how do you justify those kinds of spending priorities, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The spending priorities of this 
government have been clear through all of this, Mr. Speaker. What 
we have tried to do, given the economic times we face, given that 
we must get our economic house in order — the reality is, Mr. 
Speaker, if we do not, if we do not, those things which we cherish 
most, health care and education, will suffer the most. The people 
of this province would not be well served, Mr. Speaker, if in fact 
we did not get our economic house in order because 

we would in fact jeopardize the future. 
 
And I continue to be intrigued and amazed by an opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, who on one hand says, you know, make no changes, 
make no changes. At the same time they say, don’t let the deficit 
go up; at the same time they say, don’t let taxes go up. You can’t 
have it all ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our priorities in education have been clear. There is more money 
going to be spent on education from the provincial purse this year 
than last year; that to me suggests, Mr. Speaker, that we have our 
priorities in the right place, and we’ll continue to have them in the 
right place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, With me is Jack 
Vicq, acting deputy minister, Department of Finance; Bill Gibson, 
president of the Crown Management Board; Gerry Kraus, 
Provincial Comptroller; and Greg Mrazek, director, accounting 
services, Crown Management Board. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would explain 
to this Assembly why it is in the public interest that the Provincial 
Auditor no longer have a supervisory role with respect to 
appointed auditors? 
 
Mr. Minister, appointed auditors are not new, although I think 
they’re going to become a great deal more common under this 
legislation. 
 
An Hon. Members: — Right. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I believe it was the Deputy Premier who said 
right to that comment . . . (inaudible interjection ) . . . Yes, I’m 
sure it was the official sitting beside you. 
 
Mr. Minister, under the old legislation, as I read it, the appointed 
auditors worked under the Provincial Auditor, and the reports 
which came forward were in a very real sense the Provincial 
Auditor’s reports because he had to approve them. 
 
As I read this legislation, Mr. Minister, the appointed auditors are 
not subject to that supervision. It is true that the Provincial Auditor 
may, where he’s not satisfied with a report, redo the work, but he 
doesn’t exercise that supervision. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’d tell this Assembly why you think 
that is in the best interests of the public whose 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3512 
 
 

money is being spent, or whose assets are being managed, as 
distinct from the government whose . . . which has had an endless 
number of difficulties with the Provincial auditor, thanks to your 
incompetent and shoddy system of management? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, like the public, I tend to down play the 
hon. member’s adjectives and would simply indicate that he still 
maintains a supervisory position. And if the hon. member had 
been here during debate on second reading, he would have 
realized that the Bill still gives the supervisory power to the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
And what happens is that . . . and the fundamental change is 
simply that the various Crown corporations can use a private 
sector auditor. That private sector auditor’s report must be taken 
by the Provincial Auditor unless the Provincial Auditor believes 
that it’s not being done properly, and then he has the full right to 
go and do the audit all over again, whatever he intends to do. 
 
So it still gives the ultimate supervisory power to the Provincial 
Auditor — that’s not taken away — but the audit itself will be 
done by private sector auditors. If the Provincial Auditor is not 
satisfied, he can step in and then do the audit; the only thing is that 
he must give reasons for it, and I don’t think that’s unfair. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well that’s interesting, Mr. Minister. I just 
wish that the legislation actually said that. What the legislation 
says is that the Provincial Auditor may make his own inquiries if 
he cannot rely upon the Report of the Provincial Auditor. There’s 
quite a difference between being able to do something if you can’t 
rely upon it and being able to do an audit if you’re not satisfied. 
There is quite a difference. 
 
A jurisdiction to do something if it can’t be relied upon is, I 
suggest, fairly narrow. It does not cover the situation where the 
examination was not as complete or exhaustive as the Provincial 
Auditor thinks it might be. It might still be reliable but somewhat 
narrow. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, that there was just one purpose for this 
Bill; that was to restrict the role of the Provincial Auditor and to 
minimize the amount of damage which your own mismanagement 
and the amount of embarrassment which your own 
mismanagement causes you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . When 
I’m finished, Mr. Minister, I’ll sit down. If you keep an eye on me, 
I’ll let you know when I’m done. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have taken out a number of sections which have 
restricted the role of the Provincial Auditor in supervising 
appointed auditors. The old 11(13) indicated that the Provincial 
Auditor may, upon receipt of a private auditor’s request, okay that 
report or request additional information, whether or not he felt that 
the report could be relied upon. It was an unfettered discretion to 
ask that further inquiries be made or, in rare occasions, that some 
work be redone. 
 
The old 11(4) gave the Provincial Auditor the right to request from 
any department of the government, or Crown corporations and 
their auditors, any information which, in the opinion of the 
Provincial Auditor, was 

necessary to fulfil his responsibility under the Act. That’s gone. 
And that’s a great deal broader than the present section which 
simply allows him to redo the work if he thinks it can’t be relied 
upon. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, that the deletion of those sections, 11(3) 
and 11(4), emasculate — and I don’t think that’s too strong a term 
— emasculate the ability of the Provincial Auditor to ensure that 
assets held on behalf of the public and Crown corporations are 
properly managed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the hon. member should be aware that 
section 11 was changed because what it does now it sets the same 
scope for all — and let’s keep in mind the profession that we’re 
dealing with. I mean, they virtually are all educated with the same 
standards. Secondly, they have to report according to generally 
accepted accounting principles that are established not just on a 
provincial basis but in many cases nationally and internationally. 
So that by setting that same scope for all, it covers off, I believe, 
the concerns raised by the hon. member. 
 
I think, secondly, that we should keep in mind the comments of 
the Provincial Auditor when he himself reviewed the legislation, 
section 1, clause 7 . . . his report, where he points out quite clearly 
that if his interpretation is: 
 

. . . in accordance with the intention of the legislature when it 
enacts these amendments, then it is my opinion that the 
amendments contained in this Bill will not affect the 
accountability of the executive government to the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
So I could go on and on and on, but I suggest to the hon. member 
that to argue that you get less of an audit because you’re using 
private sector, I frankly think, flies in the face of reality, and it is 
not accurate. The fundamental change is that the Provincial 
Auditor will have to accept the audits as prepared by the private 
sector audits unless he has reason to believe . . . and he must give 
the reasons. 
 
Is this new? Of course it’s not new. And I could go through the 
debate we had on Friday where the new leader of the New 
Democratic Party makes a rather eloquent plea for private sector 
auditors for the Saskoil corporation — and we went through that 
on, I believe, Friday; it may have been Thursday. And they do 
bring to, particularly the Crown corporations in a competitive 
environment, may well bring new expertise which is not there 
through a Provincial Auditor. 
 
For example, an auditor that . . . an audit company that may have 
advised other computer companies may bring an expertise as part 
of its service to SaskCOMP or any others. And that was the same 
argument made by the member from Riversdale when it came to 
Saskoil, and realistically . . . and that there’s no difference. 
 
I think that the hon. members would have had a concern if they’d 
had have been the Provincial Auditor . . . or the private sector 
auditors had have been removed from the ultimate scrutiny of the 
Provincial Auditor, but that is not 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3513 
 
 

the case. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, there is a vast difference 
between the Provincial Auditor and private auditors in the manner 
of their appointment. And there’s a vast difference between a 
Crown corporation and a private corporation. I want to begin with 
that point. 
 
In a private corporation, whether the shares are traded on the 
exchange or not, the shareholders appoint the auditor, and not the 
directors. And they are responsible to the shareholders. In this 
case, Mr. Minister, there is no distinction between the shareholders 
and the management — both are the Government of 
Saskatchewan. So the independence which a private auditor has in 
a private corporation simply doesn’t exist here. There’s no 
independent group of shareholders to appoint them. 
 
That is why, Mr. Minister, the Provincial Auditor has been made 
responsible to the Legislative Assembly and not to the 
Government of Saskatchewan. And that is one significant change. 
The auditors which do the audit are no longer responsible to the 
Assembly and no longer enjoy that degree of independence from 
the government. 
 
The minister may say that the ethics of their profession require 
them to provide an independent audit and not to rely upon requests 
made by management, and that’s true. But they’d be less than 
human, any of them would be less than human, if they weren’t 
concerned about whether or not an adverse audit might result in 
them getting less work. That doesn’t happen in a private 
corporation because the directors don’t appoint them. 
 
But here, if you get an audit you don’t like, the firm which 
provided it has no protection against losing the account — none at 
all. The Provincial Auditor doesn’t appoint them, isn’t able to 
defend them in such circumstances. 
 
So this system, Mr. Minister, of having private auditors appointed 
by management — and that’s effectively what’s going to happen 
— removes an essential degree of independence and therefore an 
essential degree of protection for the public. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well let’s keep in mind several things. I tend 
to get surprised when the hon. members express some concern 
about the independence of the Provincial Auditor. If I can remind 
the hon. member — because he may have been part of the treasury 
benches of the day — when the Provincial Auditor became an 
appointee of the government of the day under your administration, 
it was not until 1983 that the Provincial Auditor again was 
restored as being an appointee. 
 
(1445) 
 
The hon. member from Lakeview may be surprised at this, but 
those are the facts, that he was an appointee of the Legislative 
Assembly until, I think — the hon. member can correct me — I 
think about 1976 . . . ‘75, and then it was taken away. And then in 
1983 again the legislation was changed to make the Provincial 
Auditor subject to the Legislative Assembly and not to Executive 
Council. So if you’ve had a conversion and a reconversion, then 
I’m 

somewhat surprised. 
 
Secondly, I get surprised when on the one hand you say that the 
private sector auditors are less than able to give an audit because 
they happen to be appointed by other than the Legislative 
Assembly. I only bring five examples to the hon. member’s 
attention: the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the auditors 
are appointed by order in council — that was a practice 
established by the previous New Democratic administration; 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, the auditors are 
appointed by order in council — that was the practice and the rule 
in the legislation established by the New Democratic Party; 
Saskatchewan Forest Products, the auditors are appointed by order 
in council — that legislation and those changes were made by the 
New Democratic Party; SaskMinerals, the auditors are appointed 
by order in council — that legislation and those changes and 
practice were implemented by the New Democratic Party; and 
finally, Saskoil, the auditors are appointed by order in council, and 
that practice was established both by legislation and in practice by 
the New Democratic Party. 
 
So to argue that this is something new, as I say, I express some 
surprise. And to hold up that you’re now in favour of the 
Provincial Auditor being . . . reporting to the Legislative 
Assembly, that is a conversion, albeit a welcome one. 
 
And all I suggest to the hon. member, that a fair look at the 
legislation, as the Provincial Auditor himself has done, it allows 
the Crown corporations to have private sector auditors. 
 
Secondly, the Provincial Auditor has the override. If he is not 
satisfied he can go in and do the audit again; the only difference is 
that he has to give reasons, and I don’t think it’s unfair, if he has 
concerns, that those reasons be given. 
 
Secondly, I happen to believe that, if the reasons are given, that 
this Assembly is in enhanced position because he will have to lay 
out reasons for public consumption why the audit of a particular 
corporation and the auditors of a particular corporation are not 
doing their job. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, why did you feel it necessary to 
bring in this legislation if it wasn’t to restrict the ability of the 
Provincial Auditor to supervise the work of the private auditors? 
What sense does the legislation make? You could appoint . . . If 
you simply wanted to be able to appoint private auditors for all 
Crown corporations, you might have brought in a section to that 
effect. But you didn’t — we’re much beyond that — and restricted 
the ability of the Provincial Auditor to exercise an overall 
supervisory role with respect to these provincial auditors. 
 
And I say, given their lack of independence — and there’s none; 
they’re appointed by management and report to management — 
given their lack of independence, Mr. Minister, it’s simply not 
satisfactory to have private auditors operating within such a scope. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There are several reasons. Firstly, if you have 
two audit authorities for a corporation, then obviously both have 
professional responsibilities to do 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3514 
 
 

the audit, which would have meant a significant duplication of the 
activities. 
 
With regard to the changes, to allow so that they’re all subject to 
the same scope, which is section 11 . . . in our view gives 
uniformity and consistency. 
 
And finally, we’ve had the debate as to why we were using private 
sector auditors throughout the course of this. I think the 
government policy is there, which as well answers your first 
question. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, why did you feel it necessary to 
delete subsection 6 of section 11 of the old legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The reason is because it was considered 
inappropriate and inefficient for the Provincial Auditor to require 
an appointed auditor to perform an additional examination. If the 
Provincial Auditor does not agree with the actions of the auditor, 
then his authority extends to allow him to do the whole audit. We 
thought it was rather wasteful to have him simply go in and ask for 
a re-examination if he didn’t agree with it in the first place and 
have the same people do it over again; that he then moves to his 
overriding power, which is to do it himself if he’s not satisfied. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, my understanding of subsection 
6 of section 11 of the old legislation is that was the basis upon 
which the Provincial Auditor could institute litigation if he wasn’t 
getting the documents which he felt he needed to do an audit. He 
now loses that power and has to rely on just the documents 
provided by the government unless those documents are so 
insufficient that he would have to reserve his opinion about the 
statements. 
 
If there are other sections, Mr. Minister, which guarantee him 
unrestricted access to documents, I would appreciate your pointing 
them out to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think if the hon. member takes a look at 
section 10 of the printed Bill referring to section 24, he will get the 
answer which allows the Provincial Auditor “free access, at all 
convenient times” etc., etc. That’s the section that applies. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — This section allowed him to ask for other 
documents to conduct additional examinations or audits of 
accounts, records, or financial statements beyond those that were 
provided to him. I don’t interpret section 10 as giving him that 
ability to require that any document be given to him. I don’t read 
that into the other legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Section 24 gives him that right in the 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Whether it does or not, Mr. Minister, why did 
you delete this section? This section has little to do . . . this 
section, as I see it, has nothing to do with private auditors. Why 
did you delete this section? It’s, as far as I can see, outside the 
scope of the balance of the Bill which is to, as you say, permit 
private auditors to do the 

work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well except I gave the answer earlier. If . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — But it didn’t make any sense. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well except that if you’ve got the Provincial 
Auditor having the ability to do a full audit under the existing 
legislation, then you go ahead and appoint a private sector auditor 
to do an audit, you can rest assured you’ll end up with two audits. 
And so, what the objective of the legislation is, is to have the 
private sector audit that, and the Provincial Auditor in the case 
where the private sector auditors are used, to have an override. If 
he’s not satisfied., then he can go through and do an audit. There’s 
nothing to stop him if he’s not satisfied and if he gives reasons. 
 
So we didn’t think it realistic, if the private sector auditor on one 
hand is doing something that the Provincial Auditor disagrees 
with, to ask the private sector auditor to go back and do it again. In 
all likelihood the Provincial Auditor isn’t going to agree with it 
again, at which point he falls back on his ultimate authority to go 
in and do the audit with the reasons given. So to have a duplication 
is one of the reasons for the legislation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I say again that if you had 
wanted to simply permit private auditors to do the work of Crown 
corporations and all of them, a simple amendment to that effect 
would have sufficed. What you wanted to do was to get the private 
auditors out from underneath the Provincial Auditor, unless he 
could come within that narrow phrase of providing a report that he 
couldn’t rely upon. But unless it’s unreliable — as distinct from 
being incomplete — unless it’s unreliable, the Provincial Auditor 
will have simply no role. 
 
If you had simply wanted to allow private auditors to do the work, 
this Bill wasn’t necessary. A simple amendment would have 
sufficed. The whole thrust of this Bill is to inhibit and limit the 
ability of the Provincial Auditor to supervise their work. And I say 
it’s essential, given the fact that they have virtually no 
independence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I could then ask the hon. member, if you want 
to take your logic, why in the legislation respecting the five 
different departments that we talked about earlier, SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation), Sask Forest 
Products, Potash Corporation, Saskoil, and Sask Minerals, is there 
in the legislation the power to use private sector auditors? The 
reason is, if you don’t, you in effect will end up in many cases 
having private sector doing an audit and the Provincial Auditor 
then going in and doing an audit as well. And it simply avoids that 
and still protects the ultimate responsibility of the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, do you foresee private auditors 
doing all Crown corporations? Will that be what will happen 
starting with the next fiscal year of the Crown corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m going to assume that they all will be done, 
because my officials . . . other than, say, the 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3515 
 
 

Liquor board which will stay with the Provincial Auditor. There 
may be one or two smaller ones that they don’t recall now. But for 
that reason I will assume that all the Crown corporations will be 
using private sector auditors. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, under the former legislation 
private auditors were appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. If I’m correct, and I think I am, that requirement is no 
longer there. Who will now appoint them? Is it the general 
manager of SGI that appoints the auditor for SGI? I see the 
minister shaking his head. Perhaps I’m mistaken. But I 
understood, from an earlier review of this legislation, that the 
requirement that it be done by the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
was taken out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well if you go to the consequential 
legislation, they’re all appointed by Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1500) 
 
Bill 41 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments 

to Certain Acts resulting from the Enactment of The 
Provincial Auditor Amendment Act, 1987 

 
Clauses 1 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to repeal The Public Utilities Review 
Commission Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If I could . . . the hon. member . . . (inaudible) 
. . . introduce as well Bob Blackwell, director of operations, 
treasury board division, Department of Finance, and Doug Moen 
with us from the Department of Justice. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. Mr. Minister, in 1982 the setting up of the Public 
Utilities Review Commission was a major election campaign for 
the PC party. And some time in the summer of 1982 the 
commission was introduced with, I might say, a great deal of 
fanfare from yourself and other members of the PC party. For 
example, you made statements in, I think this is July of ’82 at page 
499 of Hansard: 
 

. . . the people of Saskatchewan have waited long enough for 
an independent agency that will finally give the people of 
Saskatchewan that feeling of confidence that the rate 
increases of our crown corporations are fair and just and 
reasonable under the circumstances. 

 
So, Mr. Minister, having . . . you know, and we went into some 
detail on second reading debate on this Bill about 

how this promise was made by the PC party and made with a great 
deal of fanfare. You talked about public participation and public 
input into setting utility rates. And today what we have here is 
your government introducing a Bill to abolish this independent 
agency that you thought was the answer to so many problems. 
 
And so I would like to hear from the minister — and I know the 
public would be very interested in hearing as well — why you 
decided to abolish the Public Utilities Review Commission?  
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I think the irony may be on the 
government abolishing the Public Utilities Review Commission. I 
think the irony is just as much the New Democratic Party 
opposing the establishment of the Public Utilities Review 
Commission in the first place, now opposing the abolition of it. 
And I think the hon. member, herself, has been consistent until this 
vote of being opposed to the existence of the Public Utilities 
Review Commission. 
 
We’ve had much public debate. I gave the reasons during second 
reading as to the reasons for the abolition of PURC. And the hon. 
member, I’m sure, is aware of the increasing complexity of the 
interveners before PURC, the costs of the preparation, the costs of 
consultants, the costs of expert witnesses was sky-rocketing. And 
the Consumers’ Association of Canada, Saskatchewan division, 
had expressed concern, both publicly and to the government, of 
their inability to participate to the full because of the increasing 
complexity and the increasing technicality of the interventions 
before PURC. 
 
So although I believe today that PURC is a good idea, I do say that 
if we had a financial environment with a great deal of money, I 
would be strongly in favour of PURC (Public Utilities Review 
Commission), and I would strongly be in favour of more money to 
the consumers’ association for its interventions before PURC. But 
given the financial environment, it was becoming increasingly 
costly. 
 
If I had a disappointment on the operations of PURC, it is one I 
believe shared by the chairman of the Public Utilities Review 
Commission, and that was that PURC never had the success that 
the members of the commission had hoped, of trying to involve 
more of the general public so that they felt they had access to it. 
 
It very quickly became a situation where I think the major 
representative of the general public was a consumers’ association. 
Many people were intimidated by the increasing complexity of the 
applications and the board hearing, so it . . . those combinations of 
factors, as I’ve given to the hon. member before, were the reasons 
for the abolition of PURC. 
 
Ms. Simard: — It think it’s fair to say . . . I’ve been advised, Mr. 
Chairman, that in effect the New Democratic opposition voted in 
favour of the establishment of the Public Utilities Review 
Commission when the commission was established in this 
legislature in 1982. So when the minister says that the opposition 
was opposed to it, he has to bear in mind that the opposition did 
vote in favour of it. 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3516 
 
 

I think it’s important to note that we have always been sceptical 
about whether or not PURC was the right method to use in order 
to obtain public participation into setting utility rates, and I myself 
have expressed that scepticism on a number of different occasions. 
However, the fact of the matter is, is the Public Utilities Review 
Commission was a PC promise and is a promise broken by the PC 
party in as much as they are repealing the commission today and 
claiming that they’re doing so on the basis of cost. 
 
I would suggest that it’s not on the basis of cost; it’s more a 
question of political expediency on the part of the government, 
inasmuch as PURC was making decisions that were not politically 
expedient for the government, and PURC didn’t march to the 
government’s tune in the sense that the decisions may not have 
been decisions that the government would have made itself or 
would have wanted made on its behalf. 
 
But with respect to the question of costs, I wish to ask the minister, 
precisely what was the cost of PURC, and I’m wondering if he 
could tell us that today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll get that information because I thought we 
had it handy. We do have the expenditures of about 2,630,000, but 
then that does not include the costs of each of the Crown 
corporations and their preparation. 
 
I thought I had all of that information handy for the hon. member, 
but we’ll go back and I’ll supply it to you if you want it today. I 
don’t know whether that will be difficult or not, but I’ll get you 
that information because I had released it to the public before so 
it’s available. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I think you had said it was something like $6 
million, Mr. Minister. Does that ring a bell? I’m wondering if you 
could get me a breakdown on that information then as to how you 
calculate the 6 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I can tell you how the calculation would arise, 
but I’ll have to get you the details of the calculation. The 
calculation would arise from the actual expenditures of PURC and 
then what the various Crown corporations had to pay for their 
preparation, and then, thirdly, any Crown corporation charges as a 
result of the awards by PURC. You may recall that PURC in many 
cases required the Crown corporation to pay the intervener’s cost. 
So it would make up, I believe, those three components. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I think it was the Public Utilities Review 
Commission, Mr. Chairman, that said they had saved the 
taxpayers, or people who use the Crown utilities in the province, 
some $200 million. I’d like you to comment on whether or not that 
figure is accurate, number one. And number two, if that is 
accurate, would you not agree then that the cost of $6 million 
could be justified in the eyes of the . . . or would you take the 
position then that the cost of $6 million would be justifiable in the 
eyes of those people who are being saved some 200 million on 
their utility rates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well again, I think the public is aware that 
they may have that saving, but there is an increased 

cost in many cases to the corporation. For example, SaskPower, if 
it has a reduction in costs, in many cases would simply have an 
increased debt which would perhaps be amortized over a longer 
period of time. 
 
Whether the public has a saving as a result of a view of PURC that 
perhaps there should not be a system whereby one activity of a 
corporation perhaps subsidizes another — for example, gas 
subsidizing electricity in SaskPower, or long distance subsidizing 
local — one can make an argument that if you separate those two 
functions and you save on one — for example gas, if their PURC 
makes an order reducing the gas charges to the taxpayer, but then 
your electrical would go up eventually — I’m not sure that would 
constitute a saving. 
 
One, I’m not sure the taxpayers look upon the safe-driver rebate as 
a tax saving, although all of those things were calculated in the 
general picture put forward by the spokesperson for PURC, so I do 
believe that that calculation would be a subjective one. I also 
believe that it would be very much a debatable point whether those 
were actually the savings or whether they were transferred, for 
example, from gas over to electric, for example, in SaskPower. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, one of the things that PURC was 
doing was moving from a cross-subsidization philosophy, if you 
like, to a more user-pay philosophy. And I’m wondering what 
your opinion of that is, and what your government intends to do in 
the future with respect to setting utility rates, vis-a-vis those two 
philosophies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ve argued most strongly, and we did 
before PURC, in the philosophy of cross-subsidization. We have 
argued, as well, in national fora of the need for cross-subsidization 
as it applies to telecommunications. We believe that overall they 
give a lower cost to Saskatchewan consumers. They, as well, tend 
to maintain the viability of the Crown corporations with those 
cross-subsidizations. 
 
It’s my view that if we did not cross-subsidize in both SaskPower 
and SaskTel, some components of those — the operation of those 
corporations — people would simply begin to refrain from the use 
of the particular service. And we believe that that, in most cases, 
would result in unfairnesses, and so we’re supportive, 
conceptually and practically, of the cross-subsidization. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Will your government then be implementing 
cross-subsidization in the future setting of utility rates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well it certainly will be a factor. We do, as I 
say, support the concept of cross-subsidization. 
Cross-subsidization, just so I’m not misinterpreting your question, 
does not mean that each component has the same rate. And I’m 
sure that’s not the tenor of your question. Cross-subsidization, 
although you may have a rate increase in local telephone rates, 
does not mean that cross-subsidization is no longer the principle. 
But as a principle we’re supporting it. We’re in favour of it. As I 
say, we’ve argued it beyond the borders of the province as well. It 
will be a factor, but it may not always be showing up in a specific 
rate increase or decrease. 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3517 
 
 

(1515) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Now. Mr. Minister, one of the main reasons that 
we’re objecting to the introduction of this Bill in the legislature is 
the fact that we recognize, the NDP opposition recognizes, that the 
public wants input into setting utility rates, and you obviously 
recognized that in 1982 when you established the commission. 
You are now repealing the commission, but you fail to come 
forward with any alternatives to achieve this public participation, 
to achieve the goal of public participation, and we have mentioned 
a number of them in the media some time ago and in this 
Legislative Assembly in the debate pertaining to this Bill. 
 
And I would like the minister to advise us today whether or not he 
has any alternatives in mind, and whether he will be moving on 
these alternatives immediately. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The position will be put forward, is that we’re 
restoring the rate-making process to as it was prior to the 
establishment of the Public Utilities Review Commission. 
 
Are there other options? I’m not satisfied, at least at this stage, that 
there are financially some realistic options. I would not close the 
door to future realistic options — one, as I say, that would deal 
with some system whereby the public would feel it had some 
input, or in fact have some input. 
 
But as it stands at this stage, we are establishing again the same 
rate-setting mechanism as existed prior to the establishment of the 
Public Utilities Review Commission. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, we mentioned a number of 
alternatives. One of them — and I’m not suggesting it’s the best 
one — but one that comes to mind, that probably wouldn’t involve 
any more government expenditure than what already takes place 
with respect to establishing boards of Crown corporations, was to 
have representatives from consumer associations directly 
appointed to the boards of Crown corporations, to have an elected 
representative coming from a consumer association appointed to 
the board. 
 
I’m wondering what the minister thinks about that alternative, and 
whether he’d be prepared to look at it with a view to implementing 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As I say, I wouldn’t rule out any options. 
There are some difficulties with that particular proposal because 
the actions of the corporation don’t always impact just on rates, 
and in many cases there are broader issues which should be dealt 
with, and whether a special interest representing an interest is 
advisable. One can debate that for some time that it may not be as 
an effective an option as the hon. member presents. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Another one that came to mind was the 
possibility of having advisory council travel the province on a 
regular basis to obtain some input into the setting of utility rates or 
other matters that impinge upon consumers of utilities in the 
province — and that option may not be 

as expensive as the minister thinks. And I’m wondering if he’s 
given that option any consideration, and whether he would look at 
the possibility of implementing an option along those lines. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The difficulty with that particular option is 
that immediately the ones who appear would spend the money to 
promote, advertise, appear, bring in the experts, are the very large 
users, which were the ones that tended to respond to PURC. And I 
would foresee that the concept would easily be usurped by those 
who had a great economic interest in the results. I mean that’s . . . 
if you take the advisory council, and if you were to substitute 
PURC, but it travelled, then you would probably end up with the 
same thing. 
 
PURC started out nice and simple, but as it developed it became 
very complex, and I think any type of an advisory council would 
ultimately have the same effect. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if there are any 
outstanding applications that were in front of PURC, any 
outstanding matters that had to be dealt with, and if so, what they 
are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised that . . . my officials are not 
aware of any outstanding. There were rate changes made after 
May 15, and this legislation ratifies those rate changes made by 
PURC. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Could you please tell the House, as well, who the 
members of the Public Utilities Review Commission were at the 
time of its abolishment?  
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The chairman, familiar to the hon. members, 
Ernie Boychuk; Roy Billinton of Saskatoon, I believe, the 
University of Saskatchewan; Bernard Kirwan from Gull Lake, 
Saskatchewan, SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) I believe; Emily Poncelet of Whitewood; Marian 
Sherman of Prince Albert; Arnold Nelson of Regina; and June 
Blough of Regina, who was vice-chairman. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, could you please tell us whether 
any severance packages were paid to any of the members of the 
commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It is proposed, but I gather payment hasn’t 
been made of the balance of the annual per diem to each of the 
members as a gratuity, and then, secondly, the retirement package 
previously debated with Judge Boychuk. Judge Boychuk for many 
reasons felt it would be inappropriate for him to go back to the 
bench, and so a retirement package was arranged. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Could the minister tell us what the amount of this 
per diem or the amount of the gratuity would be for each 
individual, and the amount of Mr. Boychuk’s retirement package? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — For the members it’s 1,000. I’ll get you Judge 
Boychuk’s. Judge Boychuk’s — it was 20 months, which would 
take him to his full retirement age. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I just want to reiterate . . . 
 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3518 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — If I may . . . 
 
Ms. Simard: — Sorry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Understand that with Judge Boychuk that is 
for his judgeship as well. He was paid as a provincial court judge. 
This doesn’t come as a perk (perquisite) retirement package. It’s a 
retirement package for himself as a provincial court judge. 
 
Ms. Simard: — The 20 months was as a provincial court judge 
salary? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Yes. The minister says yes. Mr. Minister, I want 
to reiterate just once again the fact that there has been no 
alternative to the Public Utilities Review Commission put forward 
by your government. And I want to reiterate that, because I know 
the public is very concerned about the setting of utility rates, and 
the public would like some consumer input into setting utility 
rates. 
 
And what we have here, Mr. Minister, is a promise that was made 
by your government and a promise that is being broken by your 
government today — a promise upon which you took considerable 
political advantage and introduced with a great deal of fanfare. 
And what it appears to the public, and I might say to the New 
Democratic Party opposition, is not that the cost was prohibitive 
because we know there is lots of money available for other 
organizations . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — George Hill. 
 
Ms. Simard: — . . . in this province. Yes, the member from 
Souris-Cannington says, George Hill. He’s only one example, but 
nevertheless a very significant example. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is this a situation . . . The abolishment of 
the Public Utilities Review Commission is a situation where the 
government did not agree with the decisions that were being made 
by the Public Utilities Review Commission. The government was 
being embarrassed by the fact the Public Utilities Review 
Commission was making decisions that were politically 
inexpedient from the point of view of the government, and 
therefore the government decided to get rid of this watch-dog 
agency on Crown corporations. It’s another example of how the 
government is very willing, and very readily will axe the 
watch-dog agencies or cut back on watch-dog agencies when they 
don’t agree with the decisions that are being made. 
 
But it’s very important to bear in mind the fact that the public does 
want public participation. And although the New Democratic 
opposition did not necessarily agree with all the decisions that 
were being made by PURC, we want to see some public 
participation in the setting of utility rates, and we strongly urge the 
government to heed what the public wants and to look at 
alternatives for public participation. 
 
I’ve only raised two of them today, but we’ve raised three or four 
on the floor of the Assembly, and perhaps you have some better 
idea. But let’s take a look at what 

alternatives are available and let’s take a look at some . . . setting 
up some sort of apparatus so that the public can have this input. 
 
And so once again, in closing the debate on this Bill, I with to urge 
the government to take a second look at that and to consider some 
way to have consumer input into setting utility rates. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — To make the argument that the government 
disagreed with all of PURC’s rulings, I don’t think is a fair one; 
there were many. And as a matter of fact one of the great strengths 
of PURC is that it was the first time that officials in the three 
Crown corporations had to justify their actions before a board that 
was prepared to review their actions and that was able to obtain 
some expertise to be able to ask those questions. 
 
Having said that, ultimately the debate on the rate increases, or the 
rates of Crown corporations, will be decided by the public as to 
whether they see them fair or not. And I think we will agree . . . 
would agree with that. Whether there are some other vehicles to be 
able to do that, as I’ve assured the hon. member, I do have an open 
mind in that. 
 
But what I would like to see next time is that it be some vehicle 
that does not have the expenditures and the movement towards a 
degree of sophistication that excludes the public, that PURC and 
we are finding all other public utilities in Canada seem to have, 
that your major players before them are those with the economic 
abilities and the financial abilities to make presentations. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to.  
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1530) 
 

Bill No. 44 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Public Utilities Review Commission Repeal Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I just want to indicate once again 
that we will not be supporting this Bill, and our reason for not 
doing this is in the fact that this was . . . PURC was a promise 
made by the PC government in 1982 that is being broken today 
without the government coming forward with any alternatives to 
allow and encourage public participation. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to.  
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3519 
 
 

Tax Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If I could introduce to the Assembly, Mr. 
Chairman, Len Rog, the executive director, revenue division, 
Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Bill 17, the Act to 
amend The Corporation Tax Act, I have a very few questions on 
it, Mr. Chairman. And I’d just like to perhaps start out by asking 
the minister if he could justify some figures that I have found to be 
a little unusual that are on page 51 of the budget address which 
estimate The Corporation Capital Tax Act will raise $2.2 million. 
But in effect in the Estimates it shows that he will be going from 
. . . or he is estimating that the revenue from such a tax will raise 
$52 million. Last year the actual number was $31 million. 
 
Could you explain those discrepancies, if you’re indicating the 
increase is 2.2 million, yet the Estimates show that from actual to 
estimate is 21 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll go through the list of the items making up 
that increase: an estimated additional 18 million received as a 
result of the general rate increase to .5 per cent from .3 per cent; an 
estimated additional $3 million received as a result of the rate 
increase to the tax rate levied on banks. That’s from 3 per cent 
from 2 per cent. An estimated additional $0.4 million received as a 
result of the increase in the tax rate levied on trust and loan 
companies. An additional $5 million in prior year payments 
resulting from the tax rate increases. Those of course we get 
through federal government adjustments. An estimated 2 per cent 
growth in the tax base and anticipated prior year adjustments to be 
paid to SaskTel and Sedco as a result of base adjustments. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you. How many companies in 
Saskatchewan that were levied the corporate capital tax did not 
pay last year, and what was the total amount owing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There are approximately 800 corporations that 
paid the tax. We’re not aware of any who did not pay the tax. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So your revenue is current with all corporations 
in the province with respect to this tax. What is the best guess as to 
whether there are new corporations involved with the levy of this 
tax and the increase thereof? Are you expecting any new 
corporations to be included in this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If you’re talking new corporations starting 
out, the base for the tax, they’re exempt if under $10 million. So if 
there were any coming along from a start-up, we wouldn’t 
anticipate any. We’re not aware of any new ones that would cause 
the increase. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — There’s no projections in terms of your 
department estimating how many more companies will be 
involved with this. 
 
Could you, in laymen’s terms, explain how that tax is 

levied? I know it’s on the . . . each corporation must have a 
minimum of $10 million of capital, but could you explain 
precisely what that means, whether it’s assets minus liabilities or 
some other formula that you use? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m not sure you can put this particular tax in 
layman’s terms. In general, it’s taxable paid-up capital; it applies 
to all corporations operating in Saskatchewan whose taxable 
paid-up capital exceeds $10 million. That taxable paid-up capital 
is defined as a company’s shareholder’s equity, plus long-term 
liabilities, minus its investments in other companies. 
 
Now I can further mudify the waters if you want. Because the 
allocation then, among provinces, depends on the location in 
which it earns revenue, pays salary and wages, etc., etc., in the 
calculations, I frankly don’t think there’s any simple way of 
explaining this particular tax. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Can the minister explain to the Assembly 
whether or not there’s been any response from the corporate 
sector, from the banking institutions, from the loan and trust 
companies, with regard to the tax increase, and what those 
comments might be in general? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Banks don’t like it, and particularly did not 
like the increase. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t had much 
response from them. I’ve read one report and I . . . Someone once 
said that the art of taxation is to pluck the most feathers from the 
goose with the least amount of hissing. And I guess the point I 
want to make with respect to this Act is there has not been a lot of 
vocal opposition to it because it’s a very modest tax. 
 
You indicate in your estimates that it will result in a $2.2 million 
tax increase to the 800 companies and corporations which operate 
in this province, yet with the tobacco tax you are estimating 
revenue increase of $9 million. 
 
And we can go through all the taxes that we’ll be discussing today 
— the fuel tax, the flat tax increase, and others. And I just want to 
make the point that the government should be looking at, rather 
than increasing taxes, undertaking the largest tax grab in the 
history of this province, which in this budget alone, with all the tax 
Bills, will result in a $1,000 provincial tax increase for a family of 
four . . . and I think that rather than increase taxes wholesale, what 
the minister should be doing, very clearly and the government 
should be doing, is looking at some of the mismanagement that 
has been undertaken by this government; looking at the high cost 
of patronage; perhaps reducing its $24 million a year advertising 
bill to Dome Advertising, and looking at other ways, rather than to 
just pass on the incompetence and mismanagement of this 
government on to the backs of ordinary taxpayers in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ve been through the debate many times, 
and I just advise the hon. member that the corporate capital tax in 
Saskatchewan is the highest in Canada. Manitoba now has raised 
it up to Saskatchewan’s level. 
 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3520 
 
 

You do run the following difficulty if you get too far out of line, 
and that is: it is quite easy for the very companies, the larger ones, 
to move their offices to the province of Alberta. So you have to 
watch your west border in terms of the imposition of this tax and 
get it at a level that is maximizing the revenue and doesn’t get you 
to the point where you’re in fact, losing revenue. 
 
So this is where the payers of the tax have a great deal of 
flexibility as to where they operate and the calculation. So one has 
to be cautious, in fairness, as to how far you can go. We do believe 
that we have the maximum, at least at this stage. Obviously we’ll 
monitor it from time to tine, but we don’t want to see the point 
where, in fact, people are artificially moving over to another 
jurisdiction simply to avoid paying the tax. 
 
Secondly, one should keep in mind, as well, the corporate capital 
tax which, although not subject to this particular debate, as well is 
— the corporate income tax I mean — which as well, in many 
cases, is amongst the highest in Canada. So at those two levels we 
are, at least at this stage, as high as we can go. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — My final comment., Mr. Chairman, would be 
with regard to the oil companies and the taxes that they . . . 
actually the tax cuts that they’ve made. The government has made 
a number of cuts in this budget which will affect, in a very 
negative way, our health plans; which will affect, in a very 
negative way, the delivery of social services to people that really 
are in desperate need of them. 
 
I find it really incredible that they would continue to raise taxes 
when in effect . . . and to make cut-backs to programs and services 
which are very crucial to our province and the people living here 
when the first tax cut they made, or in the first cut they made, was 
a tax cut to the oil companies in December of ’86. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that’s all the questions I have with regard to this 
Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to.  
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, Mr. 
Chairman, the government opposite has, rather than attack the real 
problem for the tax increases, that is, their mismanagement and 
their fiscal irresponsibility, and to attack the fact they’ve got the 
fastest growing deficit in this continent . . . And look at some of 
the reasons for that. They have chosen to pass on the 
mismanagement and incompetence to the people of this province. 
 
I find it quite amazing that they tax corporations $2.2 million more 
this fiscal year than they did last, but in fact they’re charging 
people who use tobacco in this province a significant amount 
more. And I think what we’re 

looking at here is roughly $9 million. So they believe that the taxes 
should be spread out to working people and other people who use 
tobacco to the extent of five times greater than the corporate 
friends that support this party financially right across the province 
and outside. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tobacco industry is a very complex industry, and 
it’s run on a lot of interesting laws, but I just want to make one 
point to the members present today with regard to the tobacco 
industry, and that is, first of all, I believe that this tax is unfair and 
that we should not be increasing the taxes on tobacco at this point 
for the reasons I’ve given with regard to that government’s 
mismanagement and incompetence. 
 
But I believe what they should be looking at is, if they’re going to 
be increasing the tobacco tax, that perhaps they dedicate the 
revenue from that tobacco tax to something that is more 
productive in this province. And of course I would suggest that 
they dedicate it towards the drug plan, the maintenance of the drug 
plan as we knew it before they gutted it and/or the maintenance 
and reinstituting of the dental plan, which we have seen privatized 
by this government. 
 
But I say that because the more consumption of tobacco that 
occurs, the more dangerous it becomes to those who consume 
tobacco and to those who are around people that consume tobacco. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Which way are you going on this, John ? 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The minister asks which way I’m going on this, 
and I can tell him that I smoked tobacco for 14 years. I would light 
up a cigarette and sneeze, and this went on for a long time, and I 
realized that not only was I allergic to it, but that it was a very 
serious health problem for me and others. And as a result, about 
four and a half years ago I quit smoking for the purpose of 
maintaining and improving my health, and certainly those that 
were around me. And I find that I feel much more energetic as a 
result, but I don’t think people are too interested in my personal 
story or testament as it related to tobacco. 
 
However I want to just make one point from an article that I have 
here on the tobacco industry, and that is a quote from — I forgot 
the magazine; I think it’s . . . I’ll quote the magazine as soon as I 
find it. But it says here: 
 

In the world’s greatest cigarette plan in Tobaccoville, North 
Carolina, nothing is loathsome to the eye or hateful to the 
nose. All is clean and bright and up to date. Smoking on the 
vast shop floor is banned. It might harm the 72 computerized 
cigarette-making machines which hum softly as each one 
produces 8,000 filter cigarettes a minute, or the driverless 
automatic guided vehicles which beep rudely at anyone 
foolish enough to step in their path as they speed production 
materials around the 2 million square foot plant. 

 
So I think that people should be aware that even where 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3521 
 
 

they manufacture tobacco, they try and curtail the consumption 
thereof by humans and others. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to ask if the minister could provide us 
with comparable figures as they related to other provinces, what 
the percentage increase has been in this fiscal year in comparable 
figures to other provinces, as well as what the percentage increase 
has been from 1982. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I expected to be attacked on the tobacco tax, 
but not quite so viciously. I don’t know who the hon. member was 
referring to when he talked about restricting smoking for humans 
and others. I’m sure he may want to edify not only myself but the 
rest of the public as to who “others” may be. 
 
Secondly, I would have been interested in hearing the comments 
of the member from, I believe, Saskatoon Nutana . . . Saskatoon 
South, who during the course of this Bill was saying that we did 
not raise the tobacco tax high enough. So to say today that we 
raised it too high, from two hon. members, is a great surprise. I . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? As I say, I find it surprising 
that today we get attacked for raising the tobacco tax too high. I’m 
sure many people in the province will be quite interested in 
hearing that. 
 
To target the tax increase, I’m not sure in this case is necessarily 
advisable in that the health expenditures for cancer, of course, 
have increased significantly over the last years, and to target it 
back into that would be just an unnecessary step. I think it fair to 
say that tobacco tax into the general revenue, as we know 
ultimately where it’s going, most of that, or a third of that, at least, 
is health care. 
 
I can give you a list of all provinces if you wish that. I can pass it 
over to the hon. member, or I can read them off. 
 
We should keep in mind that in regard to revenues overall from 
tobacco tax this year, we had estimated over the last few years 
because of the wide discrepancy between the lower tax in the 
province of Alberta and the higher tax in Saskatchewan, we were 
losing as a province roughly $10 million a year in revenues 
through smuggling. And I’m advised by other ministers across 
Canada that as a result of the very low tax rate in Alberta that 
smuggling of cigarettes actually had an impact ass far east as 
Montreal. 
 
As a result of Alberta’s moves last Spring in increasing its taxes 
. . . they have brought them up considerably. There certainly still is 
a difference, but they’ve narrowed very much the differential 
between the two provinces. The tax, for example, for a package of 
25, it’s $1.17 in Saskatchewan, it’s $1 in Alberta, $1.15 in 
Manitoba. As well, in Manitoba I might advise that in addition 
there is the 7 per cent retail sales tax. 
 
And I could go down the list. I don’t know if you want all of these 
read into the record. I think the pertinent ones are our 
neighbouring provinces, but if you wish them all, I’m prepared to 
read them all. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Read the neighbouring provinces and ship 
over the balance. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Okay. I’ve given you Alberta and Manitoba. 
British Columbia is 97 cents. Tobacco — 40.5 in British 
Columbia, 37.5 in Alberta, and 40 in Manitoba, again with the 
retail sales tax on top of that. Cigars — I’ll give you the range, 
because it depends on the cost of the cigar. The cheap ones I know 
the hon. members enjoys from time to time, the tax is considerably 
lower than the better ones, and I’m sure he’d be interested in that. 
But I’ll get a photocopy of this if I may. If you want it right now, 
You’ll have to give us a couple of minutes, otherwise I’ll have it 
photocopied and sent over to you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Education and  
Health Tax Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, I’d just like to make some comments, 
very brief comments . . . well maybe not so brief, about the E&H 
tax, the Bill No. 19 which increases the sales tax in this province 
from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. And that, of course, is a 40 per cent 
increase on a tax which is a consumption tax, which is an unfair 
tax because it affects lower-income people and middle-income 
people far more severely than those of a higher income bracket. 
 
And I just want to remind members and the people of this 
province that the government opposite has over the years made a 
number of commitments and promises which they have broken, in 
spades. This is another commitment that they made. Members 
opposite, whether they’re from the Qu’Appelle-Lumsden 
constituency or from Maple Creek or from Regina South, or from 
other constituencies in the Conservative benches, promised very 
clearly that they would to away with the 5 per cent sales tax and in 
effect phase it out so that it wouldn’t affect any purchases in this 
province. 
 
What we see with Bill No. 19 is a 40 per cent increase, and it’s an 
exact opposite move by this government which as been called the 
government of antonyms, the government of opposites — 
whatever they promise, they do the opposite; whatever they 
suggest one day, they deny the next. And in my view, Mr. 
Chairman, I think it’s a clear example of a promise that’s been 
made and a promise that’s been broken, in spades. 
 
What I would like to also point out, Mr. Chairman, is that the 
increase in the E&H tax from 5 per cent to 7 per cent really 
emphasizes the lack of credibility this government has. They have 
indicated in writing and verbally to many people that they would 
phase out the 5 per cent tax. What we have seen with this Bill is a 
40 per cent increase and a clear indication as well that a 
Conservative’s word is not his or her bond. 
 
They cannot be trusted to be believed by anyone in this province, 
whether it’s a promise to decrease personal income tax by 10 per 
cent — which by the way they have 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3522 
 
 

increased by 28 per cent — or whether it’s a promise to never 
reimpose the fuel tax, which they have reimposed and increased it 
from 6 cents a litre to 7 cents a litre; or whether in fact it’s a 
promise to do away with the sales tax. And in Bill 19 they 
increased it from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. 
 
They have promised in the past, Mr. Chairman, to provide less 
government and better government. But what we have seen is 
more government and more bureaucracy by this Conservative 
Party. They have through the fuel tax involved now 641,000 more 
licensed vehicle operators in the proliferation of red tape through 
the purchase of gas and maintaining gas receipts. 
 
We have seen in that example alone, Mr. Chairman, a government 
which has shifted the burden of red tape and increased it in a 
manner and in a percentage that is unprecedented in the history of 
this nation to 34 million receipts. The total number of receipts that 
will be accumulated in a very small “c” conservative estimate is 
34 million receipts. That’s 641 operators that have to accumulate 
them, file them, make sure that they’re all accurate, and to ship 
them into the government, and they then have to be processed. 
And that is an example of more government and more 
bureaucracy being passed on to the backs of ordinary 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
They promised a better government, and what we have seen is a 
massive onslaught of patronage. We have seen the appointment of 
Mr. Hill to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation at a price of over 
$200,000 a year, which previous to that was filled by an individual 
that was working part time in that position. 
 
They have promised less government, but in fact they have almost 
tripled the number of political hacks that they have working in the 
government to 183, which is costing taxpayers of this province 
somewhere in the vicinity of $10 million. So Bill 19, Mr. 
Chairman, is an extension of the wonderful government that we 
have in this province today. 
 
They have promised to do away with the sales tax of 5 per cent, 
and their credibility is reflected once again in the fact that that 
promise has not only been blown to pieces but in fact its extended 
to a tax increase that is, along with the others in this budget, 
unprecedented in this province again. 
 
We have seen the Conservative pillage the provincial treasury. 
Now we see the Minister of Finance, with his 7 per cent sales tax, 
dig very deeply into the pockets of people in this province. 
 
And I say to the minister, and to the government opposite, that if 
they spent more energy and more time looking at their operation 
and cleaning up some of the patronage and watching what they 
pay people, and also watching the costs that they incur with regard 
to advertising, this province would be subjected to far less, and far 
more minor tax increases. 
 
The people of this province, Mr. Chairman, would not be too upset 
if the sales tax increase resulted in something positive, but what 
we have seen is this government not 

attack the deficit which they are the authors of, but we have seen 
this government encourage the acceleration of the deficit to 
become the fastest growing deficit in the province. If we have 
seen, as a result of these tax increases, improvements to services or 
programs, then perhaps the people of this province may not object 
too strenuously to it. 
 
They have cut the non-government organization grants to groups 
who serve people of a low income and in various needs in our 
economy and our society. They have reduced the amount of 
assistance to the recipients of social services. They have privatized 
the drug plan . . . 
 
(1600) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you doing all your speech on this one, 
John? 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Yes, right. They have, Mr. Chairman, not 
improved services or programs as a result of the tax increase, but 
in fact they have added this tax increase of the E&H increase from 
5 per cent to 7 per cent, on top of the other increases where people 
are now paying, who require them, a higher cost for prescription 
drugs. People are now having to pay more for the dental program, 
which has provided a very excellent service to our children 
throughout this province. 
 
And what people are saying is that as a result of the tax increases 
in this largest tax grab in the history of our province, is that they’re 
unhappy. They’re disgusted with the performance of the 
government opposite because the tax increases are not resulting in 
improved services and programs. The tax increases are not 
resulting in more jobs for the people of Saskatchewan, but in 
effect the tax increases are being added on to the other tax 
increases that will eventually result because of the budget that’s 
been put forward by this government. 
 
And I guess the question that people are asking me more and more 
is whether we can call an election, which the opposition obviously 
would like to, but we can’t. And secondly, what they’re asking me 
is: what is the use of keeping a Progressive Conservative 
government in power? What is the use of keeping this government 
in power? They make commitments one day; they break them the 
next. They don’t govern the people of this province in the sense of 
providing more improved services or new and different programs 
which will help them. They lay tax increase upon tax increase 
upon tax increase, and that does nothing for the economy of this 
province; it does nothing for the families that live in this province, 
and in fact it discourages a number of people from even remaining 
in this province. 
 
We have seen a number of examples of that in recent months, Mr. 
Chairman. We have seen the people of this province leave in 
hordes. We have actually had 2,000 fewer people working in this 
province in August of 1987 as compared to August of 1986, when 
our neighbouring provinces like Manitoba had an increase of 
2,000 working people and Alberta had an increase of 12,000. So 
it’s not a trend that is a very good trend. 
 
Families are becoming very upset because the graduates 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3523 
 
 

from our technical institutes and the graduates from our 
universities are leaving this province in order to find other jobs, 
thereby breaking up the family unit as we know them in this 
province. 
 
My question to the minister — and I have other remarks I’d like to 
share with him and perhaps we can get to them at a later time — 
but what I’d like to know with regard to the E&H tax is: what is 
the impact of the elimination of the rebate on mobile homes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — To respond, I ask the hon. member if we were 
doing all of our debate on this particular Bill, and I assume we are, 
that I just advise the hon. member if he takes a look at page 55 of 
the budget address, that Saskatchewan people with a total income 
of $20,000 per annum or less are the lowest-taxed people in 
Canada; that people with a total income of 35,000 are the 
lower-taxed people in Canada. And it’s not till one gets to higher 
levels that we move up into second place at 50,000. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member that he should also be aware of 
the Saskatchewan tax reduction which was designed for 
low-income people, which was part of the budget, which is the 
first which a Saskatchewan sales tax reduction to offset the 
increase. 
 
And finally I should advise the hon. member, that the exemptions 
for individuals on sales tax are the most broad exemptions of any 
province in Canada imposing a sales tax. Obviously Alberta with 
no sales tax lays claim to that fact, but the exemptions for 
individuals are the most broad in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to correct as well that his latter statement that there’s been 
an out-migration; I think that the latest figures showed at in fact 
there was an in-migration as the economy begins to turn back 
around. 
 
Finally, with regard to the mobile hoe tax refund, the refund had 
provided a refund of 50 per cent of the E&H tax paid on the 
purchase price of a mobile home. In our view, that gave . . . there 
was an inequity between mobile homes and ready-to-move homes, 
which are also available in the province. And so that the removal 
of that refund restores the position of the mobile homes and the 
ready-to-move homes. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a question to 
the minister in regard to sales that are done in Saskatchewan by 
firms from outside of the province, and I’d like to use the 
particular example of building products that are sold from, say, the 
province of Alberta into the province of Saskatchewan. And this, 
as you can appreciate, Mr. Minister, becomes an increasing . . . 
does the minister want me to wait while he’s consulting? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, you go ahead. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The closer you get to the Alberta border, the 
more prevalent the problem becomes, and that is, that firms that 
sell building supplies on the Alberta side can sell their building 
supplies into a community like Lashburn or Maidstone, and they 
aren’t collecting in many cases the E&H tax, or more commonly 
known as 

the sales tax, from the purchaser. And I’m wondering, since this 
puts Saskatchewan companies at a disadvantage, what is your 
department’s policy in terms of collecting the E&H tax from those 
firms who are outside the province but sell within the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the member makes the point I tried to 
make in a previous debate about the corporate capital tax and the 
corporate income tax, how we have to be aware of the effect of the 
tax regime in the province of Alberta. With regard to commercial 
contractors, my officials advise that there is a collection scheme 
there licensed, and there is a provision whereby they can collect 
from consumers. If individuals want to go out and do that, we 
have the same enforcement difficulties with building supplies as 
we would with anything else that people went to the province of 
Alberta to purchase and avoid paying tax. It’s obviously been a 
long-standing difficulty. 
 
We’ve tried to minimize the desire of people to go to the province 
of Alberta, for example, by taking . . . one of the effects of taking 
the tax off clothing is that more people now go to Alberta if 
they’re trying to avoid tax for major purchases as opposed to 
everyday purchases. And we’ve noticed that retail sales have gone 
up in most cases along the Saskatchewan side along the Alberta 
border, because people are no longer going over for routine, 
everyday purchases. 
 
It’s a problem; we try and enforce it; we try and look at it 
realistically. But it has been a problem since sales tax came in and 
will continue to be one. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, building supplies are usually 
major purchases, and I’m thinking in terms of someone wanting to 
get the building supplies necessary to build a house or a 
commercial building on the Saskatchewan side, but wishing to go 
to a company in Alberta to purchase those building supplies. Now 
you can see where it certainly put companies on the Saskatchewan 
side at a clear disadvantage. 
 
And I suppose my next question to you. Mr. Minister, which is 
different from the first question, and that is: who is the onus on to 
pay the tax to Saskatchewan government? Is it on the purchaser or 
is it on the seller from the Alberta side? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised by my officials that the way the 
system has been in place for some time, that we are collecting the 
tax on commercial contracts. Okay. So there does not seem to be 
the difficulty. The customer becomes . . .the sub-trades and others. 
So I am assured that we are collecting the tax in those 
circumstances, but the onus would be on the consumer. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — If someone in Saskatchewan, say someone from 
Maidstone, wishes to purchase building supplies from Nelson 
Lumber in Alberta — Nelson Lumber, if they know the person if 
from Saskatchewan, do they not have any responsibility to collect 
the tax from that individual and submit it to the provincial 
government, Mr. Minister? 
 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3524 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Nelson would be an example of a company 
registered in Saskatchewan and under the collection scheme that’s 
been worked out over the years, that they are collecting that tax. 
 
I mean if someone went in and got a bag of insulation material or 
something — an individual — obviously we wouldn’t be able to 
control that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I can well appreciate that, Mr. Minister. I had a 
complaint from a building products supplier in The Battlefords 
who has bid on more than one occasion on a tendered project, and 
they have been unsuccessful because they add in the amount of the 
sales tax, which is now 7 per cent in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and Nelson Homes in Lloydminster have been 
successful because they don’t add in the 7 per cent sales tax. And 
that clearly puts Saskatchewan companies at a disadvantage. 
 
And the specific company that complained to me, Mr. Minister, 
confronted Nelson Lumber with this and Nelson Lumber said they 
had no responsibility to collect or remit that tax to the province of 
Saskatchewan. Is that in fact the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s not the advice I have, in that a 
commercial contractor, because he’s carrying on business, would 
have to pay the tax. 
 
If you’ve got a specific example I can assure the hon. member we 
would be more than pleased to check it out for you and get a 
response to you. But the commercial — and again I’m advised by 
my officials — the commercial, we’re quite confident that we’re 
collecting the tax because they have to be registered to carry on 
business here, and that it seems to be effective in collecting the 
tax. Now if you’ve got a specific problem we’d be glad to check it 
out. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well thank you. I appreciate that, and I do 
request that this specific case be checked out. And I’m wondering 
if you can tell me who in your department I would contact so that 
they can proceed with some kind of investigation into this matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — You can just send me a letter on it and I will 
give it to the officials to check it out, if you want to do that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to ask a 
couple of more questions with regard to the mobile home clause. 
Has the minister had any representations from the manufacturers 
of mobile homes in Saskatchewan regarding this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There is one manufacturer in the province, 
Shelter in Estevan, who have made representations opposed to the 
tax. That’s the only manufacturer that I recall. I think I got a 
couple of letters from dealers who are opposed to the tax. We did 
respond in the manner which I advised you, that it puts them on 
the same plans as the ready-to-move homes which are also 
manufactured here in many cases. 
 
(1615) 

 
Mr. Solomon: — I just want to make the point, Mr. Chairman, 
that the minister has provided in his budget documents, on page 
55, with regard to Saskatchewan being the lowest taxed province 
in the country, and I dispute those figures. He does not include the 
elimination of the property management grant which is provided 
in . . . a similar type of grant is provided in other provinces. He has 
excluded to mention, or failed to mention the fact that he has 
increased costs so dramatically to municipal associations and 
urban municipalities and rural municipalities that these 
municipalities now have to increase their taxes in order to gain 
sufficient revenue to meet at least the basic services that this 
government has retracted on from the budget. 
 
Also I might add that there are other tax increases that to the 
people of this province are experiencing great pain, and that is the 
fact that prescription drug costs are now up front and are costing a 
lot of people a lot of money. There’s increased cost to delivering a 
dental plan to young children due to the fact that many parents 
have to take time off work and travel that extra distance, not to 
mention the cost which is really incalculable with regard to the 
health of children. Many children will not receive the preventative 
dental health care that they received in the past as a result of this 
government’s actions. 
 
So there are many other tax increases that are hidden taxes. This 
government has increased hidden taxes by 42 per cent, and that is 
not showing up on this table on page 55. So in effect this province 
under this government is not reflecting, in my view, an honest 
position with regard to other provinces in their taxation policies, 
but in effect they have compiled this tax table to suit their own 
purposes. 
 
I wonder how the minister can justify taking $100 million out of 
the economy in the increase of the E&H tax from 5 per cent to 7 
per cent, when the economy is in desperate need of disposable 
income being spent in many small businesses in the province, both 
in small villages and towns and in urban municipalities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well we’ve noted and have been tracking the 
retail sales, and I’m advised that except for the automobile sector, 
retail sales are up across the board. And the automobile sales are 
down, but not as far as they are in some other jurisdictions. We 
don’t see the drop in automobile sales as a reflection of the E&H 
tax, and I think that the fact that one sees the automobile new car 
rebates and low interest loans on a North American campaign by 
automobile manufactures, would indicate that their sales are down 
throughout most of North America at least. We don’t attribute and 
we don’t see any relation between the two. 
 
And as I say, I believe all other sectors are up varying degrees. I 
believe home appliances, and that is up considerably to this stage. 
So we get a better idea, obviously, on retail sales as we approach 
year end. But to this stage retail sales are in fact up except on the 
automobiles. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Again, Mr. Chairman, I don’t mean to debate 
the issue, but the reason that automobile 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3525 
 
 

manufactures introduced the low interest loans is to attract 
business. But when you’re in effect increasing the price of an 
automobile, whether it be a half-ton or a car, by 2 per cent over 
and above what the 5 per cent sales tax was, you are discouraging 
purchases of those products. And the people in this province can 
see that money being used for purposes which they don’t agree 
with, then of course would therefore conduct themselves 
accordingly with regard to purchasing a major item like an 
automobile. 
 
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I just want to remind members in the 
House, and of course the people of this province, the 
Conservatives with respect to the 5 per cent sales tax promised in 
the last couple of elections to phase out the sales tax and to reduce 
it to zero, what we see here today is an increase of 40 per cent. 
 
But I want to remind people that individual candidates of the 
Conservative Party, the member from Regina South, promised to 
phase out the 5 per cent provincial sales tax. The member from 
Regina North who is now in Regina South promised to phase out 
and eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax. And the member from Swift 
Current who was a candidate for the Progressive Conservative 
Party and is now a cabinet minister as is the member from Regina 
South, promised to reduce the 5 per cent sales tax. The member 
from Rosetown-Elrose, he promised to do away with the sales tax. 
 
And in every instance, in every promise that the cabinet members 
made, they have broken their word. How can the people of this 
province attribute any credibility to the government of this 
province, the Conservative government, when in example after 
example, whether it was the member from Maple Creek, or the 
member from Kelsey-Tisdale, or the Progressive Conservative 
member from Melville, and on and on and on, the member from 
Biggar, promising to do one thing — to eliminate the sales tax 
from 5 per cent to zero — and delivering on the other had a 40 per 
cent increase from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. I’d like to ask the 
members that made these commitments how they personally feel 
about making a promise, making a commitment in writing, and 
now seeing that their commitment is not worth the paper it was 
written on. 
 
I wonder how the members feel. I know the member from 
Shellbrook-Torch River made the some commitment, and the 
member from Souris-Cannington, and the Premier made that 
commitment as well. How can people believe what the 
government and the Premier say after having seen what they’ve 
done and what they’ve promised and broken in terms of their 
promises? 
 
I think, Mr. Chairman, that the E&H tax increase is an unfair tax. 
It’s a consumption tax, and it’s a tax that is a betrayal and a 
double-cross on the people of Saskatchewan. Because the 
Conservative members, the Conservative cabinet members 
included, made promises that they had no intentions of keeping, 
and in effect did the opposite of reducing, but in fact increasing the 
sales tax in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I would simply like to advise the hon. 
member, in terms of retail sales, just for his information, the 
budget estimates were predicated on a 3.9 per cent 

increase on retail sales. Already this year we are at 4 per cent, and 
the bigger increases tend to come in the last couple of months of 
the year. So it looks like we’ll come in above our budget, 
estimates, at least at this stage. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well I hope the minister’s estimates are a little 
more accurate than the estimates he’s made before, and I’ refer 
him to the budget deficit estimates of . . he estimated a deficit in 
1983-84 of $316 million, and the actual estimate was 300 . . . or 
the actual deficit was $331 million, Mr. Chairman. 
 
In the ’84-85 budget the minister estimated $267 million, but in 
effect we had an actual deficit of $379 million. In 1985 the ’86 
fiscal year, the Minister of Finance estimated $291 million, and he 
delivered an actual deficit of $584 million. 
 
In ’86-87 the current Minister of Finance, the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, estimated a $389 million deficit, which was 
just prior to the election campaign, and on that one he was out by 
over 200 per cent. It was in actual fact, according to their figures, 
$1.235 million. And he’s now estimating a forecast of $577 
million. 
 
And I’m wondering if he’s taking into consideration the lower 
interest costs and the lower money costs this government is 
undertaking as a result of the people of this province carrying on 
their backs the up-front drug costs, the up-front dental costs, the 
other tax increases that he has been the author of. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I could introduce to the Assembly, Mr. 
Chairman, John Wright, executive director, taxation and economic 
policy division, Department of Finance; and on my far right, Kirk 
McGregor, associate director, taxation policy, taxation and 
economic policy division, Department of Finance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I’d like to give my tax speech one more time, 
Mr. Chairman, but my discretion is that I prefer to modify it a bit. 
 
I want to just remind the people of this province that not only have 
the Conservative members opposite made promises with regard to 
the 5 per cent E&H tax and that they would promise to do away 
with that, but in effect they have increased it to 7 per cent. 
 
But the members opposite — and you can read the constituencies 
from which they’re from — the member from Maple Creek; the 
member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden; the member from Estevan, 
the Premier; the member from Regina South — they’ve all made 
promises and commitments in writing and verbally, during 
election campaigns and after election campaigns, 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3526 
 
 

to reduce personal income tax by 10 per cent. And we can go 
though the list of the members of this government in their 
incredible statements about reducing personal income tax, but 
what we see is, through the flat tax, an increase in personal income 
tax of roughly 26 to 28 per cent. It’s not a 10 per cent decrease in 
personal tax; it’s not a 5 per cent decrease in personal tax. It’s not 
even holding the line on personal tax percentages, but in effect the 
implementation of the flat tax is an implementation of a second 
income tax on the people of this province and is equivalent, on the 
comparison of basis points of the federal tax, of a 26 per cent to 28 
per cent increase in personal taxes for the people of this province. 
 
And I maintain, Mr. Chairman, that that’s a very unfair tax. It 
provides a number of deductions to a number of high income 
people that are not available to those in the lower and middle 
income brackets. 
 
And I have a couple of questions. I want to know if the minister 
could give some percentage breakdown of revenue from net 
income ranges that he has? And I don’t have any specific 
numbers, but what I’m getting at is: what percentage revenue do 
you receive from the flat tax, or do you project to receive, in those 
in the 25,000 and under, to 25 to 50,000, and 50,000 and over, if 
you have those ranges or any similar ranges? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We would have to compile the information if 
you wanted a breakdown by income levels as to total tax. I can 
give you . . . that overall the average tax increase would be $75; 
under $10,000 the average tax increase would be $9; 10 to 15,000 
it would be $44; 15 to 25,000 it would be $69; 25,000 to 35,000, 
$113; 35,000 to 50,000 it would be $188; 50,000 to 100,000 it 
would be $308; and over 100,000 it would be $782. Now those are 
average tax increases at each of those levels. We don’t have the 
information in terms of what each of those levels in total would 
generate total taxes. We can try and compile that, but we don’t 
have it. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I would appreciate it if you could, Minister. 
What I was also looking for was of the revenue of $51.2 million 
that you estimate the increase in flat tax will provide, could you 
give us a breakdown of how many dollars, actual dollars, of that 
— I guess it would be around 154 million in total flat tax revenue 
— that each income range produces in terms of revenue for the 
government. You must have some kind of projection or estimates, 
and if you do, I’d like to have them. And also if you could include 
how many people in each category, whether it is . . . either 
percentage of people or numbers of people or tax filers that it may 
include? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ll have to compile that information for 
you and supply it to you. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I appreciate that. Thank you. 
 
I have a copy here of the Leader-Post, Tuesday, April 16, 1985. 
It’s dated, of course, but . . . page 4, and the title of this newspaper 
article is that “The rich can still dodge tax.” And it’s in reference 
to the initial implementation of the flat tax at 1 per cent. 

 
And I just want to read an excerpt to the minister and ask him a 
question on this, if I may. And I quote: 
 

While conceding that loopholes are available, both the 
Premier and the member from Kindersley (who was at that 
time the minister of Finance) argued, “It is important to get a 
start on tax reform even if that tax reform still requires some 
fine tuning.” 

 
Could you tell the members of the House what fine tuning you 
have done in the pat two years with respect to this flat tax to make 
it more fair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the reason for the flat tax and where it 
was located was at the time of the negotiation for a flat tax with 
the national government, that was the only option that we could 
attain. Since that time, the province of Alberta taxes it on taxable 
income, and Manitoba and Saskatchewan are the same. 
 
We do expect to see modifications or, at a minimum, at some 
point during the federal tax reform . . . I can’t commit to changes 
being made in next year’s budget because the federal government 
has not given the approval for tax changes. 
 
I would ultimately see, with federal tax reform and provincial 
income tax, that we will go, at a minimum, to a modified flat tax 
and perhaps to an actual flat tax of probably three levels. And I’m 
saying that in general terms. We don’t have any specific income 
levels for each of those as yet, but ultimately that’s where I would 
see it coming down. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So the fine tuning that the Premier and the 
former minister of Finance referred to has not been done to date. Is 
that fair to say? And then fine tuning, in the sense of trying to 
minimize some of the abuses — as what he was referring to — as 
opposed to the fine tuning it so that other provinces levy a flat tax 
as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well it’s . . . I mean, negotiations have been 
going on since that time with the national government as to the 
imposition of the flat tax, and they will continue. 
 
All I can suggest to the hon. member, in light of the federal 
initiatives on tax reform, they have indicated to the provinces that 
they are very reluctant in the next year to accept any major 
changes to the income tax scheme, I gather, until such time as they 
either have the new scheme in place or they are ready on any 
national sales tax, value-added tax, or whatever tax scheme they’re 
going to have, if they do make the changes that are in their white 
paper. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Does the minister believe it fair that people who 
invest in investments like motion pictures, and tapes, and 
petroleum exploration ventures, MURBs (multiple unit residential 
buildings), and that sort of thing, do you believe that that is a fair 
deduction on the implementation of the flat tax when ordinary 
working people, middle income and lower income people, do not 
have that opportunity to invest for the purpose of tax 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3527 
 
 

deductions prior to the implementation of that tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — At the time we did try and negotiate that those 
would not be deductible, but remember that the flat tax, when it 
was imposed, it was the first in Canada, and that it was on a trial 
basis by the national government. So we did try and negotiate so 
that those wouldn’t be deductible from the flat tax. 
 
Having said that, I’m not sure you wanted me to debate the 
policies behind those tax exemptions. I’m sure that many people in 
Canada would support the investment in Canadian-made movies. I 
know the arts community tends to support that, and certainly many 
in Canada do support that. 
 
The policy behind a scientific tax credit probably had some merit. 
The way it was implemented and the way it was controlled 
obviously was a financial disaster, and very, very poorly thought 
out by the previous Liberal government. I think that the public 
record is that the federal Finance officials had recommended 
against the form of the scientific tax credit in the way that it came 
out. So that there was a political decision by the then Liberal 
government to proceed with that, and it turned out to be a 
boondoggle, to say the least. And I don’t think, any one supports 
that. 
 
We did, as I say, try and get those moved up so that they were not 
deductible, but the federal government would not make that 
radical a change at that time to the income tax scheme. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — You attempted to answer the question, but you 
never answered the question that I asked. And the question I asked 
was: do you think those types of things are fair — deductions for 
the higher income earning population, whereas deductions for 
ordinary and middle income and lower income people cannot be 
claimed? Deductions like medical expenses and charitable 
donations and child dependants — do you think those types of 
deductions are unfair or fair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I mean those deductions, you know, we’d 
support it, and I think in this year’s budget we did increase some 
of the . . . made some changes on sales tax credit, etc. 
 
Let me tell you the income from sources that the federal 
government agreed upon at the time of the flat tax, because 
although one may disagree, there is some rationale. Income from 
employment, net of expenses; pension income; institutional 
benefits — that is family allowances, unemployment insurance 
benefits, investment income, dividends, interest, capital gains, 
annuities; rental income, net of expenses; and self-employed 
income, net of expenses, are included in the total income from 
sources. 
 
Then there were a whole host of deductions that were not 
included. And that’s: CPP contributions, UIC premiums, RPP 
contributions, registered retirement savings contributions, 
registered home ownership savings contributions, union dues, 
tuition fees, child care expenses, allowable business investment 
losses, index security investment plan losses, alimony payments, 

moving expenses, carrying charges, certified Canadian film capital 
costs deductions, and petroleum exploration venture deductions. 
All of those deductions were not allowed at the time of the 
negotiation of the flat tax. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — A question with respect to section 4. For the ’85 
and ’86 taxation years, non-resident partners earning partnership 
income in Saskatchewan were able to avoid paying the flat tax, as 
the Act requires the tax be paid by individuals residing in the 
province on the last day of the taxation year. Could the minister 
tell us how many of these individuals there were? What was the 
lost revenue, and what is the projected revenue as a result of this 
amendment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — They have to be members of national firms, 
and it’s the allocation of the income back to the province, so that 
could be a calculation of the national firm, but we estimate 
approximately 100 people would have any advantage in that 
provision. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And what was the lost revenue, and what is the 
projected revenue as a result of this amendment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We have no way of knowing at this stage. The 
officials estimate at the top end it would be $100,000. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I think it’s section 7 or subsection 6(7) provides 
the basis for calculating the tax payable by a small business 
engaged in manufacturing and processing. You indicate that the 
Act discriminates against businesses with foreign income. Could 
you explain that? And what is the loss of revenue that would be 
incurred, and how many firms does this include? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It’s a rather lengthy explanation. I will read it 
into the record. 
 
The federal government has requested amendments to our Act to 
remove unintentional discrimination against businesses which 
have foreign income and qualify for the provincial small business 
tax rate. The amendments are required to ensure that businesses 
are able to obtain the full benefit of the provincial business rates. 
 
The current legislation calculates the income of a small business to 
be taxed at the provincial small business rate by multiplying the 
taxable income of the business eligible for the federal small 
business deduction by the ratio of the business’s taxable income 
allocated to Saskatchewan to its total taxable income. 
 
Now I could go on at length here. I don’t know if the hon. member 
want is. Do you . . . Because active business income does not 
include foreign income, the denominator of the ratio will be larger 
than the active business income amount where the business has 
foreign income; this results in the business not being able to obtain 
the full benefit of the provincial small business tax rate. 
 
The amendments will rectify the situation by providing that the 
denominator for the calculation is taxable income earned in all 
provinces. The denominator cannot 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3528 
 
 

be active business income as the calculation could incorrectly 
allow a business to claim the small business rate on income in 
excess of the $200,000 ceiling. 
 
Clause 1 agreed. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1645) 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act to mend The Management  
Accountants Act 

 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Just for the sake of expediting the business 
of the House, we have examined this Bill, as indicated earlier. We 
do not object to it, so we have no questions, and we’re prepared to 
let it move right along. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 
Mr. Chairman: — The minister want to introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll introduce to the Assembly Brian Smith, 
executive director, public employees’ benefits agency, Department 
of Finance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I made some fairly 
prolonged remarks during second reading, and I’d just like to ask 
some questions of the minister with regard to the cost of the Bill 
and how many people were eventually involved with taking the 
early retirement. And my first question would be that: how many 
members of the public service were eligible for retirement, and 
how many actually ended up taking retirement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The eligible were 1,608 and those who 
participated, 1,267. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Does the minister have information which 
would show us what the average income was for those that took 
early retirement, and what was the average age and years of 
service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The average annual salary was $36,500. The 
average annual pension was $19,100. The average length of 
pensionable service is 27 years. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Were any of the 1,608 — I guess there would 
be about 300-and-some that did not take the early retirement 
package — were any of these civil servants 

terminated when the application date expired, or after the 
application date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We don’t have that information. That’s Public 
Service Commission. I have been advised, just to make sure that 
the record is accurate, that these are the estimates that we have 
now. We think they’re fairly precise, but there could be a modest 
adjustment by year end. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Could the minister provide to me the actual 
costs of the government . . . the government’s cost with respect to 
the top-up and whether or not there is a cost that you’ve calculated 
that will attribute to the government for the actual pension fund 
and liability.  
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We estimate that the total cost of pension and 
bridge benefits is $20 million, and we estimate that over the 10 
years the annual savings to the province will be in the range of $40 
million. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The $20 million cost you refer to, is that the 
cost that you have calculated based on the $300 a month subsidy, 
or is it based on that plus the amount of shortfall the pension fund 
will have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That is both, but we haven’t done a valuation 
on the public service superannuation problem, and the impact on 
the unfunded liability. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — You say that you have not done an impact on 
the unfunded liability — is that correct — or that you have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The actuarial valuation has not been done. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I’m informed that as of March ’83 the unfunded 
liability was about $1.6 billion and that in March of 1986 there 
was a further actuarial valuation, but the information about the size 
of this unfunded liability has not been made public. Is it possible 
to do so today, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, we can get you that information. I gather 
that information was given to the Public Accounts Committee last 
Thursday. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I’d appreciate receiving a copy of it. I’m not a 
member of the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Could the minister provide us with a calculation as to what the 
officials might estimate the additional cost of this early retirement 
plan will be on the pension plan and whether or not it jeopardizes 
the solvency of the plan in the long term. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well we estimate that we’ll be paying less 
pensions as a result of the early retirement. But again, no actuarial 
valuation has been done. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Why was no actuarial evaluation done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The last person doesn’t retire until December 
31. 
 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3529 
 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Are you then saying that the actuaries will get 
around to doing the evaluation within a certain period of time, and 
if so, when might that time period bed, and could the information 
be made available to the members of the Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well we’d probably do it some time in 1988 
after the last one has retired. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And you would make that information available 
to members of the Legislative Assembly? Or would you entertain 
an amendment to this Bill, which would include that to be 
published in the gazette or some other location? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There is an annual report filed here, and it will 
be in Public Accounts as well. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Second Clause 3 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Proposed House amendment: 
 

Amend second section 3 of the printed Bill where it appears 
on page 3 by renumbering it as section 5. 

 
Second clause 3 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Superannuation Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you stated that your intent in 
moving this legislation was to facilitate the retirement of people 
who didn’t meet the conditions under the old legislation, i.e., they 
might not be 55 years of age, as a for instance. 
 
Why did you feel it necessary to give the Crown corporation 
unfettered discretion to terminate employees against their wishes? 
I’m not so much interested, Mr. Minister, in what you think 
SaskTel is going to do. I am interested in the extent to which you 
or the management of SaskTel might go beyond what you say. I’m 
concerned about the extent to which this Bill can be abused, and I 
think it’s very extensive. 
 
So I wonder, Mr. Minister, why you didn’t bring in amendments 
which would have accompanied your stated purpose, that is to 
facilitate the retirement of people below 55? Why in addition did 
you have to give the corporation an unfettered discretion to retire 
people against their wishes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the legal advice we have to make the 
changes — I’d like to introduce John Meldrum, vice-president, 
corporate council of SaskTel — that these were the changes that 
would be appropriate. And if one takes a look at a comparison 
with the previous legislation, 

this may be much more precise or succinct, but realistically other 
than the main item is the age and years of service, that the 
discretion probably existed in the corporation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, it did not. I ask you to 
compare the two sections. There was no discretion in the old 
section. If an employee, by reason of physical inability or was 
otherwise unable to perform his employment, under the old 
section he could be retired. 
 
Under the new section you’ve added something different. You’ve 
given SaskTel a discretion to determine when a person is unable to 
meet the terms of their employment. Why didn’t you just leave the 
open paragraph the way it was, Mr. Minister? Why did you have 
to introduce that element of discretion? 
 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, that what you just offered is the 
weakest excuse I ever heard, that is that that was the advice you 
got. We don’t deal so much, Mr. Minister, in what advice you got 
as what the effect of this legislation might be. 
 
And there is a great deal of concern, Mr. Minister, about this Bill. 
And it’s particularly true in light of SaskTel’s record of employee 
relations. Mr. Minister, I think it’s fair to say there have been three 
strikes in telephone companies in this country, one of which took 
place at SaskTel. They’re extremely rare. The stats may not be 
accurate, but strikes at telephone companies are extremely rare. 
You’ve managed to pull one off, Mr. Minister. 
 
You have management there which is intent upon God only knows 
what. But certainly one of the things they’re accomplishing is to 
upset the morale of employees at SaskTel. Throughout the years 
I’ve been an elected member, Mr. Minister, the morale at SaskTel 
has generally been very high. Employees enjoyed working there, 
wanted to remain at SaskTel, and most of them wanted to remain 
there until they retired. In the last couple of years that has changed 
dramatically, Mr. Minister, and employees are unhappy there, 
they’re worried. And there’s any number of adjectives and adverbs 
I could use to describe the morale. It’s terrible. 
 
Into this whole mix you’ve added this right, this legal right to 
terminate any employee for any reason. If you didn’t . . . it is 
certainly within the wording of that legislation to permit 
management of SaskTel to retire an employee because you didn’t 
like his politics, or her politics. It says, and is very clear, Mr. 
Minister: 
 

Where in the opinion of the corporation an employee is 
unable to discharge his responsibilities . . .  

 
Mr. Minister, the section, Mr. Minister, could not be wider. It 
appears to be wholly unnecessary, wholly beyond the needs of the 
corporation. I wonder, Mr. Minister, why you needed, why you 
thought you needed to add this additional aggravation to an 
already difficult labour-management climate over at SaskTel? If 
an opposition were doing their job, Mr. Minister, any government 
any time would face criticism. 
  



 
October 26, 1987 

3530 
 
 

I see the Chairman leaning forward towards his desk. If you want 
to call it, fine, but I’ll continue this at 7 . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No, we’re nowhere near finished. We’re going to be quite a 
while with this. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


