













































July 14, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 July 14, 1987 

 

 

1153 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Shand Power Project 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Deputy 

Premier and the minister in charge of SPC. On July 3 the Minister 

of the Environment, in answering questions during the 

Committee of Finance, speaking about the Shand power project 

in the Premier’s riding, told the House on a number of occasions 

that the Shand power project would be subject to the same 

environmental impact review as any other major project. 

 

In fact, at page 937 of Hansard the Environment minister said, 

Mr. Deputy Premier, the following: 

 

Nobody has given approval to go ahead and develop either the 

Shand project or the Rafferty-Alameda at this time. They have 

to go through the review process and at the end of that process 

is when the decision is made. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Deputy Premier, is this: in the light of 

those statements made by the Minister of the Environment, how 

can you explain the provincial government’s cabinet order, under 

date of June 17, a copy of which I have here before me, which 

authorizes the purchase of two turbines for the Shand power 

project, at a cost of $72 million, for the Marubeni corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the Shand power project, 

and the lead time that’s necessary to get that electricity to the 

consumer by 1992, when it’s projected that it will be required, 

requires that those kinds of orders be placed now. 

 

Any environmental assessment or impact study have nothing to 

do with the turbines, but have everything to do with the emissions 

and emission controls, so that there is no direct relationship 

between the order of the turbines and what may or may not be 

necessary to meet environmental requirements. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. It may be true 

that the question of emission control and turbines are not related 

directly, but the fact of the matter is that the Shand project, of 

which the turbines are an essential part, is a subject directly of the 

question of the environmental impact study. And you have 

committed your government, seemingly, to a $72 million 

expenditure in this regard. Are you telling the House that you’re 

doing that purely on speculation? In other words, that the 

possibility will be, at the end of the environmental review impact 

study process, that there will be no go-ahead from the Minister of 

Environment, and therefore $72 million is wasted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the $72 million turbines for 

the Shand project are in no way speculatory  

in nature. In fact the emission levels that Sask Power has been 

able to achieve in all of its projects, including Estevan, Coronach, 

and the environmental standards have always met or exceeded 

U.S. and Canadian standards. And that same level of confidence 

exists today. And the people at Sask Power and the outside 

consultants that have done their analysis are absolutely confident 

that there will be no problem in meeting any environmental 

requirement that’s put on them by the Department of 

Environment. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a further supplementary 

to the Deputy Premier. I hear the Deputy Premier’s assurance, as 

minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, that 

the project by SPC will meet environmental standards. That’s not 

the issue, sir. The issue here is the credibility of you, your 

government, and the credibility of the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

And my question to you is simply this: are you telling us that 

because of your commitment of $72 million to the Marubeni 

corporation of Japan to buy these turbines, that the environmental 

impact process — the hearing process — at the end of which 

presumably the total project will get the go-ahead or will not get 

the go-ahead, are you telling this House and the people of 

Saskatchewan that that whole exercise is a sham? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the turbines that have been 

ordered by SaskPower from Marubeni-Hitachi in Saskatoon are 

turbines that will be required for the Shand project. They must be 

ordered in time to have that capacity on stream, based on the lead 

times projected by the people that are in that business by, I think, 

1992. 

 

For that reason the turbines have been ordered to keep the project 

on stream. We have all the confidence in the world that we can 

meet environmental standards. We have in the past, we will in the 

future, and we have that level of confidence. 

 

As it relates to the environmental impact study, there, I 

understand, has been a statement filed with the Department of 

Environment relative to Rafferty and Shand, and there will be 

public hearings, or Rafferty and Alameda, and there will be 

public hearings in that regard in the near future. 

 

An Hon. Member: — For what purpose? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The member from Regina North East 

says, for what purpose? Well, Rafferty and Alameda, Mr. 

Speaker, are dams. And they impact on environment in a different 

way than emissions from stacks, Mr. Speaker. And so we’re 

talking about two different things here. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a further supplementary to the 

Deputy Premier. Let me ask the Deputy Premier this question: 

what happens, Mr. Deputy Premier, if, at the end of the 

environmental hearing process, the Minister of the Environment 

and the Department of the Environment  



 

July 14, 1987 

1154 

 

says that the project at Shand does not go ahead because it does 

not meet the environmental standards? What do you do with the 

$72 million worth of equipment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in the event, in the very 

outside possibility that that very hypothetical situation might 

occur, I suppose the first option, as the member says, is to get rid 

of the minister. And that’s fair. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, Marubeni-Hitachi is not in the business 

of selling turbines to Sask Power alone. And I fully expect that, 

and I know, in fact, that they have bid on lots of other projects in 

Canada and in United States, and I fully expect that turbines of 

300 megawatt variety would be marketable elsewhere. 

 

So I don’t see it in the same light as the hon. member. I think that 

it’s, in fact, a wise decision to plan to have the project on track, 

recognizing the risk that’s associated with those plans, and that 

risk assessment has been done and the turbines have been . . . the 

orders have been placed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, further supplementary to the 

Deputy Premier. The Deputy Premier would have the House 

believe that these turbines are, in effect, as somebody from this 

side has said, almost commodities which can be taken off the 

shelf. If they’re not purchased and used here in Saskatchewan, he 

has every confidence they can be purchased and used elsewhere. 

And presumably that same approach could apply to the initial 

purchase of these turbines, but that has not been the case because 

you made the announcement back in September about your 

intention to do so. 

 

An Hon. Member: — September ‘86. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I say to you . . . September of 1986. I ask 

you, Mr. Deputy Premier: is it not correct that the very fact that 

you’ve committed your government to $72 million to these 

turbines in effect has effectively tied the hands of your Minister 

of Environment on this important issue and thereby has made the 

entire hearing process a total sham? Isn’t that the situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I take it that that is the hon. 

member’s position, and I don’t think there’s anything that I can 

say will change that. The fact is that we view this as a good 

project; we view it as being environmentally sound; we expect 

that we can meet any of the requirements, as we have in the past. 

And SPC, even in the days of your government was very good in 

that respect and is even better today, I suggest, in environmental 

matters. 

 

Now, the risk assessments have been done. We are confident. 

And for those reasons we have gone ahead to keep the project’s 

critical path on the path, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Joytec Equities — Venture Capital Project 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is  

to the Minister for Science and Technology, and concerns the 

government’s claim that in this day and age every government 

cent spent matters. And it concerns Joytec Equities Incorporated 

of Saskatoon. This venture capital corporation, created in 

February of 1986, is supposed to manage . . . produce golf 

simulators. It’s collected $210,000 worth of taxpayers’ money 

from your department. It has also collected in the neighbourhood 

of more than $1.1 million in venture capital write-offs. But the 

company has yet to produce one golf machine for sale. It can’t 

even meet its own March target deadline for production. I want to 

know what the reason for delay is, and when we’re going to see 

some results from this kind of investment by Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for his question with regard to Joytec. I will simply say that 

Joytec is a very active company at the present time. The money 

that has been expended by our department, of course, is for 

research and development, and they are still in those stages. 

There is ongoing discussion with regard to sales with countries 

abroad, and I feel that the company is proceeding right on track. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, this company has been given 

every opportunity by your government. It’s been given every 

opportunity by financing from your own department from the 

venture capital funds. It’s had the Premier go to Japan to talk to 

Marubeni Corporation. It’s even had space at Saskatchewan 

Expo, and there’s still no production. When are we going to see 

some results? When are we going to see some jobs for 

Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member seems 

to like putting down the good things that are happening in this 

province, and we take a lot of pride in the fact that our high-tech 

companies in this province are doing very, very well. We run 

second, or we run third behind Ontario and Quebec insofar as 

space technology and telecommunications is concerned. And we 

have a very active high-tech industry going on in this province. 

 

Joytec, as I indicated, is a research and development company to 

this point. They have produced a few machines which they have 

been using for demonstration purposes. They have negotiations 

ongoing with companies in Japan and other countries throughout 

the world, and I’m sure that before very long we will see them 

producing a few of these machines in Saskatchewan. But for the 

time being, they are doing a lot of research and development. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. They certainly 

are doing a lot of research and development, but there’s no 

production. Is the minister aware that on April 1, Technigen 

Corporation, which recently, a few months ago, took over Joytec, 

issued a press release claiming that it had sales agreements worth 

$122 million to sell more than 6,700 simulators; and that at the 

same time, the Vancouver Stock Exchange investigated this claim 

out of concern for its grossly exaggerated claims that Technigen 

itself has contacts with the Panamanian company through the 

Swiss company, and that the Government of  



 

July 14, 1987 

1155 

 

Saskatchewan has gotten the taxpayers of Saskatchewan into 

quite an interesting deal with this company, and yet can show no 

results. When are we going to see results? What steps have you 

taken to protect Saskatchewan’s investment in this Joytec 

company? Or is it a joy-ride? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I would simply say that 

some of the comments made by the member opposite are 

certainly unfounded. I think that if he would look into it a little bit 

further, he would see in fact that it’s a member of the NDP Party 

in B.C. that has raised this. And of course, right now there is an 

issue before the courts. It’s been brought forward by Technigen. 

And some of the comments that were attributed to this individual 

have . . . and one of the newspapers involved . . . there is a case 

ongoing. And I think I would suggest that the member opposite 

look into it a little bit further. 

 

As far as Joytec is concerned, they are a very active and viable 

company. And I’m very sure that we will be seeing a lot of good 

things happening there in the very near future. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I suggest that the minister himself take a look 

into the facts and into the charges that have been laid and have 

been tabled. And I ask again: what steps are you prepared to take 

to protect Saskatchewan’s taxpayers’ investment when your 

government has put more than $1.5 million into Joytec? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member 

opposite that we have every confidence in the high-tech industry 

in this province and in Joytec. We have no reason to think at this 

time but what Joytec are going to provide a lot of additional 

revenues for this province through their golf simulator. 

 

As I’ve already indicated, discussions are ongoing, and 

agreements have been reached with a company in Japan. And 

they are also negotiating other contracts throughout North 

America. So I have no doubt but what many of these machines 

will be manufactured in Saskatoon in the very near future, and we 

have no reason to be concerned at this point. 

 

Sale of Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My question 

is to Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture, and it deals with 

one of the many ill-advised moves of your government, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, you will know that your department has made it 

well known to the entire world that one of Saskatchewan’s top, if 

not as a matter of fact the top, tourist attraction, the Moose Jaw 

Wild Animal Park, is for sale for $1. Last year, you will know, 

Mr. Minister, that over 150,000 people visited the Moose Jaw 

Wild Animal Park, with over half of those traveling more than 50 

miles to be there and to enjoy the park. 

 

The province has invested well over $1 million in the  

park, and it employs 14 people. It’s a proven success and a 

proven asset for both the city of Moose Jaw and the province of 

Saskatchewan. My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: why are you 

in such a rush to sell off such a valuable asset? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, we’re in no big rush to sell 

off a valuable asset. What we’re in the process of doing right now 

is calling for public proposals to see what kind of interest exists 

out there in the private sector. We’d like them to come along and 

give us some solutions to the problems we’re experiencing, where 

we’re losing a minimum of a quarter million dollars a year in 

taxpayers’ money. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, it’s not unusual for a park of that nature to operate with 

a deficit. you and I both know that the value of that park is not 

found in the assets, the moneys that it accrues at the gate. The 

value of the park is found with the business that it attracts to the 

surrounding community, as well as to the entertainment it 

provides for families and children of this province and beyond. 

 

Your government has spent hundreds of thousands of dollars in 

the billion dollar smile tourism promotion. And I ask you, if you 

are truly interested in the promotion of tourism in this province, 

does it not make better sense to put the money into maintaining 

and improving facilities such as the Wild Animal Park? After all, 

what’s the use of advertising for tourism if we’re going to close 

down the tourism attractions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, it makes eminent good 

sense to put more money into the wild animal park. But why 

should the taxpayers of Saskatchewan be putting money in there 

into a losing cause? If the public are willing to come forward, we 

will offer them a long-term lease, contingent upon the amount of 

money they’re prepared to put in, and contingent upon the fact 

that it must continue to operate as a zoo. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, you and I both know that the first offer for the sale of 

that park was made to the city of Moose Jaw. And the 

negotiations for it, I would offer quite frankly, were bungled by 

your department. 

 

You will know that there are some governments in this province 

that are dedicated to spending taxpayer money wisely, and the 

city of Moose Jaw is one of those. Don’t you think that in making 

that first offer to the city of Moose Jaw, that they deserve more 

than one month to make that very important decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I think the city of Moose 

Jaw had considerable time. In fact we delayed the opening of the 

park to give them more time to consider, and they decided that it 

just was not a good investment because they didn’t want to pick 

up the loss, that was being absorbed by the rest of the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, by only the Moose Jaw taxpayers. 

 



 

July 14, 1987 

1156 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Final supplementary, Mr. Minister, I ask you to 

make a commitment in this Assembly today to the children and to 

the families of this province. Will you give this Assembly your 

word that a year from now, in the summer of 1988, the Moose 

Jaw Wild Animal Park will be operating, regardless of whether or 

not you find a buyer to operate all or part of the operation? And 

will you also give us a commitment that the wild animal park will 

continue to be Saskatchewan’s zoo for Saskatchewan children 

and Saskatchewan families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to give a 

commitment that the zoo will be operating for many years to 

come, thanks to public participation. 

 

Displacement of Saskatchewan Unionized Boilermakers 

 

Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Labour on the 

construction site at the Prince Albert pulp mill. I would like to ask 

the minister: are the Manitoba union boilermakers depriving local 

Saskatchewan union boilers of jobs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, there’s an ongoing problem 

that we’re having in Saskatchewan with respect to the P.A. 

situation on jobs and the boilermakers’ union. And the ongoing 

problem has started at Estevan where the boilermakers are 

insisting on bringing in Manitoba workers and displacing 

Saskatchewan workers. 

 

And I had a call last night at about midnight with respect to the 

Prince Albert project where unionized boilermakers and the 

boilermakers’ union, which is headquartered out of Winnipeg, is 

sending in workers from Manitoba, and they have allowed one 

Saskatchewan resident to be hired and have sent in three from 

Manitoba. And I’m trying to deal with this situation. 

 

Mr. Gerich: — . . . (inaudible) . . . being discriminated against. 

What are you doing to correct this matter? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member from Redberry 

asked a supplementary, and we gave him that permission. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The situation 

with respect to union matters is governed by the by-laws of the 

union, and, in particular, this is an international union with no 

Saskatchewan local. And we are trying to have them establish a 

Saskatchewan local so that they will hire Saskatchewan union 

members. And we’re running a constant problem here of 

resistance. 

 

I’ve gone so far as to call the international president in Kansas 

City. But I still get reports of intimidation and a $2,000 reward 

for any one of the members caught speaking to me. So it’s a 

difficult situation. We may have to continue with the persuasion 

or maybe amend The  

Trade Union Act to protect . . . We may have to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. Order, please. If the minister has any . . . a few 

remarks to wrap up his answer, he can; otherwise we’ll move to 

the next question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been trying 

to use persuasion. But it isn’t working and we may have to amend 

The Trade Union Act to protect Saskatchewan workers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Grasslands National Park 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know we all enjoyed 

dealing with the wild animals, particularly the one over from 

Melville. My question, again, is to the minister. . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. I am not going to ask the member at this time to 

withdraw that remark. But I would like to caution him. 

 

And the member from Regina Rosemont, unfortunately, has 

engaged in rather unparliamentary remarks for some time. So I 

would like to caution him that those kind of remarks are not 

acceptable in this House. And I would like to once more remind 

him of that, and ask him to please refrain from making those 

types of unparliamentary remarks. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I was going to suggest that there 

was another domicile for the minister, the member from Melville. 

I won’t, however, given your comments. My question is to the 

Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture, and it has to do with 

the long-awaited grasslands park, or creation of the grasslands 

park here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, in recent days we’ve seen reports where the 

formation of the South Moresby National Park has been 

accomplished, thanks, mostly in part, to the good works of the 

people for Parks Canada and their efforts to bring together a 

number of conflicting groups such as the conservationists, Haida 

Indians, and loggers. And they’re able to do that and put in 

forward the park. 

 

I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, whether or not you are now — 

given the fact now that South Moresby is off the platter of Parks 

Canada — whether in fact, you, on behalf of the government of 

Saskatchewan, will move forward and create the grasslands 

national park here in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I thank the hon. member for raising the 

issue. It’s one that’s been very near and dear to the Government 

of Saskatchewan’s parks for some time. As the members opposite 

are aware, we ran into some technical and quasi-legal difficulties 

in the creation of the park. We seem to have come about 90 per 

cent along the way to having them solved. And I’m pleased to say 

that officials from my department, from Department of the 

Environment, and from Parks Canada have ongoing  



 

July 14, 1987 

1157 

 

discussions to try and ameliorate the situation and get it solved as 

quickly as possible. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 

negotiations have gone on for a long time, stretching back from 

the ‘40s. In 1981 an agreement was signed with the federal 

government, an agreement in principle, which would put the park 

on the road. We’ve heard the same answer time and time again, 

that the negotiations are ongoing. Can you give a date in which 

you will make the announcement that in fact those negotiations 

have completed, and can you tell the House and the Assembly 

here, when in fact we can expect grasslands park? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, the member is perfectly 

correct. There was an agreement signed in 1981. Unfortunately, 

what that agreement did was say, we will at some future date 

amend legislation to make this possible. The government of the 

day was the NDP. The minister of the day, former member from 

Morse, had every opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to introduce those 

amendments had he chosen to do so. He did not. This government 

is moving ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, lease. Order, 

please. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Government Mismanagement 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move a motion under 

rule 16 of which I gave notice last Friday. Since the introduction 

of the budget by the Minister of Finance on June 17, my 

colleagues and I in the New Democratic Party have had people 

from every part of the province who have spoken to us expressing 

great concern about what was mentioned in that budget. 

 

We have heard of deep concerns about past policies of this 

government which have brought them to the financial strait-jacket 

that they find themselves in today, and of present policies of the 

government which are destructive and do little to deal with the 

problems our people and our families face in Saskatchewan 

today, day after day. 

 

On behalf of these people and countless others who they 

represent, and who have members on this side of the House 

represent, I move the following motion, seconded by my 

colleague from Regina North West. And I move: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the provincial government 

for its mismanagement, wasteful spending, unfair tax breaks 

for the wealthy, and expensive patronage appointments at a 

time when it is unfairly increasing the taxes on ordinary 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to address a few words to that motion 

which I have just moved, seconded by my colleague from Regina 

North West. And on behalf of  

these people, I move the motion, because many of the measures 

which we have seen in the budget, particularly those dealing with 

tax increases, are doing a great deal of harm for the well-being of 

many Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now it may be seen by the government members opposite, and 

the members opposite, that by using the word “condemns,” which 

I have done, that it’s somewhat strong or harsh. I chose the words 

deliberately, Mr. Speaker. And before any of those members, as 

the member from Swift Current has just done from her seat, get 

too wrapped up in their indignation or their self-righteousness, I 

ask each one of those Conservatives, in this Legislative 

Assembly, to remind themselves of the people who have spoken 

to them in recent weeks, of the letters which they have received 

from thousands of people all over Saskatchewan, and the letters 

to the editors which they have read, all of which have said that 

the government is wrong, and that this government has been bad 

for Saskatchewan, and that this government has betrayed them. 

 

Yesterday the Minister of Finance stood in this House and he 

introduced several Bills dealing with major tax increases for 

Saskatchewan families. And these Bills, I might add, are just the 

beginning. The budget announced a massive tax increase on 

ordinary Saskatchewan people, and there are more Bills yet to 

come. And at a time when there is a need for increased economic 

activity to create jobs for the thousands of unemployed and for 

our young people, tax increases will take away over $300 million 

of consumer spending power and put it into the hands of this 

government to pay for the $300 million-a-year, oil royalty 

holiday given to the oil corporations last September and in 1982. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is one 

comparison which illustrates better than any other where the 

priorities of this government lie. Working people and farmers pay 

more so that the wealthy and corporate oil sector can have more. 

Now the member from Weyburn says he’s heard this speech; well 

he’s going to hear it again and again and again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — And I know he doesn’t like it, Mr. 

Speaker, because he doesn’t like the truth. 

 

The people who live here in Saskatchewan, who work here, and 

who raise their families here, the people who have hopes and 

dreams of building their homes and their communities and their 

province, have imposed on them with these tax increases the 

greatest tax increase in Saskatchewan history. But the oil 

corporations who pump out an important non-renewable resource 

are given a royalty holiday of $300 million a year. Now this, I 

say, Mr. Speaker, is a resource which we can only sell once. 

There is no second time. and if we give it away, there is a price to 

pay for evermore. 

 

This government has chosen to give it away. And they argue that 

it has to be done to create economic activity. But where is it? 

Where is the economic activity? Who has  



 

July 14, 1987 

1158 

 

benefited? Where are the jobs? And why is our population 

decreasing? And why do our young people have to leave this 

province in order to find jobs? 

 

Between 1982 and 1986, this government gave away over $1 

billion in oil revenues, and this past December, 1986, they 

announced that that policy of oil royalty holidays will continue 

even more and longer. 

 

Now that kind of policy has had some very negative results, for 

which we are paying the price today. These policies have led 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, into record-breaking, 10-digit 

deficits. Six consecutive deficits have resulted in a cumulative 

deficit which will total approximately $3.4 billion. In 1982 this 

government over there inherited a surplus of $140 million, and 

through their mismanagement and political expediency they 

squandered it all and ran this province into debt. And now, now 

the taxpayer is forced to pay more and more, while they get in 

services less and less. 

 

The record of its mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, is evident in a 

number of areas. The energy sector I have already mentioned — 

the massive give-away. And so what is the result? The oil is gone, 

the money is gone, and the jobs are gone. 

 

And let me just provide an example of what happened. It had 

nothing to do with commodity prices. It had everything to do with 

conscious decisions of this Conservative government. In 1982 the 

production, in millions of cubic meters, of oil in Saskatchewan 

was 8.1 million cubic meters. The value of that oil was $1,189 

billion. Saskatchewan people received in revenues, through 

royalties and taxes, $700 million, and we had a surplus of $140 

million. 

 

In 1985, Mr. Speaker, when the production was 11.9 million 

cubic meters, and when it was valued at $2.4 billion, do you 

know what Saskatchewan people received? They received $655 

million less than they received in 1982 because of this atrocious 

give-away. 

 

That’s why the Minister of Finance comes to this House in this 

budget and again introduces Bills to create massive tax increases 

on the citizens of Saskatchewan, because they’ve been so busy 

paying off their friends in the oil corporation sector. 

 

Why we are where we are today? In 1973 when the price of oil in 

U.S. dollars on the U.S. barrel was $3.89 a barrel, we had a 

surplus budget in Saskatchewan. In 1974 when the price of oil 

was $6.74, we had a surplus in Saskatchewan. But in 1985 when 

the price of oil was $30 a barrel because of this give-away, we 

had a deficit under this government of $378 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that deficit was a deliberate decision created 

by the member opposite. It’s mismanagement that led us to where 

we are today, and it’s this mismanagement which has led to the 

largest tax increases on people in Saskatchewan history. 

 

Now the energy sector is not the only example of the atrocious 

mismanagement of this government which now  

is leading to these kinds of tax increases. The potash sector is 

equally as good an example of mismanagement. 

 

When this government was elected in 1982, every year prior to 

that the potash corporation made profits: in 1980, $167 million; in 

1981, $141 million. But after the election of this Conservative 

government, that changed, and there was a reason for that change. 

The reason was because the government set out to deliberately 

undermine the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan — 

deliberately undermined it. The government has thrown away 

tens of millions of dollars a year by forcing the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan to draw plans to compete on the 

world market with the private potash companies. And this 

decreased competition has benefited only the private, 

foreign-owned potash companies. 

 

And let me illustrate that, Mr. Speaker. In 1981 PCS enjoyed 63 

per cent of Canpotex off-shore sales — 63 per cent, 1981. By 

1984 that share was only 43 per cent, because of the deliberate 

actions of this government. 

 

And now the Minister of Finance stands up the other day, when 

questioned by the press, and he says he’s going to turn over the 

$810 million debt, much of which has been created by this 

government with their mismanagement, onto the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan and increase their taxes even more, rather than 

have the potash corporation pay for it out of profits when it 

begins to make those profits again. 

 

That’s the kind of mismanagement and decision making that has 

brought about the massive tax increases the Saskatchewan people 

have had put on them. 

 

I could talk about what’s happening in the mismanagement in our 

highways. Here we have one of the largest investments made by 

the citizens of Saskatchewan, and year after year after year the 

government allows this investment to go into disrepair because 

they have not provided enough funding for the maintenance of 

those roads, so that a measure of Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan 

people is being allowed to deteriorate because of government 

mismanagement with inadequate maintenance. And the cost of 

reconstruction will be great, and the taxpayers will once again 

have to pay more. 

 

Similar kinds of mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, have taken place 

in the areas of health and education. And here again we’re 

experiencing a general deterioration in what were two of the 

brightest stars in the provincial system. The Tories promised to 

make health care in Saskatchewan number one in Canada. 

Everyone remembers that. Instead, the prescription drug plan has 

been decimated, the children’s dental plan has been cut back, and 

rural hospitals are talked about in terms of rationalization. 

 

Saskatchewan hospitals have experienced bed closures, 

reductions in teaching positions, and the loss of medial 

specialists. People are paying more through their taxes but getting 

a deteriorating health care system. 

 

Cut-backs within the education system have also been  



 

July 14, 1987 

1159 

 

rampant. Technical institutes together cut by $4.5 million. 

University operating grants, a zero per cent increase. Education 

development fund, which the Minister of Finance boasted about 

in his budget speech, cut from $35 million to $14.5 million. And 

the end result, the end result has been a great deal of confusion 

and dismay at these wrong-headed decisions. And education 

opportunities have been reduced. 

 

Our students, our young people are being told by the Minister of 

Social Services that it’s more important to save money than to 

provide jobs for them. And at the same time the Minister of 

Education is saying to them, to many of them, that they can no 

longer get an education. No longer can they get an education. 

 

And in conjunction with this mismanagement, this government 

has taken abuse and wasteful spending and patronage to new 

extremes. Everyone knows about the Weyerhaeuser deal. 

Everyone knows the kind of sweetheart deal which was made to 

sell off this Prince Albert Pulp Company. There was no down 

payment. The $248 million is payable . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member’s 

time has elapsed. 

 

Excuse me — why is the member on his feet, from Regina 

South? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I’ve got a special 

little group of guests that I’d like to introduce at this time. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you and to the members of our Assembly, some special guests in 

the Speaker’s gallery. And these little people are — there are 

seven of them, ranging in age from five till about eight or nine, 

and they’re with the Whitmore Park Child Care Co-op. Their 

three teachers are Elizabeth George, Katharine Boughen, and 

Chantile Shannon. One is missing, but we’ll catch up with her 

later. 

 

Now while some of these little visitors, Mr. Speaker, are 

relatively young. I am sure that they will enjoy the tour of the 

building and examining the fine artifacts that are here, and 

certainly will enjoy the lemonade and stories that I’ll share with 

them in a few moments time. I ask all members to welcome them 

to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Government Mismanagement 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join 

with my colleague from Regina North East in this debate. The 

people of Saskatchewan are very disappointed in the government 

that we have operating in this province at the moment. They are 

expressing their discontent with massive demonstrations. They 

are  

concerned about many things that are going on with respect to 

health care and so on. But I think what people are very upset 

about is the simple fact that they’ve been misled. 

 

The government has preached fiscal responsibility, but they have 

practiced unrestrained fiscal irresponsibility. They have talked 

during election campaigns, not only in Saskatchewan but other 

parts of the country as well, about how they believe in less 

government, that less government is better government. And 

they’ll tell you that in every constituency that you go to in this 

province. The PC party, the Progressive Conservatives, are the 

party of less government, less bureaucracy, and less red tape. 

They’re the party of — as their members go around and preach 

— of less influence in the economy. They don’t want to be 

involved as much with the taxpayers of this province. 

 

(1445) 

 

The Conservative party, the party of less government, has 

increased political patronage at unprecedented levels, Mr. 

Speaker. They have doubled the number of political aides that 

they have hired for their 16 cabinet ministers. They now have 

183, paying in the vicinity of somewhere of $10 million per year. 

 

The Conservative party, the party of less government, has 

increased taxes at an unprecedented level in this province. They 

have increased taxes since 1982 to a little over $1,000 per family 

of four, and that’s very, very difficult for people who are making 

18 to $25,000 a year. And it’s becoming more and more difficult 

with the massive increases that we witnessed in this budget of 

June 17, which provided a substantial increase added to that 

$1,000 per family of four since ‘82. In fact, if you do the 

calculations, Mr. Speaker, the calculations will show very clearly; 

they will illustrate an increase of another $1,000 per family of 

four in this recent budget alone. 

 

The PC party, the party of less government, has a deficit of over 

$3 billion. And what they’ve done is, rather than provide less 

government for people, they have harnessed and burdened the 

people of this province with a debt that they will never recover as 

long as this government is in power. 

 

Is this less government, Mr. Speaker, all of these tax increases? Is 

this less government for the people of Saskatchewan? It’s less 

government for some people, but it’s certainly more government 

for the taxpayers of this province. What it basically provides is a 

deep, delicious pork barrel for out-of-work Conservatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina North East talked about 

Weyerhaeuser, and he talked about the sweetheart deal, and this 

is an example of the political patronage that we’ve seen. Another 

example we’ve heard in this House is the Peter Pocklington deal 

— the $21 million subsidized loan from Sedco (Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation), $10 million of which is a 

gift, as an incentive to set up a pork processing plant in the 

province at the taxpayers’ expense. 

 

They have placed their friends in government positions at  



 

July 14, 1987 

1160 

 

fairly high wages. They have given Paul Schoenhals, a former 

MLA from Saskatoon, a nice plum as chairperson of the board of 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How much, John? 

 

Mr. Solomon: — They have provided . . . That was a little over 

$100,000. And the previous chairman was a part-time position 

receiving far less than that. 

 

George Hill, a former president of the PC Party, another one of 

their friends, deep into the deep, delicious pork barrel, is reported 

to be receiving over $200,000. And he’s now chairman of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

A consulting contract provided to one Tim Embury of $500,000, 

who was the MLA for Lakeview prior to 1986. Gordon Dirks, 

another former MLA, received a contract, untendered I might 

add, of $35,000 for a study that was to be done in three months. 

Dennis Ball, who is now the full-time chairperson of the 

Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board, is receiving $122,000 as 

of 1985, which was substantially more for a position which used 

to be a part-time position as well. 

 

It has spent, this government opposite has spent over $20 million 

in the last fiscal year, that we have a record of, in advertising — 

self-serving government advertising at taxpayers’ expense. 

 

Investors and speculators have taken a large number of dollars 

out of the treasury, as well, through investment tax credits at the 

venture capital tax credit program. A small minority of people 

have been able to amass $67 million in tax credits, Mr. Speaker. 

The amount of research and development in jobs created for the 

province is highly questionable. And the two examples we’ve 

seen are, of course, Supercart International in Regina, and now 

Joytec in Saskatoon. 

 

We are seeing the government spending taxpayers’ money in a 

mismanaged, loose, loosey-goosey fashion on the Rafferty dam 

project; proposed $600 million in the Rafferty and Shand 

operating station as well. And of course, information that we have 

is that these projects are purely political projects announced, and 

they’ll be built in constituencies which are represented by the 

Premier and a fellow cabinet minister. 

 

And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, as these patronage 

appointments are going on, ordinary citizens of this province are 

compelled to pay higher rates of taxes. We heard about the gas 

tax, which is a 15 per cent increase, roughly a 15 per cent 

increase in the gas tax it was on over four years ago. The sales tax 

had been increased by 40 per cent, as we heard. And, of course, 

the flat tax increased from 1 per cent to nearly 2 per cent. What 

this means is, rather than increasing the basis points of the 

provincial tax, which is now at about 52 or 54 per cent (for each 

flat tax point increase is equal to seven basis points), so in effect 

we’ve had a 14 per cent basis point increase over the previous 52 

on our income tax payable to this government for their follies and 

their schemes. 

 

The average taxpayer has paid about $107 million in flat  

taxes alone in terms of increase. And on top of that, they’ve lost 

the property improvement grant, which resulted in another $80 

million increase in taxes. At the federal level as well, initiatives 

have increased the burden of taxpayers of this province. There’s 

been a $1,000 net increase in taxes per family from ‘84 to ‘87 

alone. Meanwhile, over 60,000 profitable corporations in Canada 

currently pay no taxes under this new proposed tax reform of Mr. 

Wilson. 

 

We’ve seen, in this province, a tax increase of $73 a month to 

nursing home residents. we’ve seen a $20 a month increase in 

home care fees for low-income seniors, and a $50 a month 

increase in home care fees for seniors who don’t qualify for the 

government subsidy. We’ve seen the abolishment of the drug 

plan which will increase costs to the tune of $50 million to 

Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen increases to 

tuition fees at the university level. We’ve seen increases, as well, 

to people who use our parks and our recreation facilities. 

 

The government talks about fiscal responsibility. We’ve seen 

massive tax increases at unprecedented levels. The government 

talks about the economy being under control and the economy 

prospering in this province. We’ve had more bankruptcies in this 

province in the last number of years, Mr. Speaker, than any other 

province on a percentage basis. While the Devine government 

manages to find large sums of money for large corporations and 

political friends, Saskatchewan consumers and small businesses 

are abandoned to face tough economic times. We have tough 

economic times in this province. There is no great revival of the 

free enterprise ethic under this free enterprise government. 

 

In 1986, Mr. Speaker, there were 21 per cent more bankruptcies 

in Saskatchewan than in 1985. This figure represents the second 

highest bankruptcy rate record in Canada — dwarfing the 

Canadian percentage rate of 6.5 per cent. In addition, there were 

2,234 disappearances from the province’s corporate register in 

1986. This is a significant indicator, since a business doesn’t have 

to go bankrupt to close its doors. 

 

We can talk about these bankruptcies, and we can talk about 

migration — the outflow of young people leaving this province, 

as the member from Regina North East touched upon. And what 

is more alarming than anything, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that we 

have, from January to June of this year alone, nearly 4,600 people 

who have left this province more than entered. And what that 

does to this government, in my view, is provide another nail in 

the coffin in terms of their program of fiscal responsibility, their 

program of job creation they’ve been talking about over the last 

number of years, and really destroys their argument. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, last year you may recall we had 

over 14,000 people leave the province. So in the last 18 months, 

we’ve had roughly 19,000 people. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Mr. Gerich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let us take 

a very close look at the motion introduced this afternoon by the 

opposition. 

 



 

July 14, 1987 

1161 

 

I remind this legislature that for 10 long years Saskatchewan 

suffered because of their mismanagement, wasteful spending, and 

extensive patronage, and their unfair taxation policy of theirs. 

Now for 10 long years wasteful spending, mismanagement were 

the order of the day for the NDP. For ten long years, Mr. Speaker, 

expensive patronage and unfair taxation policy was their way. 

 

For 10 years the people of Saskatchewan were subject to the NDP 

policy of putting family of Crown corporations before the real 

Saskatchewan families. For 10 long years the people of 

Saskatchewan were subject to the NDP policy of putting their 

Crown corporations before the real Saskatchewan families. And I 

have to get that point across, real and clear, to the people. 

 

The nightmare of the NDP social experiment came to an end in 

April 1982. You will recall that on April 1982 the people of 

Saskatchewan rejected the mismanagement, the wasteful 

spending, the expensive patronage, and unfair taxation. And the 

people of Saskatchewan freed themselves from the chains of the 

NDP technocrats. 

 

Obviously the NDP have not learned from their lessons in 

history. They have no idea why they sit in opposition. But allow 

me to explain this to the legislature. Why do they sit in 

opposition? And when will they continue to be in . . . And why 

will continue to be in opposition for many years to come? 

 

There are two words in the dictionary that the NDP opposition 

has never learned to deal with in the meaning of. The first word is 

“hypocrites”. Now any political party that would have the nerve 

to talk about mismanagement, wasteful spending, and unfair 

taxation, expensive patronage, after being defeated in two 

elections, because those very issues are the . . . because of those 

very issues, are obviously hypocrites. Indeed, they’re 

sanctimonious hypocrites. 

 

The second word the opposition has learned not to deal with is 

“reality”. The NDP opposition has come to face the reality of 

April . . . has not yet come to face the reality of the April 1982 

election or the October 1986 election. The reality of the people of 

Saskatchewan have no more desire to return to this 

mismanagement, wasteful spending, and unfair taxation, or 

expensive patronage of their NDP ideas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion before the Assembly today is a mockery 

of our parliamentary system. The motion is shamelessly and 

blindly partisan attempt to use this Assembly to distort the record 

of the government. The motion is nothing but NDP chicanery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to set the record straight, it will be 

necessary for this Assembly to amend the proposed motion. I 

wish to inform you, sir, that it is my intention to move the 

following amendment: 

 

That the motion would be amended by striking all words 

after the word “Assembly” and substituting: 

 

commend the government of Saskatchewan for  

its effective management, fiscal responsibility, fair taxation 

policy, prudent appointments which have resulted in 

effective and efficient government for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Seconded by the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, allow me to explain to this legislature why it is 

imperative that the opposition motion must be amended in the 

manner that I have presented. 

 

You and I know the record of mismanagement in the NDP years. 

Mr. Speaker, I recall the extravagant expenditures of the public 

money to buy uranium and potash mines. I recall the millions of 

dollars spent to buy farm land. And in all of these cases, it was in 

the name of state ownership. State ownership is a glaring 

example of mismanagement of the past. The socialist mentality of 

the 1970s was replaced by the common sense and practical style 

of government implemented by this Progressive Conservative 

government since 1982. Progressive Conservative government 

has a record of excellence because of its effective management of 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a government we have effectively recognized a 

structure to make that government more cost effective and 

efficient for the people we serve. We subscribe to the idea that 

government is a servant and not the master of the people. 

 

(1500) 

 

The reorganization of government departments and reduction in 

the size of the civil service has resulted in more responsible and 

effective provincial government. Gone are the days when the 

attitude was more government, bigger government. In the two 

elections, the people of Saskatchewan have said no to that 

concept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to hear the NDP talk about wasteful spending is like 

listening to a river boat gambler talk about the virtues of clean 

living. People of Saskatchewan have come to realize that when 

the NDP was in control of the public treasury, it was like putting 

a fox in charge of the chicken coop. 

 

Now Winston Churchill, who spent a lifetime in a crusade against 

socialism, was right. And in saying . . . he said socialists have no 

guilt when it comes to using other people’s money to create 

equalized misery. And that was the NDP legacy here in 

Saskatchewan for the previous 10 years before 1982. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wasteful spending is when the government uses 

millions of dollars of the public’s money to buy uranium and 

potash mines. Wasteful spending is when the government spends 

millions of dollars to promote the family of Crown corporations. 

And wasteful spending is when the government spends millions 

to take over farm land set up in a scheme called the land bank. 

We remember the days of wasteful spending when there was no 

thought of tomorrow — no planning, no direction. Those were 

the NDP years of waste, and wasted years they were. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remind this legislature that in two elections  



 

July 14, 1987 

1162 

 

the people of Saskatchewan said no to the NDP waste. 

 

Now through the fiscal responsibility of this Progressive 

Conservative government, our province is using the public money 

to provide effective and efficient government services. Yes, 

we’ve been practising restraint. Yes, we have reduced public 

expenditures where necessary. 

 

And on the other hand we have been building Saskatchewan and 

expanding government services to protect the people of 

Saskatchewan. There’s been a 63 per cent increase in health 

spending . . . health care spending, since 1982. It’s an example of 

the Progressive Conservative commitment to the protection of 

Saskatchewan people; $1.2 billion for health care is the highest it 

has ever been in the history of Saskatchewan. This is a clear-cut 

example of spending public money wisely to provide quality of 

health care. 

 

Another example of prudent spending has been our protection 

programs for the farmers and home owners. We’ve been the 

leader in the government, all over Canada, in protection programs 

for the people of this province. 

 

This is the time in Saskatchewan history for responsible financial 

decision, a time for leadership. It’s a time that calls for courage 

and principle. I’m proud of, and confident in, the man at the helm 

of our state and our ship, our Premier. Premier Grant Devine is 

respected for his dynamic and innovative leadership. The Premier 

recognizes what must be done today in order to build 

Saskatchewan for the next decade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us look back through the pages of history at the 

10 long years of the NDP regime. Did they have a vision and 

foresight to build the future? I think not. They were preoccupied 

with tinkering with the system to create state control and state 

ownership. Their objectives were to tax the daylights out of any 

resource industry that might invest in this province; tax the 

middle class until they bled. And like certain barnyard animals at 

the trough, they made Saskatchewan’s government an NDP 

patronage heaven. 

 

At this time I would like to . . . they were talking before about 

patronage. A former member of Kinistino, Mr. Don Cody, was 

elected in 1971, defeated in ‘75. And he was given a job at SGI, 

senior position until 1978, in June, when he was re-elected MLA. 

Go down to Mr. Don Faris, a former member from Arm River; he 

was appointed director of communications of the Education 

Department and of Co-ops, in March 24, 1981. . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 

my pleasure to enter into this rule 16 debate, today, and I must 

admit, Mr. Speaker, in beginning, that it’s a little bit difficult to 

believe that the member from Redberry made that amendment in 

seriousness. Obviously he’s not listening to his constituents, nor 

is he listening to the people of Saskatchewan, and I refer him 

specifically to the Sask Trends Monitor publication which  

was released last week and clearly condemned the Government of 

Saskatchewan for it’s actions. So I stand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

speak strongly in opposition to the amendment proposed and to 

support the original motion, which is: 

 

That this assembly condemns the provincial government for 

it’s mismanagement, wasteful spending, unfair tax breaks 

for the wealthy, and expensive patronage appointments at a 

time when it is unfairly increasing the taxes on ordinary 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in recent days the people of Saskatchewan 

have been asked by the PC government to make a leap of logic. 

And the leap of logic is this. The government has said to the 

people of Saskatchewan that by cutting government expenditures 

they’re going to save money. And I ask the question, Mr. 

Speaker: save money for whom? 

 

Foe whom — we must all ask ourselves in this Assembly — for 

whom does and should government operate? Should government 

operate for the interest of oil companies? Should government 

operate for the Peter Pocklingtons of the world? Should 

government operate for the Weyerhaeusers? Should government 

operate for the interests of defeated cabinet ministers and Tory 

MLAs? And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the answer to those all is 

a strong and clear no. 

 

The other question that we have to ask, Mr. Speaker, is: should 

government operate for the ordinary people of this province? 

Clearly — and I agree with one statement made by the member 

from Redberry — clearly it is the responsibility of government to 

be the servant of people. And I think it’s on those grounds 

specifically, Mr. Speaker, that the original motion must be 

supported. 

 

And government has to ask for whom is its role most important? 

Is it most important for government to operate in the interest of 

those who have most? Or is it more important, as a matter of fact, 

for the government to operate in the interest of the citizens of this 

province who have least? When government makes choices, Mr. 

Speaker, it clearly has the responsibility to understand the impact 

and the implications for the citizens of the province, for the 

impact that it has on the real people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I suggest that in any democratic society — and I suppose 

some are questioning how democratic some of the changes that 

are being introduced are — but it is a strong, strong belief from 

the people of this country and the people of this province, that in 

a democratic society the government should be, in effect, the 

people. And the voice of government should speak in the interests 

of people, and especially in the interests of those who are least 

able, I should say, to determine their own destinies. 

 

I think this reflects the kind of co-operative thinking of the people 

of Saskatchewan traditionally in this province — people who 

have concluded decades ago, Mr. Speaker, that the appropriate 

way of solving problems in our society is to band together and to 

take the co-operative approach; people who believe that it is the 

responsibility  



 

July 14, 1987 

1163 

 

of their governments to act as instruments to solve problems. 

 

And so let us look at several choices that the government has 

made recently, Mr. Speaker, recently made by this PC 

government. And let us look at who is affected least and who is 

affected most by the negative decisions made by the members of 

the opposite and the government. 

 

One choice this government has made is to undertake no job 

creation, no significant job creation activities. It’s amazing to me 

that, in light of the high levels of unemployment that we have had 

for some time in this province, that we see no initiatives being 

taken to create meaningful jobs for the people of the province. 

Who does that affect least? Of course, obviously it affects least 

those who are already employed. And it also in fact affects in a 

positive kind of way large corporations who are looking for 

people to work for the smallest wages. Who does it affect most? 

The people who are most affected by that decision, Mr. Speaker, 

are the unemployed and, most seriously of all, those people who 

are receiving social assistance as a way to make ends meet on a 

day-to-day basis. 

 

The government made other choices. It decided to cut summer 

employment funding in the Access Youth program from $13.7 

million to $4 million — a cut of approximately 70 per cent. Who 

does that affect the least? Obviously, it affects the least who are 

already employed. Who does it affect most? It affects most, 

unemployed students and especially those unemployed students 

who need their summer jobs in order to have the incomes to 

continue their studies. Those students who are most affected are 

those from lower income families in Saskatchewan. 

 

The government made other choices. It chose to increase nursing 

home rates in Saskatchewan by $73 a month. Who does that 

affect least? It affects least the more well-to-do seniors, 

obviously. And who does it affect most? It most affects the 

seniors with the lowest incomes. 

 

The government chose to increase home care fees by 66 per cent. 

Who does that affect least? Again, obviously the seniors with the 

higher incomes, and most affects those seniors who have low 

incomes. 

 

The government decided to increase sales tax by 2 per cent from 

5 to 7 per cent. Who does that affect least? Everybody’s affected, 

but who does it affect least? Obviously, those of the most higher 

income individuals and families in Saskatchewan. Who does it 

affect most? Lower-income families who have less money 

accessible and who spend a greater portion of their incomes on 

meeting the needs, and for whom the extra $100 dollars they’ll 

pay in sales tax this year will have the greatest impact. 

 

The government decided to reduce access to the children’s dental 

care program. Who does that affect least? Well obviously, in 

terms of negative affect, the ones who are least affected are the 

dentists, who will be the benefactors of this plan. Who’s affected 

most? Single parent families, again, families who are required to 

have two parents working in order to meet their needs and, most 

obviously, Mr. Speaker, the access to the program  

will affect the children of Saskatchewan who have benefited from 

a high quality preventative health care program for a number of 

years. 

 

The government has introduced the deterrent fees in prescription 

drug plans. Who does it affect least? And the answer has become 

somewhat, I think, repetitive, Mr. Speaker. It affects least, people 

who have higher incomes. And it affects most, families with 

lower incomes who have to assume all the extra cost and, most 

seriously of all, seniors on fixed incomes who are elderly and 

oftentimes requiring a large number of prescription medications 

to maintain their health. 

 

The government decided to increase the flat tax by a half of per 

cent to one and a half per cent. Who does it affect the least? 

Those higher-income people who are able to use the tax breaks 

that they’ve always had and continue to have, determined by the 

way the flat tax is deducted. And who does it affect most? 

Obviously again, Mr. Speaker, the middle- and low-income 

people who are only able to use basic deductions in their income 

tax. 

 

The government chose to put back the gas tax of 7 cents per litre, 

which at best, and in it’s kindest terms, Mr. Speaker, can be 

referred to as an interest-free loan from the people of 

Saskatchewan to the government of Saskatchewan. Who’s 

affected least? And again, it’s the higher income individuals and 

families. Who’s affected most? Low income people who lose 

their expendable income and also the small businesses of this 

province who are using gasoline in order to operate their 

businesses. 

 

The government chose to increase tuition fees in universities and 

technical institutes. And again obviously the impact is least for 

those families who have children attending those institutes from 

families of higher income. Who’s affected most? Again those 

with lower income. 

 

And so we see, Mr. Speaker, that there is a pattern. When we 

look at the decisions of the government that have been introduced 

in recent times, over and over again we see that there’s not a 

saving of money. What there is is a shifting of the burden from 

government to individuals, in such a way that those individuals 

and families with the most suffer the least, and those with the 

least suffer the most. And that’s the story in a nutshell, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It’s blatantly false to say that the cuts are reducing costs if our 

first priority is the ordinary people of Saskatchewan. It’s 

convoluted logic, I suggest, to suggest that these costs are good 

for government. As a matter of fact, they are bad for people. It 

reflects the misplaced priorities of the government, Mr. Speaker, 

and marks a severe shifting of the burden for services to people 

who can least afford them. 

 

And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that I oppose 

the amendment introduced by the member from Redberry, and I 

firmly support the motion we have before us condemning the 

provincial government for it’s mismanagement, wasteful 

spending, unfair tax breaks for the wealthy, and expensive 

patronage appointments, at a time when it is unfairly increasing 

taxes on ordinary  



 

July 14, 1987 

1164 

 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to participates in this debate 

to expose the bankrupt and hollow rhetoric of the NDP 

opposition. This motion before the House is sanctimonious. This 

motion is full of self-righteous NDP rhetoric. The motion, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, before this House is proof, is proof that the 

opposition is bankrupt of ideas, bankrupt of policy and most of 

all, bankrupt of leadership. 

 

The motion before us today in this Assembly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is negative. It distorts the truth and is a waste of the 

productive time of this legislature. Mr. deputy Speaker, the NDP 

opposition wishes to have examples of wasteful public spending. 

Allow me then the opportunity to remind the opposition that it 

was they who spent over $500 million to take over potash 

industry in this province in the 1970s. 

 

Let me remind them of their wasteful spending on the family of 

Crown corporations, which created a debt in excess of $7 billion. 

Yes, I am quite pleased to point out the examples of wasteful 

spending during the NDP years. 

 

Perhaps they would like to talk about the land bank. The NDP 

used $138 million to remove 1.2 million acres, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — from Saskatchewan farmers, independent 

Saskatchewan farmers in our provinces. State ownership is what 

they believed in, Mr. Deputy Speaker — state ownership. And 

they still do. 

 

Or perhaps they would like to talk about the NDP investment in 

uranium mines — the very mines, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they, 

across the floor, now wish to close and put thousand and 

thousands of people out of work. Talk about mismanagement and 

wasteful spending! 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, their record of mismanagement and wasteful 

spending is why they form the opposition today. And that is why 

they will continue to be in the opposition, and we will remain in 

government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP opposition wishes to discuss 

expensive patronage in the motion before the Assembly. Does the 

NDP consider the appointment of federal NDP politician Ian 

Deans to the Public Service Commission of Canada as patronage? 

Or do they consider the appointment of former Ontario NDP 

leader Stephen Lewis, as Canada’s ambassador to the United 

Nations as patronage? I would ask how they describe those 

political appointments, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

May I remind this House that the NDP in Saskatchewan has a 

great track record in patronage. They were masters — masters — 

at the art of political patronage. And allow me, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, allow me to cite some examples. 

 

Here’s one that should be interesting to all members of  

this Assembly, especially those on that side of the House who 

aren’t as fortunate as the member for Regina Lakeview, who 

sought the nomination for the NDP in Regina North West in 

1979, and then received $7,100.04 from the Attorney General’s 

department, headed by the current member from Saskatoon 

Riverdale, as an honorarium in 1981-82 for legal services 

rendered. 

 

What I’m wondering, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is if this was meant to 

soothe the wounds inflicted by the current member for Regina 

North West, who upset her in the 1979 nomination in that riding, 

or perhaps, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was an appreciation for her 

abilities by the current member from Regina Centre, her former 

law partner. Patronage, Mr. Deputy Speaker, patronage? Far be it 

from me to make that suggestion. 

 

Let me cite to you maybe a couple of other patronages here. 

Louis Roy was a defeated NDP candidate in Prince Albert-Duck 

Lake in 1975, later given a job at DNS, Tourism and Industry, 

consultant 4 — $4,000-some-odd dollars, plus dollars, a month 

 

And they want some more. Ken Wawryk, sought NDP 

nomination in Saskatoon, Sutherland, 1978, given a job with 

SMDC corporate affairs department, assistant researcher, $36,000 

a year. I’ll tell you. . .oh, they want some more. The list goes on 

and on. 

 

Ted Glover, appointed special assistant, April 1982, to the hon. E. 

Kaeding, Rural Affairs, $3,650 a month. Bill (William) Knight, 

former NDP MP, appointed assistant principal secretary to the 

premier, July 17, 1979. Last salary was cited as $4,900 — almost 

$5,000 a month. Ted Koskie, appointed executive assistant to the 

minister of Consumer Affairs, brother to the hon. member from 

the Quill Lakes. Barbara Marie Kramer, daughter of Eileen 

Kramer, former NDP cabinet minister, $2,200 a month. 

 

I’ll tell you . . . and they still want more — they still want more. 

Former NDP MLA was Allen R. Oliver, defeated in 1979, 

appointed to the Highway Traffic Board, received 16,000 and 

some-odd bucks. And the list goes on and on — on and on. 

 

Alex Taylor, defeated NDP MLA, a former NDP cabinet 

minister, elected 1971 Kerrobert-Kindersley, and defeated 1975 

Kindersley, appointed director of negotiations 1975-77; chairman 

of Worker’s Compensation Board ‘77 to ‘79. I will tell you . . . 

then received special permission for leave of absence to conduct a 

study for Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. January 1, 1981, 

through to December — $48,000 for that study, plus $4,230 

expenses. I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they talk 

about patronage — they talk about patronage. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you can see by the NDP, they had no 

hesitation to extend political patronage to their party workers or 

supporters. I would suggest to this Assembly, the NDP opposition 

have no credibility when it comes to any constructive discussion 

of patronage. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the motion before this House is wasteful. It 

accomplishes nothing but to waste public money and to waste the 

time of this House. The motion  



 

July 14, 1987 

1165 

 

before this House unfairly distorts the excellent record of this 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is never easy to take the 

economic decisions this government has had to take. It takes 

courage, and it takes leadership, and it takes the integrity to do 

what is right. And that is why I have such a high regard and 

respect for the Premier of our province and the leadership he is 

providing for our province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I get into 

the crunch of the things that we have as a government done over 

the past years, you will note . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I must interrupt the member from 

Lloydminster. His time has expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to enter this debate today. As I read the motion form the 

member of Regina North East, to me it clearly and concisely 

outlined the direction this government has taken in the province, 

and I think that the motion really tells the true story of what’s 

happened to the people of this province. The motion tells us why 

the economy of Saskatchewan is depressed and deteriorating 

daily. And all of the Tory rhetoric that’s been sold to the people 

of this province with millions and millions of their own dollars 

can’t hide the truth. 

 

The business community and the farmers and, in fact, all of the 

Saskatchewan residents are facing the unpopular results of what 

this government has done. As I look at this government’s record 

in terms of what it has done to the small-business community 

regarding bankruptcies, it’s an appalling situation, Mr. Speaker, 

and the people of this province are quite clear that it’s not 

acceptable. 

 

In 1986 the business community faced 21 per cent more 

bankruptcies than they did in 1985 — the second highest record 

of bankruptcies in Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, the business 

community find that not acceptable. Businesses in this province 

have been closing their doors, liquidating their assets, and moving 

to other parts of this country where the business climate is more 

favourable. They’ve left this province in search of an economy 

where a business truly can survive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I talk about the business people that your 

government has affected, I’m not talking about those who survive 

at the hand of this government with hand-outs and the patronage 

and the corruption. And I’m not talking about the Tory hacks who 

wallow at this government’s trough. I’m talking about the real 

people, my friends. 

 

You can chirp, and you can natter, but you will know that the 

polls are indicating that the people of this province believe the 

New Democrats when they say you’re corrupt, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

talking about the real people — the real people who thought that 

they could be part of a free enterprise system under this 

government; people who believed that there was a place for them 

in this province; a place where their entrepreneurial  

endeavours could flourish; a place where they could raise their 

families; and a place they could realize their dreams. Mr. 

Speaker, this government has shattered many dreams in this 

province. They’ve been betrayed. The people have been lied to. 

 

But there are those, of course, that fare very well. One of the 

former members, one of the former speakers, has indicated which 

ones that we feel have done very well at this Tory trough. And 

I’m not going to list the dollar figures because they’re too 

exorbitant to even both with. But I want to tell you about Paul 

Rousseau, and I want to tell the people of this province about 

Schoenhals, and George Hill, and Embury, and about Gordon 

Dirks, and about Dennis Ball — all of your buddies that wallow 

at the Tory trough that you seem to keep full with taxpayers’ 

dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a difference between the patronage that’s 

been delivered to their buddies and to the way the real people of 

the province have been treated. The only kind of sharing that the 

business community has been asked to do, is to share in paying 

these high-priced wages that you’re paying these hacks. They’re 

asked to pay to cover for your political friends. 

 

(1530) 

 

The ordinary Saskatchewan people can’t afford to be part of some 

of the programs that you’ve been delivering — programs for the 

rich and for the wealthy, and friends of this government. If these 

programs had created jobs for the people of this province, the 

people would find them acceptable. But, Mr. Speaker, that hasn’t 

happened. 

 

My colleague from North Battleford referred to them as having 

no bang for the buck. And that’s exactly what’s happened. 

Programs that don’t work; people’s dollars for your friends, but 

nothing for the ordinary people of this province. The PC Party 

lied to the people of this province during the election. And now 

the people are asked to pay for it. 

 

A list of the things that have surprised the people of this province 

— I just want to read to this House. Gas tax, 7 cents a litre; sales 

tax, increased to 7 per cent; flat tax, increased. Mr. Speaker, the 

effects of the increased sales tax and the gas tax and the flat tax 

for the average family is going to cost them some $350 a year. 

And I don’t believe that’s acceptable. And that’s why I believe 

that this motion speaks to the problems that this government has 

created. I think it was right on. 

 

This government has polarized the wealth of this province. 

They’ve brought the farmers to their knees. Small business is 

suffering, and the tradespeople are out of work. Professionals are 

unemployed. People that could be, and should be adding to the 

economy of this province. And all of this while the members 

opposite fill the pockets of their friends with taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government of corruption. As I campaigned 

in the 1986 election, and as I talked to the business people in 

Prince Albert . . .And the member from Weyburn’s come back to 

chirp again, and we welcome him. But as I talked to the business 

people in the  



 

July 14, 1987 

1166 

 

Prince Albert area, and they tell me about the unfairness of their 

tendering practices, Mr. Speaker, it’s little wonder why you 

couldn’t win an urban seat and why the small towns in 

Saskatchewan didn’t support your policies. 

 

It’s pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, why they wouldn’t accept your 

kind of government, your kind of corruption, and your kind of 

mismanagement. They know, Mr. Speaker, that your 

government’s been unfair. And they want some changes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to go the couple of polls that were just 

announced, and that were just published in the last little while, 

and it tells you why you guys are sitting in the smallest you’ve 

been for many, many years in terms of percentage of public 

support. And I don’t believe that since this budget you’ve 

introduced it’s going to improve, because you’re going to go 

nowhere but down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, they’ve misled the people of 

this province, they’ve betrayed the trust that the people put in 

them, and they’re going to find themselves outside looking in as 

soon as they’ve got the guts to call another election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say today that I’ll 

be supporting the motion. And I’ll be supporting the motion on 

behalf — the original motion — on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan who’ve lost confidence in this government. 

 

And I ask, Mr. Speaker, that every, every member of this 

legislature support that motion, do the right thing, and support the 

motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me a 

great deal of pleasure today to rise and respond to the gross 

inaccuracies cited in the motion form the members opposite. 

 

Quite obviously this province feels that the members opposite are 

masters of mismanagement, wasteful spending, and unfair tax 

breaks, for it was the members sitting across from me who were 

refused returning to office in 1982 and in 1986. 

 

The members opposite speaks about polls, and I have good 

experience with that, Mr. Speaker. When I came into this 

legislature in a by-election in 1985, the members opposite were 

chirping about the polls then, and yet they managed to finish a 

thousand votes down in Thunder Creek constituency. 

 

The NDP have never been good at listening to people, because 

that is they have no new ideas and no solutions to problems 

which face Saskatchewan on an ongoing basis. It’s because of 

these things and more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they will remain 

in opposition for a long, long time. We, however, the Progressive 

Conservative Party, listen to people. And the people told us that 

they  

wanted some things changed in this province. 

 

I’d like to talk about a few things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that were 

raised by members opposite — things that people wanted 

changed. 

 

The mover of the motion this afternoon talked a lot about oil. 

And even though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have any oil in my 

constituency, it impacts on a lot of people in my constituency, 

because for years the former NDP government told us that the 

energy sector was going nowhere in this province. 

 

And we could see by the number of wells drilled in 1980 and 

1981 and 1982 that they firmly believe that. They believe that we 

should pay hundreds of millions of dollars to the province of 

Alberta for natural gas; that there was no natural gas in 

Saskatchewan to service the rural community, to service the small 

towns, and to service some of the secondary industry which we 

wanted to develop in this province. 

 

And lo and behold, with a change of government in 1982 those 

wells, and the wells drilled, dramatically increased. And all of a 

sudden we had natural gas so that we could service the rural part 

of Saskatchewan and service the small towns and communities; 

give them the same level of service which people in the major 

urban centres had been expecting for years and years. 

 

You know, it’s funny, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when the 

national energy program came along in 1981, the government of 

the day didn’t say boo. They didn’t say boo when thousands of 

people were laid off in places like Lloydminster and Swift 

Current and Kindersley and Estevan and Weyburn. They didn’t 

care about those folks. And when this government faced the same 

situation in the last couple of years, we took steps to make sure 

that those thousands of people kept their jobs, that those wells 

kept being drilled, that gas was found to provide service to rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, it’s important for a riding like 

mine, which doesn’t have any oil or gas in it, but which now has 

thousands of people benefiting from the things that this 

government has done in the energy sector, that I know that the 

folks in my riding are going to continue to say no to the types of 

things proposed by the members of the opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — And I listened with great interest as the 

member from Regina East talked about potash and about the 

wonderful decision made by the NDP government to get into the 

potash business and how, since 1982, that this Conservative 

government had grossly mismanaged the potash industry. 

 

And I wonder, has that member — and he represented a rural 

riding for 11 years — could possibly miss out on the fact that 

potash is a fertilizer and it is used in the growing of crops. And it 

so happens that the biggest customer for Saskatchewan potash is 

the United States of America. And when you take the price of 

corn, which is the primary user of potash as a fertilizer, and say 

that it has dropped  



 

July 14, 1987 

1167 

 

from $3.60 a bushel to around $2 — I believe the last listing I 

saw was about $1.98 — he would know why the demand for 

potash in the North American market has dropped dramatically. 

He would know that in a competitive market like that that you 

have to reduce prices in order to continue keeping market share. 

 

And I guess that is an indicator of how the folks opposite view 

things, because when you don’t realize that the commodity prices 

out there are on a world-wide basis, and that you must go out and 

compete, because if folks are only getting half of what they did 

before for their product, they can’t afford to put as much fertilizer 

on. 

 

I think this government should be commended for increasing our 

market share in certain parts of the world, and for maintaining 

most of the market share which we had there before, even though 

people don’t want to use the product particularly, because what 

they’re getting for their product is less than half of what they did 

five years ago. 

 

I also took with great interest, Mr. Deputy speaker, the comments 

that were made from folks opposite about there being no money 

for Saskatchewan business people. Being in the production of 

agricultural products, I consider myself a business man, as do 

66,000 other families in this province; indeed the biggest business 

sector, if you will, in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And now there has been no money provided for the small 

business sector in this province. And I think about the $1.2 billion 

for the production loan program which has kept many of these 

business people operating and functioning over the last couple of 

years. I think about the $185 million that went out to the livestock 

cash advance, which once again kept a lot of people operating 

and functioning, kept them there to take advantage of the upturn 

in the market-place which has now happened with the cattle 

producer in this province, with the hog producer in this province, 

indeed with the entire red meat production facilities in this 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think about the Premier going front and centre with the federal 

government for the deficiency payment last fall — a billion 

dollars into the pockets of business people in this province. Those 

types of programs, those type of initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

were never, ever undertaken by the NDP in the 11 years that they 

were in government — never. The biggest business sector in this 

entire province, and they got absolutely zero, except for the 

government coming in and overbidding the price of land so that 

the next generation could not come along into the farming sector. 

 

The member from Prince Albert made the comment that people 

. . . we’ve been filling the pockets of our friends in this province 

with money. Well I have a constituency with 8,700 voters who I 

consider all my friends, and I admit that we have been putting 

money in the pockets of those people. and I think if you go out to 

my constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will see that those 

people really appreciate the fact that their government and their 

members were doing everything that they could to put money in 

their pocket. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — And I guess if that makes me a pork-barreler of 

unprecedented proportions, I will have to go back to my 

constituents and say that, I guess that’s what I could do for you, 

and the NDP didn’t like it, and you’re all a bunch of hogs at the 

trough, because we did everything we could to support you in 

your business and your livelihood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one final comment on this. Our Premier and our 

Minister of Agriculture is in Ottawa at present, dealing with his 

fellow ministers of Agriculture and dealing with the federal 

government to ensure that there will be more dollars coming into 

the pockets of the biggest business sector in this province. And I 

would just like to commend him on that effort, even though 

members of the opposition did not even know that he was there 

yesterday, working on behalf of Saskatchewan people. 

 

But I think it just shows the initiatives that this government has 

taken over the last five and one-half years to ensure that we 

protect people in this province, that we protect farmers, that we 

protect rural Saskatchewan and our small towns — to ensure that 

that cash flow is there so that we can support our institutions, 

support the people in the secondary industries who are so 

important to our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 

observed the members of the government with their weak 

arguments of trying to defend the mess that they have placed the 

Saskatchewan people. I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard 

to believe the magnitude of the mess that this outfit has created 

on the backs of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1545) 

 

It has been indicated that they have laid on the backs of the 

people of Saskatchewan, billions of dollars of debt — 3.4 billion 

on the Consolidated Fund alone; $11.7 billion of total debt, 

including Crown. This is the magnitude of the debt. But at the 

same time, Mr. Speaker, what has been going on? There has been 

the biggest tax rip-off of ordinary people in Saskatchewan that 

this province has ever seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to say to you; take a look at the magnitude 

of the tax increases since they came into office. Take a look at the 

flat tax . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Time has elapsed. Time has elapsed. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 8 — Promotion and Development of the 

Tourism Industry 

 



 

July 14, 1987 

1168 

 

Mr. Gleim: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure on 

speaking to the motion of tourism in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Our government is committed to building 

Saskatchewan as we address the importance of economic 

diversification of the province wide, playing upon our strengths. 

And the industry that has economic diversity written all over it is 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Special attention to tourism’s tremendous growth potential is not 

new, Mr. Speaker. Since taking office in 1982, tourism has been a 

high priority of this government. Expansion of tourism creates 

jobs and diversifies our economy. It is, in fact, a renewable 

resource capable of generating tremendous returns on investment 

everywhere in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our tourism industry’s main needs are to develop 

new attractions, facilities and services, and a higher degree of 

professionalism in the service of hospitality areas. To address 

these needs, we need new degree of tourism awareness, was 

essential, Mr. Speaker. After conducting several awareness 

campaigns in November 1985, 96 per cent of respondents in the 

survey said, yes, tourism is important to Saskatchewan’s 

economy. Such a high level of awareness indicated strong support 

for enhanced tourism across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, aggressive provincial advertising and market 

activities replaced the old image of Saskatchewan as a tourism 

destination with one of this exciting dynamics. Early initiatives 

included a tourism marketing assistance program to assist 

community groups such as visitor and conventions event 

organizers, and other non-profit groups, to undertake new and 

expanded tourism promotional activities in Saskatchewan. We 

involve communities, organizations, industry operators in 

co-operative advertising campaigns and direct sales activities, 

expanding our market efforts with more effective campaigns. 

 

We promoted Saskatchewan as a tourist destination through 

Saskatchewan ambassador program. In 1986, over 1,600 

residents became ambassadors of the province of Saskatchewan. 

We supported the creation of one of the most important 

developments in the history of Saskatchewan tourism — the 

Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan — TISASK. 

 

This new umbrella organization provides a leadership in 

developing training programs, assists the industry in more 

effective marketing, and represents the entire industry in all levels 

of government. TISASK fills a void that existed for many years, 

and is a sign of emerging maturity of Saskatchewan tourism 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has, through Saskatchewan tourism 

and small business, now Saskatchewan Tourism, Small Business 

and Co-operatives, engaged in effective series of aggressive 

promotions. In our key markets, in 1986, the Saskatchewan 

advertising generated over 45,000 inquiries, an increase of 181 

per cent over 1986, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our home market has not been neglected; in fact, the latest 

promotion, the Great Saskatchewan Vacation  

Contest, under way. It provided one of the most initiative 

approaches to urging Saskatchewan people to explore their 

province in 1987. 

 

Briefly, the Saskatchewan vacation contest is running province 

wide. Winners will receive prizes that take them to other parts of 

Saskatchewan. All answers are contained in a department 

publication, The Great Saskatchewan Vacation Book. 

 

I want to advise the House of some current tourism initiatives. To 

cope with well commended need for hospitality training, the 

Department of Tourism, Small Business and Co-operatives is 

planning to establish a tourism hospitality institute. This program 

will provide new opportunities for our people to gain greater 

access to employment for their future and advancement into the 

industry. Mr. Speaker, this will not be a bricks and mortar 

institute. It will be a system whereby training can be provided 

where it is most needed, in the most efficient and practical 

method possible. We envision a flexible operation which will 

utilize the expertise of successful individuals already in the 

hospitality industry. 

 

Looking at ways to expand our tourism development at the 

community level, our government is planning tourism 

opportunities to assist individual communities develop their 

tourism potential. We will be looking and working with 

communities, large and small, across the province to help them 

create the market and to market top-notch attractions and events. 

 

I would note, Mr. Speaker, that the community events in 

Saskatchewan attract over 2 million people every year, generating 

over $140 million in revenues. The programs will also include a 

service and a hospitality component. 

 

All three components — developments, marketing, and service 

— of the programs will be contingent upon properly executed 

tourism plans for which communities will assist, will be 

responsible, thus reinsuring that most of the viable projects will 

proceed on a well-planned basis. 

 

A few glimpses of the future work of tourism division revealed 

several interesting areas of concentration. Mr. Speaker, the 

department will work to restore U.S. air links with the province. 

It will continue to build upon exciting markets and look at 

developing new ones, and it will continue to seek new developers 

and development opportunities. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, we will maintain the momentum we 

have generated, in partnership with the private sector, for our 

province’s dynamic and vibrant tourism industry. We will 

explore and expand its potential, thus encouraging and assisting 

in economic diversification in every part of Saskatchewan. The 

key component of our tourism programs have been underlying 

principle of co-operation between government and private sector, 

because economic growth is not created by government, but by 

the private sector. To find new and more efficient ways of doing 

business, Mr. Speaker, we remain committed to working with 

people of the province, especially the business community, 

helping them to help themselves in building a better future for our 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 



 

July 14, 1987 

1169 

 

Mr. Speaker, in view of this record of achievement, it is 

appropriate for me to assemble, to compliment the Government 

of Saskatchewan for the work it has done and continue to do for 

the betterment of the tourist industry. 

 

It gives me great pleasure to move: 

 

That this Government of Saskatchewan be complimented 

for the work it has done is assisting the tourism industry and 

its commitment through the Saskatchewan Builds program 

— Tourism in encouraging and promoting and continued 

development of a dynamic and vibrant tourism industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gleim: — And this will be seconded by the Hon. Jack Klein, 

Regina South. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Prince Albert-Duck Lake, Mr. Speaker. As 

I begin my remarks, I would like to indicate that I intend to move 

an amendment to the motion. And the reason I would move the 

amendment is simply because this resolution is sadly reminiscent 

of a number of PC slogans and promises that the people of this 

province have heard over the last five years. 

 

(1600) 

 

Initially, it was the “open for business” slogan. And the 

manufacturing sector was earmarked as the mechanism for 

economic growth and diversification. Unfortunately, no results 

materialized. 

 

And then it was “partnership for progress.” This time the small 

business community would provide the central thrust for 

economic diversification. The employment development fund 

was created with 600 million committed over five years. But 

where is that economic development fund today? It’s replaced, 

Mr. Speaker, with yet another new fund, with new money, and 

undoubtedly new priorities. 

 

Finally, in October of ‘86, the “Saskatchewan builds” program 

was unveiled. One component of this initiative was the creation 

of a $50 million program to generate jobs in the provincial 

tourism and hospitality industry over the next five years. And 

again, diversification was the central theme. But now, as the 

Minister of Tourism and Small Business states, the brightest star 

on the diversification horizon appears to be now tourism. 

 

The script, Mr. Speaker, is familiar — the spirited slogan, 

accompanied by promises of large sums of money spread over a 

period of time, giving the illusion of a long-term plan or strategy. 

But, Mr. Speaker, the programs that are put forward by this 

government are no longer credible. And they’re no longer 

credible because the government is no longer credible. 

 

This government has betrayed Saskatchewan small business. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think I can comment about that because I’m 

a small-business man. I deal with the small  

business - you wouldn’t know, the minister chirps. I feel I can 

speak about this simply because I’m in touch with the business 

community. I’ve been in that sector for a number of years, and I 

know their feelings. I know their aspirations, and I also know 

their dreams. 

 

The 1987 budget announced the creation of a new tourism and 

hospitality institute, and we noted on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, that it was conspicuously absent of any details. We 

question as to whether it’s just another opportunity to funnel 

government money into the pockets of the political friends of the 

PC party. And we ask if this is another scheme to enhance Darryl 

Binkley’s bank account. 

 

People don’t believe that this government is serious any longer, 

Mr. Speaker. The credibility of this government has gone the way 

of Supercart, of Ward Johnson Electric, and of Molson’s 

Breweries in Prince Albert. 

 

The motion talks about complimenting this government on the 

work that it has done in assisting tourism. We say, Mr. Speaker, 

that the motion is simply not true, and it’s not consistent with the 

facts of what’s been going on in the province since 1982. 

 

They failed at open for business. They failed at every effort that 

they’ve tried to attract business to this province, and the only way 

that they could get any business to come into this province — and 

I want to speak now for a few moments about Weyerhaeuser — 

is to give away a quarter of a billion dollars plus, of assets, in a 

shameful display. Give away a quarter of a billion dollars of 

assets — no repayment terms that are ever going to be delivered 

upon. 

 

They’ve betrayed the people of this province Mr. Speaker, in the 

economic diversification that they’ve tried. They had to give 

Peter Pocklington some $21 million of taxpayers’ money in order 

to bring a plant to this province that I’m not convinced we need. 

And why I say that, Mr. Speaker, is at the time they were dealing 

with Peter Pocklington from Alberta, Intercon is running at half 

throttle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has been in error and has failed at 

every attempt that they’ve made. They’ve saddled this province 

with a $3.4 billion deficit, and now they’re coming to the people 

of this province to pay for it. 

 

They come to the people with increased E&H tax; they come 

with a new flat tax, and now they increase that; the senior citizens 

$73 a month, and the list goes on. Mr. Speaker, their actions are 

unacceptable, and I say to you, they’re unforgivable, and the 

people of this province will one day have a chance to set the 

record straight. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, this motion speaks out and 

talks about complimenting the government’s work on tourism 

and the job that they’ve done. And at the same time, this 

government is pricing itself right out of the market. The people of 

this province, and the tourists who frequent this province, or who 

would like to frequent this province and like to be able to afford 

to, are finding that  



 

July 14, 1987 

1170 

 

the rates that they’re charging for parks and for fishing licenses 

are out of the reach of what they can afford. And it’s my 

speculation, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve priced themselves out of 

the market. 

 

And I think they want to take a lesson from their federal 

counterparts. The fee increases to the federal park at Waskesiu 

have cost the business people in that area a great deal of money. 

The number of people who have been able to afford to frequent 

that park has dropped 26 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And if there is 

anybody on that side that can understand what a drop in gross of 

26 per cent would mean, I would be very surprised. And I say I’d 

be surprised if they could understand it, because if they could, 

they wouldn’t have embarked on the rate increases that they have. 

 

I want to read into the record, Mr. Speaker, a few of the increases 

that this government has thrust onto the people of this province. 

Park entry fees, daily entree fee, from $4 to $5, increased 25 per 

cent; annual users permit fees increased 33 per cent, from 15 to 

$20; camping service sites, an increase of 7 to $12 dollars, an 

increase of some 71 per cent, Mr. Speaker, unserviced sites, $6 to 

$8, an increase of 25 per cent; seasonal campsite permits, $250 to 

$500, an increase of 100 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t go on with the increases because there’s 

still a bit of a list. But I think it’s important that the people of this 

province understand that this government simply doesn’t know 

what they’re doing. They’re incapable of making a rational 

decision. And the increases that they’ve thrust upon the people 

indicate that very clearly. 

 

Accommodations for the weekend, I would like to read into the 

record as well. Deluxe modern cabins increased from 37 per cent 

to 50 per cent, some 35 per cent increase; light housekeeping, 18 

to $24, an increase of 33 per cent; motels, $21 to $28, an increase 

of 33 per cent; holiday cottages, two people, an increase from $22 

to 29 per cent, that’s a 32 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For those that can afford it, these increases are fine. And that’s 

who they’ve been delivering legislation for, for those who can 

afford it, their friends, those that support their political party. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Only the rich. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Only the rich. What about the people of 

this province who don’t have a 40 or 50 or a $60,000 income? 

Those are the heavy users of those parks, Mr. Speaker, simply 

because they can’t afford to go anywhere else. They can’t afford 

hotel rooms. They’re looking for cheap accommodations with 

their tent trailers and their hard-top campers. And this 

government is thrusting, for a serviced site, an increase of some 

71 per cent. 

 

Are you telling the people of this province that they’re no longer 

welcome in the government campsites that we own? Are you 

telling them, by these rate increases, that you no longer want 

them to be involved in the tourist industry, or to have a weekend 

with their family at Emma Lake or at Candle Lake or at any other 

lake you want to  

mention? Mr. Speaker, what they have done is unforgivable. 

 

I want to go for a minute and speak about fishing licence. We’ve 

got a lot of anglers, a lot of senior citizens, who use angling as 

their main source of entertainment over the summer. Young 

families, fathers, mothers who take their children out for a 

weekend of enjoyment. Those same people that you’re asking an 

increase of some 71 per cent to park their camper trailers and 

their hard-top trailers, you’re also telling them it’s going to cost 

them more to go out fishing. 

 

Let me read into the record, Mr. Speaker, the increase in the 

fishing rates. An increase from last year $10 to $15 — an increase 

of 50 per cent. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That superseded the previous $5. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — The member from Quill Lakes indicates 

that it superseded the previous five that they’ve thrust upon the 

folks, and I believe that to be true. Again another example of their 

unfairness. Non-resident fishermen, an increase of $20 to $30 — 

thirty-three and one-third per cent. Are they telling the people 

from outside of this province, from California, and from Arizona 

or from Montana or South Dakota or North Dakota, or are they 

telling the people from Alberta, British Columbia or Ontario or 

Newfoundland that they don’t want their business in this 

province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, any business man knows that when you’re going to 

increase your retail prices on whatever commodity that you’re 

selling, you do it in a staged fashion, and a fashion that’s not 

going to take your customers out of your store. You’re dealing 

with a big store here. This government is dealing with a big 

industry, and when you see rate increases 33, 50, 100 per cent — 

not acceptable at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ve got a letter that I’d like to read into the record as well, Mr. 

Speaker. It was in the La Ronge Northerner, June 3, 1987. And 

it’s a rather lengthy letter, so I would just like to read parts of it. 

But it’s sent from a Helen L. Maveton of Lakewood, California in 

the United States. And she writes: 

 

Until this year, after enjoying our visits for 16 years, we are 

totally disgusted at the costly accommodations offered the 

campers. Camping rates for the spots we have parked in in 

the 12 previous years have doubled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she goes on. But I think she’s made her point, and I 

don’t want to elaborate on that particular part. But she’s got a 

little question here; she has something to ask this government and 

the people that represent this area of our country. She says that: 

 

Your officials have priced us out of your province. We can 

no longer afford these prices for just a spot to park our 

trailer. The camping grounds were fine the way they were. 

We are camping, not expecting high-cost accommodation. I 

sincerely hope you, the people, and merchants will make 

yourselves heard on our behalf as well as your  



 

July 14, 1987 

1171 

 

own and welcome tourists with prices we can afford. 

 

How much more clear would a tourist, who spent 16 years in this 

province in the summers, have to be? What will it take to make 

you people open your eyes? What will it take to make you 

understand that your priorities are wrong? 

 

You can’t price yourselves out of a market if you’re hoping to 

expand your growth. You’ve got to be realistic in the kind of 

income that you can expect in terms of tourism. You’ve got to be 

realistic in terms of how you stage rate increases. We all know 

that rate increases are inevitable, but they’ve got to be done with 

some care, with some caution, and some responsibility, none of 

which this government, Mr. Speaker, has shown. Every possible 

fee they’ve increased. And this is just another example of the 

contradictory and misguided policies of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is recognized by the people of this 

province as a failure. Their credibility is shot. Government 

incompetence is destroying opportunities in tourism, and by 

destroying opportunities in tourism, they’re destroying 

opportunities for small business. Tourism can be, and one day 

with a New Democrat government will be, injecting money into 

this provincial economy so that we don’t have to see cut-backs to 

dental care and to health care and increase to rates to our senior 

citizens. 

 

But I’m sad to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s not going to happen until we 

get rid of that bunch on the other side. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to move: 

 

That all the words after “that” in the first line be deleted and 

the following be substituted therefor: 

 

This Assembly regrets that the provincial government’s 

narrow emphasis on it’s open for big business policy has 

contributed to the government’s inadequate performance 

with respect to the jobs and opportunities in the tourism 

industry and in the small business sector throughout the 

province. 

 

This amendment will be seconded by the member from Moose 

Jaw South. 

 

(1615) 

 

Some Hon. Members — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — This debate will continue concurrently on the 

motion as amended by the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake 

and seconded by the member for Moose Jaw South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I couldn’t be more 

pleased and enter this debate and speak a little bit about tourism 

and how our government in fact assisted that private sector in the 

tourism industry. And I will certainly speak on the original 

motion, Mr. Speaker, and just prove that the amendment was 

utter nonsense. And  

I’m really amazed that the member would even begin to think 

about putting in an amendment like that. 

 

I was hoping that the new members opposite would understand 

something about building, something about business, something 

about tourism. But I see it’s the same old thing and they’re living 

in the past. Even the tourists that were with us in the gallery left 

as he was speaking. I guess they couldn’t put up with it either. 

 

But as the member from P.A.-Duck Lake spoke and spoke about 

our programs and the credibility of our programs over the last 

four or five years, Mr. Speaker, I just couldn’t help but reflect 

what those programs were and what they did for this tourism 

industry in our province. And for that member to make that kind 

of statement is incredible. 

 

I visit with the chamber of commerce from Prince Albert quite 

regularly, your home town. And I dare say that I meet with them 

more than you do. And I would like to ask you if you have ever 

even attended one of their meetings. I doubt it. And you get up in 

the House and you say that you represent fairly the business 

community of Prince Albert. Well, I say, boloney. 

 

He spoke a little bit about Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker. He said, 

big business, and what does this government . . . He fails to 

recognize the essence of a corporation like Weyerhaeuser’s 

presence in this province, in his home town, and how it will 

expand and supplement and provide growth to the business 

community in his own area. 

 

It’s just amazing that you’re that short-sighted that you can’t even 

understand that that very presence will do what it’s designed to 

do, and help diversify our economy and spread business right 

around that whole area. It’s almost sorry that you’re their member 

with that kind of a down attitude. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of being asked by the Waskesiu 

Chamber of Commerce to attend there recently on a tourism 

sub-agreement announcement. And it was delightful for me to be 

back their with my friends from Waskesiu, just north of Prince 

Albert, and to see the enthusiasm and the encouragement and all 

the excitement that was in the area, because they recognized that 

our government was still providing this needed assistance to the 

tourism industry. 

 

And yet was there one member of the opposition up there on that 

glorious event — one member at this chamber of commerce 

event? Nowhere to be seen — none of them. And a major tourist 

announcement for that area. So much for that. 

 

He’s still got his head in the sand. He was talking about tourist 

rates. Are you kidding, Mr. Speaker? Five bucks, the price of a 

movie, to get into a park. I mean, what’s the big deal? You talk 

about terms of percentage and, you know, 100 per cent of nothing 

is nothing; $5 to enter a park for a whole carload — less than the 

price of a movie. I don’t know what you’re complaining about. I 

haven’t been talking to any of these people that enjoy our parks 

that say that they can’t go there because they can’t afford it. 

 



 

July 14, 1987 

1172 

 

You were talking about fishing licences. And do you know that 

the seniors here get fishing licences free? They don’t pay 

anything. You made it sound like they were paying $100 a pound 

to catch their fish. They fish for nothing and they enjoy it, and 

they’ve got a lot of time. 

 

They’re the ones that go to the parks. They buy all this RV 

equipment. Not particularly the seniors, Mr. Speaker, but a lot of 

people in our province buy recreation vehicles now being 

manufactured right here in our province. We did that. Not you — 

we did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — And yet your member from North Battleford 

chooses to fight with the chamber of commerce in that area — 

doesn’t like the new growth that’s going in North Battleford. 

They’re selling all these RV units over this whole province, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re going to all of these parks. They’re not saying 

anything about paying $7 for the site; they want the site there. 

And if you think for a moment that the American tourists got a 

little bit of a problem with the fees, you’re sadly mistaken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I carry around with me all the time a little $20 U.S. 

bill. And I carry it around for a reason, and I carry it around from 

my days in the amusement park business. That $20 bill that I 

carry, U.S., is a constant reminder, not of the $20 bill we will 

spend in the U.S. market, but some American came here and 

dropped another 20 in the Saskatchewan market. That’s very, 

very important to me. And there’s a lot of these 20’s going 

around now, thanks to our government and how we’re going after 

the American tourist. You make it sound like a big deal to pay 

that entry fee. 

 

Do you know that an American tourist in Los Angeles, when he 

looks at our fishing programs in the North, and we’ve got 

100,000 lakes up there, he could fish from now to eternity and 

never touch them all. They go to the shows where our outfitters 

are, thanks to our government. Because it’s a cost-sharing 

arrangement, the outfitters go, the government pays a little bit, we 

promote the North. They pay $2,500 for three or four days of 

fishing from Los Angeles to the North — $2,500. Are you telling 

me that a $7 permit is going to bother those American friends of 

ours? You’re living in the past. You’re living in the past. 

 

The other day, Mr. Speaker. . .But they are getting better, I have 

to admit that. The member did acknowledge that tourism is a 

collection of small businesses. It took us five years to get them to 

know that, but they’re finally recognizing that. 

 

And I have to again refer to the member from Riversdale 

speaking about small businesses the other day. Almost made a 

mockery out of this place when he was saying and he was laying 

claim due to the fact of all the support that he had. I suppose that 

the member from Riversdale, you know, has illusions of moving 

up in this world on the political spectrum, and as such, he’s got to 

get the small-business community behind him. 

 

But I can tell you, sir, that as you go through for your leadership, 

if you don’t get the support of your back  

bench from that business community, you’re going to be sadly 

mistaken because they’re taking you for a ride the same way that 

they are the business community that’s out there. They don’t 

understand. They’re fighting with their chambers of commerce 

and everything. You should really sort that out if you want to 

move along. 

 

I have to admit, Mr. Speaker, that I’m extremely proud to be a 

small part of Grant Devine’s team, or the Premier of our 

province, his team — his leadership, and his vision for this 

province, of building. You know we all know that he is a builder. 

He sees the opportunities that exist in this province in 

diversifying our economy, and certainly as it relates — I’ll get 

back to the motion — as it relates to tourism. He recognizes that 

the tourism and the inflow dollars that come in — we do a billion 

dollars a year of the tourism industry now, roughly — and he 

recognizes that from the tax dollars that come from that one 

particular industry, 32,000 people employed in it, those tax 

dollars, that’s how we can put together our other programs in 

government, Mr. Speaker, protecting our people. 

 

And that’s why we go through this budget process and try to get 

the expenditures to balance with our income, our record, new 

business, investment opportunities. You can look around as we 

try to improve the provincial parks that are in existence. Certainly 

they’re their for our people to use . . . (inaudible interjection). . . 

 

Now the member speaking from his chair says, sell them, sell 

them, you know — mockery. No, we don’t want to. We want to 

provide in those provincial parks what the people want. Don’t 

you understand that? We recognize, Mr. Speaker, that some of 

our provincial parks have to remain in the wilderness. People 

want that. We don’t propose to put a McDonald’s in every park. 

We never said we were going to. But certainly in areas of parks 

that are well utilized, like in Kenosee, that water slide is a 

welcome addition to every body in the area. 

 

And don’t think for a moment that our good friends in the United 

States, just an hour south, don’t really appreciate having the 

opportunity to come into Saskatchewan, spend some more of 

these American 20’s as they enjoy the water slides. It only makes 

eminent sense. 

 

And when we look at privatizing our parks, all we’re trying to do 

is put in there various items for the small-business private sector 

that the people of this province are truly going to enjoy. And I 

can honestly tell you this, but in your rapport and as you go 

wrong, you people are famous for dragging out these letters and 

saying, I’ve got a letter here that says . . . Well you haven’t 

brought up one yet that says that you’ve got a letter that says that 

somebody doesn’t like some of the privatization that occurs. I’ve 

probably given you an idea. You’ll have one of your friends write 

one. But I can tell you that is not true. The people enjoy very 

much exactly what we’ve been putting into the parks. 

 

Along with that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have to tell you how it 

affects our economy. It creates thousands and thousands of jobs, 

this diversification in the tourism industry. Provides, more 

importantly, to me as well, Mr. Speaker, a special quality of life 

for our urban dwellers. They don’t have to particularly leave 

Saskatchewan now  



 

July 14, 1987 

1173 

 

and go into the United States of America, or into a neighbouring 

province to see what’s there. They can travel our own province. 

We’ve got an awful lot to offer in this great province of ours, and 

now as our urban people, people that I represent in Regina South, 

want to enjoy a little bit more about the summer, they’ve got all 

these glorious parks to go to. 

 

And if they’re used to watching television, and if they’re used to 

playing a little bit of miniature golf or whatever, these things are 

available to them now. The parks have been modernized and 

updated, and all these things are available for their use. And don’t 

think for a moment that they don’t understand that somebody had 

to put them in. They’ve got to be paid for; the small fees that have 

gone up. They don’t have a particular problem with paying an 

increase in fees. 

 

Now as we mentioned a little bit earlier, and I’ll just quit talking 

about the parks for a moment, Mr. Speaker. I would like to talk 

for a moment about Expo because one of the members opposite 

speaking from his seat was saying, oh yeah, you know, you’re 

taking all of the people out of Saskatchewan. Expo. Certainly 

there was a lot of our residents from the province, from 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, was extremely proud of our presence 

in Expo, and went to visit our pavilion. And they went there and 

visited with pride and said, yes, this represents Saskatchewan. 

 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, and where the NDP always 

miss out, is the fact that Expo put Saskatchewan on the global 

map. And for the first time we took Saskatchewan to the doorstep 

of the entire world, and we displayed it to everybody from around 

the world for 165 glorious days. And we displayed our 

outstanding accomplishments, that again we dealt with in pride, 

Mr. Speaker. And Expo turned out to be one of the most 

successful world expositions ever. And our motto “A presence to 

be proud of,” we couldn’t be more pleased to participate in that. 

 

Obviously the members that spoke from their seat earlier had the 

same attitude as the NDP government in Manitoba. Saskatchewan 

was the very first province to sign up a deal with Expo, Mr. 

Speaker, the very first. So, right off the bat, we understood and 

recognized the importance and the vehicle that Expo would be in 

promoting Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan-made products, 

Saskatchewan to the world. 

 

But yet, the NDP government in Manitoba, no, they stayed away 

from it. They didn’t want anything to do with it. I’m sure that 

they lived to regret it after it was all over, but none the less, 

hindsight and keeping their head in the ground . . . 2.8 million 

people visited the Saskatchewan pavilion, Mr. Speaker — 2.8 

million — in 165 days. And in addition to those, millions and 

millions of people enjoyed the exhibitory from the exterior. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sure helped our economy, didn’t it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — There he goes, speaking from his seat again. 

He’s back; I can hear him. He still doesn’t understand how it 

helps our economy, Mr. Speaker. Well, if you would have. . .I’ve 

explained how it helped  

our economy. If you would have been here a few minutes earlier 

you would have heard it. 

 

But the outdoor exhibitory, Mr. Speaker, was unique to all of the 

pavilions at the Expo site. And we had sports kiosks available for 

all the members to see. We had J.I. Case displays. We had the 

Western Development Museum’s steam calliope. And we had the 

stylized elevator itself, with the elevator going up and down, and 

the imaginary potash mine, and the like. It was a most enjoyable 

experience. 

 

The Saskatchewan artists . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 

another member speaking from his seat. It appears, Mr. Speaker, 

whenever I get going on a topic that I seem to exuberate a little, 

or get a little excited about, the members opposite just seem to 

kind of jump up and holler instead of getting into the debate. But 

never mind. I’ve got a good strong voice that my little Polish 

mother blessed me with, and I can out-yell those people. 

 

(1630) 

 

But the Saskatchewan artists, Mr. Speaker. You might remember 

when we had our Saskatchewan talent shows around this 

province, and all of the entertainers from around the province 

tried out to be a part of that team that went to Expo. You talk to 

those young people. You tell those young people that Expo didn’t 

mean anything to them. Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, they were 

the most excited young people in our province, and as they 

qualified to star in our show, boy, they couldn’t have been more 

pleased. 

 

It opened new horizons to these young people. Some of them had 

visions of going on to be professional entertainers, and perhaps 

with the experience they gained at Expo, their life-style will 

change because that opportunity was there for them. And not only 

that, Mr. Speaker, we again proved that Saskatchewan could 

provide world class entertainment right from our own backyard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Our Harvest Restaurant, now a legend, a 

five-star rating when the maximum was four. How can you beat 

that? And do you know how it was put together? It was put 

together by a successful local restaurateur in this province who 

designed the menu, who set up the place, and we set it up, and 

there it was. 

 

Do you know what it was designed after, Mr. Speaker? 

Something that all of us in Saskatchewan are so proud of — our 

heritage, the ordinary fowl supper. And that’s what our Harvest 

Restaurant was. And again, line-ups and queues that were 

amazing. And why? Because we just simply showed to the rest of 

the world what we can do. 

 

Saskatchewan Day. What a magnificent display co-ordinated by 

two chairmen, one from Regina and one from Saskatoon, and it 

was a tremendous show. Again showing the world class — 

first-class people that we have available here in Saskatchewan 

that can put on exhibitory and displays second to none from 

anybody in the world. A presence to be proud of. Mr. Speaker, I 

can’t even begin  



 

July 14, 1987 

1174 

 

to tell you, in the short time that I have available to me, what this 

presence did for the tourism industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And while this was going on at home, things that the NDP never 

in their wildest dreams would have imagined could be done or 

would like to do. For the first time ever, promoting Saskatchewan 

outside of the province. Can you imagine that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, anything as unheard of as promoting Saskatchewan 

to the rest of Canada and to our American friends? The first time 

in history that was done. I guess they didn’t like these $20 U.S. 

bills coming into our province — lots of them. Well we went 

after them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And do you know what we found when we advertised 

Saskatchewan to our American friends? For the first time they 

realized that Saskatchewan was there and wondered what it was 

. . . and it wasn’t that we had a poor image, Mr. Speaker, it was 

that we had no image. They didn’t know anything about us. 

 

And when you consider the advantage that they have with the 

American dollar over the Canadian dollar, they’re getting quite a 

bargain. 

 

We worked with our local outfitters, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned 

earlier, as we took trade shows, and we went to Denver. We 

participated with hoteliers, outfitters, and the like, again to attract 

tourists into Saskatchewan. And we did it very successfully. And 

they were competing with some of the largest outfitting 

companies in the world. Because tourism, after all, is a pretty 

competitive business. 

 

And yes, we entered the big leagues of this tough competitive 

business. And when we were at the sales missions, it was difficult 

to compete with outfitters from Michigan, with outfitters from 

Ontario, those that had been established for a long time — and 

we’re trying to crack that market for the first time. But as they 

discovered more and more and more about our province and what 

we had to offer, they were certainly interested in giving us a try. 

 

Sunspirit — the first new film that was produced on 

Saskatchewan in a decade — just an overwhelming, outstanding 

success. Sunspirit now sits in movie libraries around the world, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s available to Americans, it’s available to Asians, 

it’s available to Europeans — on a moment’s notice. The winner 

of more than several awards in the short while that we promoted 

it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And it was made by local 

film-makers, certainly. So, you know, speaking from your chair 

again. And I remember . . . It’s unfortunate that the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana speaks from her chair. 

 

I remember when we showed Sunspirit, Saskatchewan in 

Saskatoon for the first time, we had a special showing before it 

was public. And again, none of the members opposite took the 

time to come to it, not one. And yet it was available to them. And 

not one showed up. Now that goes to show you, Mr. Speaker . . . 

And then they stand up sanctimoniously in this House and dare to 

say that we  

don’t want to promote tourism, or don’t know how to promote 

tourism, or that our programs are failing. 

 

And that’s why I’m on the topic that I am, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

talking about the programs that have done their job. And wait 

until we get into our new programs and they find out what we’re 

doing with tourism. They won’t believe what’s going to happen. 

You won’t recognize your province in tourism in four or five 

years from now, because you don’t recognize what’s happened so 

far. And I’m ashamed of you to say that. 

 

Our TMAP (Tourism Marketing Assistance Program) program, 

another program that helped our little communities to encourage 

visitors to come to their local areas. And all it was, simply, was 

working together with the small business community, with the 

private sector, with the non-profit organizations and the 

exhibition boards, and just put in equal dollars so now they can 

start promoting their own places and say that we’ve got the best 

exhibition or the best rodeo or the best whatever they’ve got. 

 

And get people going, not only from the States . . . Sure we’re 

number one, and you say that in mockery. And that’s what I’m 

telling you. The member from Nutana says, you’re number one, 

you’re number one. Yes, we are number one! And why don’t we 

promote Saskatchewan and be proud of it, instead of sitting there 

and being ashamed of it. I am not ashamed of my province. I 

want to show it to the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Visitor information centres, Mr. Speaker. 

The NDP wouldn’t build them. We did. We’ve got them at our 

major ports of entry now into this province, so that as our visitors 

come . . . First of all, they’re welcomed to our province by good, 

friendly staff, and they’re told about all kinds of attractions in 

various places to visit in our province — try to encourage them to 

stay for an overnight, spend a few more dollars — very important 

to us. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I think back of the years that I spent at 

the amusement park. I received no help from the government of 

the day. Not a penny. So I just gave up on them. They . . . 

Because, why? They didn’t accept tourism for what it was. They 

didn’t recognize tourism. They didn’t know how to put any 

programs together. And yet I used to have over 100,000 visitors a 

year to my amusement park, all done by my own promotion. And 

if I wanted to drag in some Americans, I had to do it alone. No 

. . .They said no, we do ours provincially here. Everything we got 

is for the people. We don’t want any outsiders coming into the 

province. 

 

Well I beg to differ. Then they didn’t want to move them around 

the province anyhow. They just wanted them to go to their own 

little neck of the woods, but thank God that’s all finished now. 

 

But continuing development from our government, with strong 

support from our government, Mr. Speaker. . .I had the occasion 

to go to the Moose Jaw air show on Sunday. Well I’m proud to 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, that one  



 

July 14, 1987 

1175 

 

member opposite did show. The member from Moose Jaw North, 

or South, I’m sorry . . . who is probably in his seat. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And North. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, if the member from Moose Jaw North 

was there, I didn’t see him, and I don’t know how I could have 

missed him. But none the less, I did. But it was nice to see that 

they were there. 

 

And what a glorious show that the base commander, George 

Miller, and his staff put on. And again, one of the highlights of 

the show, along with the military, of course, was the civilian 

aircraft, and our friends from Minot, the Pietch family. And I’ll 

tell you what, Mr. Speaker — not only did they come and 

contribute to that air show, but there would have been thousands 

of Americans, I would guess from that area, that came up to 

watch their local boys perform. And they did a heck of a job. 

 

We estimate right now — and the numbers; we’re still working 

on the numbers — that on Sunday there was in excess of 40,000 

visitors for the air show, and that there could be as many as 

50,000. Now, they’re going to be working on that now. The 

Saturday before there was up to about 20,000. And I understand 

that that’s not counting the kids, because there was turnstile 

problems. There was tremendous crowds, Mr. Speaker, and it was 

a tremendous show. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How about Craven this weekend? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Now . . . that’s right. In my remarks earlier, I 

had mentioned that this is amazing in this little province of ours 

— how the NDP could never see all this movement. In Craven 

now, in a couple of weeks time, we’re going to have 50,000 

people a day, or more, going to Craven, Saskatchewan. Can you 

imagine — 50,000 a day going to a community of about 200. 

Probably unimaginable for the members opposite. 

 

But in any event, there again, and it’s only because of the climate 

that this government is providing to get those things off and 

running and provide those to the visitors coming in, not only our 

American friends, but certainly out of province. 

 

I can tell you that as you drive around the streets and you see our 

visitors from Manitoba, see our visitors from Alberta coming into 

this province . . . They’re coming from all over. And B.C., 

who’ve got all the mountains — they’re coming to 

Saskatchewan. There’s something, I guess, unique about the 

Saskatchewan sunset — they really don’t need a mountain in the 

way to shut it off; they just kind of . . . But, none the less, they 

come. 

 

And others all around the province. There’s other things. In 

Regina, I can speak for a moment on Mosaic. You talk, Mr. 

Speaker, about a tourism item. Mosaic — where we proudly 

display our heritage, whether we’re Polish or Ukrainian or French 

or German, Chinese, whatever. Mosaic displays all of this to the 

whole country that’s interested in coming to see it. They have 

their foods; they tell you the story of their tradition; they have 

their own traditional dress, and they provide the entertainment —  

just a magnificent tourism attraction. 

 

And as we travel around in various areas of our province and, 

depending on the smaller communities that you go to, we all 

recognize how proud Saskatchewan is of our heritage and of our 

culture. Well, what better tourism attraction is here than 

ourselves? We know that we’re the most hospitable people in the 

whole world. We know that we want to bring the people in to 

visit us. We’re proud of our culture. We’re proud of our native 

culture, for instance. And that’s another one that I . . . But in 

Mosaic there was 23 — I can’t remember all of them — but all of 

these cultures and all of these various people getting together. 

 

The Regina Agribition, along with the exhibition, the Saskatoon 

Exhibition, these are the things that attract people again, Mr. 

Speaker. The Agribition. People from around the world come in 

and visit the Regina Agribition. This legislature . . . and I’ve 

noticed some people entering the gallery now, probably tourists. 

Welcome to Saskatchewan if you’re from out of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, tourism is at its best. And this 

is what the government does to encourage our visitors to come 

into our province and enjoy themselves and have a good time 

while they’re here. 

 

Up in Prince Albert, founders day; Nipawin, the pike festival. All 

kinds of people going to the pike festival. That’s a summer-long 

attraction in Nipawin. 

 

You can say, well then, that’s fine; what do you do in the 

winter-time? We’ve got long, tough winters. Well I could talk 

forever I suppose, on winter festivals — the king trapper. Prince 

Albert has an excellent winter festival; I don’t know if the 

members from there are aware of that. La Ronge. Meadow Lake. 

 

Along with these attractions, Mr. Speaker, throughout the 

province we have hockey tournaments; we have ringette 

tournaments; we’ve got bonspiels. Now that’s all tourism, and 

that’s all designed to intermingle our communities. We invite the 

people from Nipawin down to Moose Jaw for the bonspiel, or the 

people from Prince Albert to come to Regina, or whatever they 

like. 

 

We invite people from the South to go up North to see some of 

these king trapper events. They’re outstanding, There’s nothing to 

be ashamed of. And when you see some of these men, Mr. 

Speaker, that go for the king trapper, that can chop through a 

12-inch log in about 8 seconds, it’s amazing, and it’s all 

interesting, and it all puts money into our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one thing that we’re starting to concentrate on now 

are conventions. I believe that I could keep talking about 

conventions for an awful long time, but it’s fair to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — How much money are you bringing into 

the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — You’re not aware? The leader of the  



 

July 14, 1987 

1176 

 

opposition House says that he’s not aware of the convention 

dollars. Well, the convention dollars that come into this province, 

Mr. Speaker, are overwhelming. And as our large cities fill up . . . 

Here’s the beauty of the conventions. As our large cities, which 

are now presently attracting conventions from all across the 

country, are filling up our hotels from the major cities, then our 

secondary cities can qualify for the smaller conventions. And as 

they fill up, then our little towns can provide the much needed 

facilities for smaller conventions. And like it’s got a big 

repercussion that the members opposite won’t really understand. 

 

But none the less, Mr. Speaker, I see now that it is 4:45 and I 

know that our House leader has something that he would like to 

get done, so at this time I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1645) 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 

 

At 4:46 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to 

the following Bill: 

 

Bill No. 11 — An act to amend the Farm Security Act 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 4:47 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:49 p.m. 



 

July 14, 1987 

1177 

 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

In the Hansard of July 10, 1987, under the heading of 

introduction of Guests by Hon. Mr. Maxwell on page 1091, part 

of the greeting should read as follows: 

 

C’est un plaisir pour moi, au nom du premier ministre et du 

gouvernement, de vous accueiller ici aujourd’hui. Et, Monsieur le 

président, puis-je dire que j’aime beaucoup l’accord Meech Lake. 

 

We apologize for the error. 

 

[NOTE: The online Hansard has been corrected.] 

 


