













































September 28, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 28, 1987 

 

2877 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Free Trade Negotiations 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier, and it has to do with the free trade 

talks and, in particular, with the announcement in today’s 

papers and media that there is an attempt to return to the talks 

by virtue of the appearance in the United States by the Hon. Pat 

Carney and the Hon. Michael Wilson. 

 

Mr. Premier, as you know, the Prime Minister has indicated that 

there would be no return after the announced suspension of last 

week unless and until the Americans made significant 

concessions. Would you be kind enough to advise the House, 

sir, what kinds of concessions the United States has made in 

order to justify the resumption of these negotiations at this 

stage? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as far as I know, there are 

no negotiations. Nobody’s back to the table; no formal 

negotiations, but cabinet ministers are speaking to cabinet 

ministers on both sides of the border. So they are examining the 

possibility of whether it’s worth going back to the table in a 

formal way. 

 

The President of the United States knows our bottom line with 

respect to several points. The most important would be the 

whole question of subsidies and a trade dispute settlement 

mechanism. I’m sure, as my hon. friend knows, that the 

Americans are doing some real soul-searching these days in 

public — as usual for Americans. And it’s not easy for them; 

it’s not an easy topic to negotiate to a final settlement. 

 

But as far as I know, nobody’s at the table; that there’s cabinet 

ministers talking to cabinet ministers exploring the possibilities 

that may be there. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. I would 

agree with respect to the Premier’s observation that the 

negotiations have not been resumed in the sense of Mr. 

Reisman and Mr. Murphy, but I would submit to the Hon. 

Premier that there is a resumption of discussions, if not 

negotiation, by virtue of the cabinet ministers’ contacts. 

 

And my question to you, sir, is this: why is it, from your 

communications with the Prime Minister, that Canada is taking 

the initiative to get back at these negotiations when Canada has 

already, seemingly, at least by my judgement, given up so much 

in advance in the negotiations? Why is it that Canada is in the 

United States pleading the United States for the resumption, 

when in fact the reverse is what the Prime Minister indicated 

would be the position before there was an resumption? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — With all respect, you have it backwards. 

The United States knows that we pulled away from the table, 

and the United States is asking us what might get the 

negotiations going, and they’re talking to cabinet ministers, 

both by telephone and in person. And as well, I believe that 

there are monetary meetings that are going on in Washington 

that involve six or seven countries, and the Minister of Finance, 

as I understand it, has been there as a result of those. And 

there’s certainly nothing wrong with cabinet ministers talking to 

cabinet ministers about the whole process. 

 

Now I understand that you’re against the whole concept of trade 

with the United States and the free trade negotiations. You’ve 

said so. You’ve even introduced a resolution here, but I don’t 

want you to take that stand and confuse it with reality in terms 

of what’s going on between the two countries. The negotiations 

are important. I know the NDP would not have initiated them. 

They revel in the joys of protectionism. And I . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 

These questions have been offered to the Premier in the spirit of 

actually getting some information and answers to the questions 

which have been put. And with the greatest of respect, I think 

rhetoric doesn’t help the dialogue any. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Premier, is this. It is the Canadian 

ministers who are in the United States; it is the Canadian 

government that is pushing for the resumption, by all of the 

public information that we have. In view of the fact that you are 

in consultation with the Prime Minister and are Mr. Mulroney’s 

biggest booster of these free trade negotiations, will the Premier 

advise whether or not there is an agreement to push back the 

deadline that the Congress has set in the United States for a 

deal, namely October 5; and if so, whether or not the Prime 

Minister has advised you what further concessions the Canadian 

government is prepared to make in what I would say is their 

indecent haste to get the Americans to resume the discussions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in all respect to the 

hon. member, the public of Canada needs to know quite clearly 

what the NDP position is on trade. I think that’s fair, to know 

what your position is. I mean, you’re an opposition member; 

you’re sitting in the legislature; the same applies across Canada. 

That’s only fair to know what their position is. So I stated the 

position; if it’s different than that, then I’m sure that you could 

make it clear. 

 

Secondly, with respect to the negotiations that are going on: 

Canadians pulled back from the negotiations and said, here’s 

the bottom line. Americans have been responding since that 

time. I don’t know whether there will ever be negotiations, 

formal negotiations, again. But  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2878 

 

Americans are taking another hard look at what the bottom line 

is, and I don’t think it’s anything that Canadians would have to 

do; it’s what Americans will have to do to decide. 

 

If I could, Mr. Speaker, if you recall the words of Senator 

Bentsen, who is head of the finance committee in the Senate — 

a lot to do with the trade stuff — said something to the effect: 

well how can we cut a deal with Canada when we trade with 

people all over the world and we’d have to have the same 

arrangement. 

 

Well it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, what Americans have to 

decide is if they want an example for the rest of the world. And 

that’s what Senator Bentsen has to come to in his heart of heart 

and his soul to decide: do they want to show the rest of the 

world precisely that. Here is how you should trade, with less 

tariffs and less subsidies and a new mechanism. That’s the 

question Americans have to decide, and there’s really nothing 

else that is on their mind except their own political analysis and 

temperament these days, and that’s what we’re watching. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 

Premier. The facts are that the Prime Minister has said that 

there will be no resumption of negotiations — I will use the 

word “discussions”; I think they’re in the same category — 

unless there are concessions made by the Americans in the light 

of Mr. Reisman’s walkout of a few days ago. 

 

The Premier today says that it is the Americans who are seeking 

to have the talks resumed. My question to you is very simple. 

That being the case, in the light of the dictum of the Prime 

Minister that the Americans must be making concessions, what 

has the Prime Minister told you about what concessions they 

are making? Or is it the fact that we continue to make 

concessions to the Americans and put all of our trading eggs in 

one basket to the detriment of Canada? Is that the situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, again with all respect, the 

opposition member has it backwards. And I’ll just lay it very 

clearly: we said, here is the bottom line. They didn’t say that. 

Let’s get the facts straight. We said, here’s the bottom line; 

either live up to these expectations or it’s done. And we said 

that very clearly. We said, there’s no more to even talk about 

until you can live up to at least this. Now Americans are 

reviewing that, Mr. Speaker, seeing if they can live up to that. 

 

And let’s make very clear: there’s a difference between 

negotiations and discussions. So I won’t let you off the hook on 

that one. There are no formal negotiations going on; we closed 

them down. Americans are talking to us to find out whether 

they might be able to have negotiations opened again. And 

we’re saying, without a relook at trade-remedy law, there isn’t 

any point. 

 

So they are reviewing that, reviewing their own political 

problems in the United States, whether they’re going to be free 

traders or protectionist. They have to resolve that  

themselves, internally, and if they can bring a solution to the 

table that fits ours, then there’s a possibility we could have 

negotiations started again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 

I’m having a little difficulty understanding exactly how it is that 

the Canadian minister in charge of the free trade negotiations, 

the Hon. Pat Carney, is in Washington, presumably discussing, 

but not negotiating. It is correct that she may not be negotiating 

the details of a free trade deal, but would you not agree with 

me, Mr. Premier, that what she is doing there is negotiating how 

those free trade talks can get back on the rails? 

 

And that seems to be precisely contrary to what the Prime 

Minister and you have assured the people of Canada, namely 

that it wouldn’t be our ministers taking the initiative, it would 

be the American ministers taking the initiative. And I want to 

know: what is it that we’re giving up some more in order to get 

these talks resumed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can only reiterate to the 

hon. member what I’ve already said and what the facts are. The 

Americans are reviewing the negotiating mechanism because 

we decided to close it down. And they are talking to cabinet 

ministers, and the message that’s going back to their cabinet 

ministers, Mr. Speaker, is the very same thing that the Prime 

Minister said: we have a bottom line, and if you’re not prepared 

to deal with that bottom line, then there’s no point in even 

thinking about coming back to the table. And that’s precisely 

what’s going on. 

 

And I may make the final point, Mr. Speaker. It is in the best 

interest of both countries to have a new trade arrangement that 

would be fairly designed for both sides. That’s the objective, 

and I believe it’s extremely important. If the two largest trading 

countries in the world could have a satisfactory — mutually 

satisfactory arrangement in trade — we wouldn’t be into the 

potash problems we have today or the hog problems or the steel 

problems or many others that affect people at IPSCO, affect 

people at Intercontinental Packers, affect our oil and gas 

industry, affect our uranium industry. Thousands and tens of 

thousands of jobs across the country could be secure knowing 

you have access to each other’s markets. That’s what it’s for. 

 

Now some political parties wouldn’t even try, and we know 

you’re one of them, but that’s fair ball. We have tried, and I 

believe history will report, Mr. Speaker, whether this works or 

not, that at least somebody had the courage to try to make it 

better and not leave their head stuck in the sand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the 

Premier. Based upon the information you have received from 

the Prime Minister and from his officials and colleagues at 

Ottawa, would it be your judgement that Canada, in the last 48 

hours, has begun the process of  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2879 

 

abandoning what was our number one priority, our essential 

requirement of an impartial, binding way of settling disputes? 

Would you say that that’s what’s going on in the last 48 hours? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to watch. 

The opposition has finally figured out there’s trade negotiations 

going on. I mean, they wouldn’t ask a question about it for 

months and months . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll say. Let 

me reiterate for the two members sitting there opposite. 

 

The negotiations broke down because Canadians and 

Americans were not coming to the table. They’ve laid out 

clearly what has to be there by Americans to make it 

worthwhile for Canadians, or we’ll just take them on, as 

miserable as they are, under the protectionist mood that they’re 

in. Now they, presumably, were a little bit surprised that we 

would finally pull back and say, that’s it, no sense talking. So 

they’re re-examining their whole approach and they’re talking 

cabinet ministers to cabinet ministers. 

 

Now it may not come to pass — and if Americans can’t pull 

together the courage to deal with a partner, their best trading 

partner, and a $200 billion a year potential two-way trade 

future, if they can’t resolve that, then they’ll go down in history 

as the people that wouldn’t come to the table. Because we’ve 

said, here is the bottom line and here are the things that we have 

to have, because there’s no sense signing a deal and have the 

same rules we have today — clearly. So they are trying to 

decide internally in the United States whether, in fact, they 

really do have the courage to face Canadians eyeball to eyeball 

and trade fairly back and forth with a mutually designed set of 

rules, new rules. 

 

They are trying to do that, Mr. Speaker. We’re watching them 

in their agony going through this. And if they come to the 

appropriate place where they say, yes, I can deal with that, then 

we’ll be negotiating . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, and this will be a short 

and simple question. So far as you’re aware, Mr. Premier, is it 

part of the Canadian bottom-line position that there be not a 

new set of dispute-resolution mechanism — not a mutually 

designed one; however many euphemisms may be used for a 

back-off — but what Mr. Mulroney has consistently said, an 

impartial binding way of settling disputes. Is that still part of the 

position, or are we now hearing mutually designed ones and 

other euphemisms for a back-off? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, Friday in the House I 

passed to the opposition the five fundamental elements of the 

Canadian position. And I can read the last one which clearly 

lays it out, and you have it; so I’ll just make a point. 

 

Finally, the rules governing the disciplines apply to fair and 

unfair trade, i.e., subsidies and countervailing duties, dumping 

and anti-dumping duties, import surges, and safeguard actions, 

and other trade remedies must be spelled out in the agreement 

in the clearest possible terms. And the application of these rules 

must, in the event of unresolved disagreement between the 

parties, be subject to impartial, bi-national, and definitive 

resolution. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s about as clear as you can cover, and 

the hon. member has it. They go on to talk about four others 

linked to agriculture and several other things, but the opposition 

has that, Mr. Speaker, and it lays out as clearly as you can what 

the bottom line is. And so the Americans are reviewing this to 

find out whether, in fact, they have the courage to meet these 

rules and fundamental elements laid down by Canadians. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I think no country would have very much difficulty 

dealing with a dispute resolution mechanism which was 

impartial, bi-national, and definitive but not binding. And it is 

the word “binding” that I want you to say yes or no as to 

whether or not that’s the position of the Government of Canada 

as far as you’re aware. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I mean, see . . . I don’t . . . what sure the 

textbook definition of definitive is, but to me it sounds fairly 

final. Okay, definitive is final — definitive resolution. Mr. 

Speaker, let’s just make it very, very clear. These people are 

asking about this mechanism: one, they . . . knowing that they 

wouldn’t even try it, and secondly, the major question, if I 

could point it out, Mr. Speaker, is the question of their fear of 

American investment. American investment, that’s what their 

fear is. Americans might invest here. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me just point out from a Saskatchewan 

point of view: if Saskatchewan people could just have the same 

amount, Mr. Speaker, the same amount of American investment 

that Mr. Broadbent has in his riding, Mr. Speaker, I promise 

Ontario people we won’t take any more for at least 20 years 

after that. If we can just have the same amount of American 

investment that the NDP will let Ontario have but won’t stand 

in this legislature . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Overcrowding at Saskatoon Correctional Centre 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Minister of Justice, and it concerns the Saskatoon 

Correctional Centre. That’s an overcrowded facility, Mr. 

Speaker, and the minister knows that. It was built for 132 

inmates and it has frequently up to 270 inmates located in it — 

more than twice its rated capacity. And people are sleeping in 

class-rooms, and in the gymnasium, and in rec rooms. 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2880 

 

The correctional workers went public last week, Mr. Minister, 

and through press releases and through a demonstration tried to 

publicize this overcrowding and their staff shortages and the 

security risks that result to the people who work there, and 

indeed to the general public. 

 

Now my question to you is: do you agree with the argument; do 

you recognize the argument that this kind of overcrowding 

presents a serious security risk, not only to the prison guards 

working inside those institutions, but indeed to the general 

public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think the hon. member in directing his 

question tried to leave the impression that the facility could 

only handle 132 people. And I think he knows full well that 

since the construction time that there has been significant 

modifications in order to accommodate many more prisoners 

than the original plans for 132. We dealt with that in estimates. 

 

With regards to the SGEU demonstrations last week in 

Saskatoon, I think the basis and the underlying purpose of the 

demonstrations was to indicate somehow that — and as you 

know it’s been an ongoing thing — these particular facilities are 

not safe for the employee. 

 

To a degree they tend to want to superimpose standards for all 

government employees for those working in correction centres. 

And I think that it’s only reasonable to suggest somehow that 

the person working in the correction centre is going to face 

perhaps more potential danger than someone working in a day 

care centre, or someone working in an office building. That’s 

clearly a fact. 

 

Clearly what we want to do is ensure the safety of the people, of 

the guards working at those particular institutions. That has 

been a problem throughout this country for a long period of 

time, and I would suggest that the facilities in Saskatchewan are 

— while you have to judge it by a standard — are as safe as 

institutions in any other place in this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, following from 

that answer. My information is that your department has failed 

to fill a number of positions in the Saskatoon correctional 

facility, and these are correction worker positions. And indeed, 

it seems clear that further staff cuts are being planned. 

 

Now in light of this overcrowding that you must know has 

taken place, is taking place very day, and in this time of high 

unemployment, why not give work to some of the unemployed 

people in Saskatchewan by training them to do the work of a 

correction centre, and get a decent number of correction 

workers in there to look after this very large number of 

prisoners? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think it would be unfair to  

say, as you do, that there’s going to be in fact further lay-offs in 

correction workers in the province of Saskatchewan, because 

the hon. member knows that in fact facilities or . . . for the 

particular facilities are going to be expanded with the further 

construction in Regina and further development across the 

province. 

 

So I suppose when you come down to it you could say, well, 

should we have twice as many guards in our correction centres 

as we have today. And that you have to, as you full well know, 

perhaps trade off with . . . if you’re going to spend more and 

more dollars in the correction area or in the justice area, and the 

Justice budget is increasing some 17 per cent this year, then we 

all know that that has to come from some place. 

 

Do you take it away from Health? Do you take it away from 

Social Services? Do you take it away from the farmers? So I 

think that on the whole, the correction workers and the budget 

for corrections has in fact been as good as any other budget in 

the sense that they have as much or more than they had last 

year. And I think all people in society have to, given the trouble 

in agriculture . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I think the 

minister has made his point. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. No matter how 

you say it, Mr. Minister, you come down to the plain, simple 

fact that you got twice as many prisoners there as you should 

have, and you’re trying to do that work with the same number 

of correctional guards. 

 

Let’s put it this way: in light of the fact that you and the 

correction workers are at odds about what is the situation out 

there, would you at least agree to deal directly with them and 

not just stand here and try and rationalize the problem away? 

Will you agree to meet with these people, sit down, discuss 

their concerns, and attempt to hammer out some kind of an 

agreement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well as the hon. member knows that 

they are a group within SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 

Employees’ Union), and as the member also further knows that 

SGEU is negotiating with regard to salary, etc., with the 

provincial government . . . And I would hope that the hon. 

member is not somehow suggesting that I should go deal with a 

particular little group to negotiate what they want to see with 

regard to their contract in this particular year. That clearly, I 

would think, would be an improper way to go. 

 

There is negotiations going on between Mr. Thompson, a 

long-time civil servant in this province, worked for your 

government as well as ours, and that negotiation is continuing, 

and I think that’s the proper way by which negotiations should 

be conducted. They’ve been conducted for a long time that way, 

and they should continue to be conducted that way. 

 

Federal Government to Monitor Legal Aid Fees 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2881 

 

Minister of Social Services, and it has to do with the federal 

government’s announcement that it intends to monitor the 

introduction of legal aid fees in Saskatchewan to protect the 

right of poor people to their right to counsel in this province. 

 

And I ask, Mr. Minister, if you can confirm that, in spite of the 

fact that legal aid is a cost-shared program funded almost 

equally by the federal government and by the Government of 

Saskatchewan, that as a matter of fact you failed to consult with 

the federal government before introducing your unfair legal aid 

fees. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not so sure that was a 

question at all. However, I’m pleased to see the federal 

government is monitoring legal aid, and I would hope that if 

they think more money should be spent, that the federal 

government will agree to pay more money. 

 

In the meantime we are providing a fair and adequate service to 

the poor and to those people who can’t afford to pay the full 

fare for legal aid. And some people are paying a little towards 

their legal aid, and that seems fair. And we will have to see how 

it goes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

Ms. Simard: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I have 

another 339 signatures to file here to add to the 1,300 that have 

already been filed. And they aren’t formal petitions, Mr. 

Speaker, but they’re documentations that say, and I’ll just read 

from the top one. There are a number of them, but I’ll read from 

the top. It says: 

 

We, the undersigned, request retaining (and it names the 

pharmacy) as a collection agent for Sask Power utility 

bills. 

 

And that’s what these pertain to. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $289,033,400 be 

granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 

ending March 31, 1988. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to 

make a few remarks on this interim supply Bill. I draw it to 

your attention first of all, Mr. Chairman, that this is the fourth 

interim supply Bill in this session. That is the first time, as far 

as I’m able to determine, that a legislature in Saskatchewan has 

had to pass four interim supply Bills  

because of the lack of a budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that that tells us something, and it tells the 

public of Saskatchewan something. It tells the public of 

Saskatchewan how badly this government has mismanaged and 

how unable and incapable this government has been in getting 

its house in order so that the affairs of the people of this 

province can be handled adequately and in terms of the kind of 

efficiency that the public in Saskatchewan has grown to expect. 

 

As I have said on previous resolutions of this motion, there 

obviously is a recognition that an interim supply Bill is 

something that has to be passed. In order for the bills to be paid 

and in order for people’s wages to be paid who work for the 

Government of Saskatchewan, an interim supply Bill is 

required. But I want to say without any uncertainty, Mr. 

Chairman, that it is becoming increasingly more difficult for the 

members of the opposition to deal with this kind of a motion. 

And although we feel we have to pass it, we are growing 

increasingly more reluctant to do so every day. 

 

And the reason for that, Mr. Chairman, is that every day, almost 

without fail, there is information showing how badly this 

government has mismanaged the money that it is supplied. 

Almost on a daily basis there is wasteful expenditures; there is 

patronage at previously unknown levels; there is political 

advertising; for example, in September of 1986 for one single 

month, for one program called the home program, which cost 

$250,000 in that month. 

 

Now surely, Mr. Chairman, that is unacceptable. And that is an 

example of the grossest type of wastage of taxpayers’ money — 

$250,000 in one month to advertise one program because the 

government wanted to do some political advertising and it 

didn’t want the Conservative Party to pay for it; it insisted that 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan pay for it. That’s just another 

example. 

 

Other examples, Mr. Speaker, are that while we are passing 

interim supply resolutions and interim supply Bills, we still 

have hospital beds that remain closed. The government opposite 

asks for millions of dollars every month to pay the bills, but 

hospital beds are being closed. The numbers of people on the 

waiting lists keeps growing. 

 

Taxes are collected; the government asks for those taxes; the 

legislature provides it, but there seems to be very little result 

that will benefit the taxpayers of Saskatchewan for the money 

that they have to shell out. 

 

And so I simply say that although the government is spending 

more money and collecting more taxes, the people who pay 

those taxes are getting less. But some people aren’t getting less. 

The Minister of Economic Development and Trade thinks 

nothing of spending $2,500 to jump on a government airplane 

and fly to a family wedding in Calgary. Those are the kinds of 

ridiculous expenditures that this government is making when 

taxpayers supply them with the money, as this resolution and 

this Bill which we are going to deal with today does. 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2882 

 

And while the Minister of Economic Development and Trade 

thinks nothing of flying off to Calgary at taxpayers’ expense to 

attend a wedding in his family, many families in a community 

that I’m familiar with, of Arran, Saskatchewan, now find, since 

the school has begun, that they have to drive their children 60 

miles to see a dentist because the children’s dental program has 

been eliminated. 

 

Now those are the kinds of priorities, Mr. Chairman, that I say 

make it much more difficult for us to deal with this resolution 

every time it comes before this House. People are paying more, 

but friends of cabinet ministers and cabinet ministers 

themselves and PC Party members are paying less. That’s 

another example I want to draw to your attention. 

 

I invite you, Mr. Chairman, and other members of the House to 

look at the Estimates for 1987-88 which the Minister of Finance 

tabled in this legislature back on June 17 of this year. I invite 

you also, Mr. Chairman, to consider that in 1986-87 it was 

estimated that corporation income tax would bring to the 

treasury of Saskatchewan $162 million. But for 1987-88, the 

Minister of Finance tells us that he’s only asking the 

corporations under the corporations income tax to provide $130 

million, a reduction of some $32 million, while at the same 

time, Mr. Chairman, we are being asked through his budget to 

pass that individual income taxes should increase from 

$698,800,000 in 1986-87 to $751,500,000 in 1987-88. 

 

And the same applies when you deal with the question of sales 

tax. The increase in the amount of sales tax collected is equally 

as huge. I point out to you, sir, that this is for only half of this 

year. In 1986-87 the amount of money that this government 

collected in sales tax was estimated to be $386 million, but with 

the increase of 40 per cent in the sales tax, this government for 

six months will collect $467,300,000 — a huge increase. 

 

Now I just want to say, Mr. Chairman, that there is a double 

standard here. The corporate sector and the wealthy sector are 

asked in this year to pay less taxes than they paid last year, but 

people who have to buy things for the children, who have to pay 

rent and mortgages for their homes, who have to go to work 

every day to be able to feed their families, are being asked to 

increase the amount of tax contribution they make, 

dramatically, in their individual income tax and in their sales 

tax. 

 

I say, Mr. Chairman, that the waste, the corruption, the 

patronage, the dishonesty, and the mismanagement of this 

government has reached scandal proportions. There is no doubt 

about that, and I can tell you that that is the view that is, in 

growing numbers, being shared by the people in Saskatchewan 

who see their taxes going up, but their services going down. 

 

Now many times the Minister of Finance has said, and another 

minister of Finance has said, the one before him, oh, but we’ve 

had such difficult times. And I say, Mr. Chairman, to them, it’s 

got nothing to do with difficult times, because while they were 

making some of the most wasteful expenditures that this 

province has ever seen, and the piling up of a deficit, which 

now they claim to be  

accumulated to be $3.4 billion, the revenues that they had, 

particularly from resources, were not going down. 

 

In 1981-82 the resource revenues for this government were 

$760 million. Did they decrease in 1982-83? Of course not. 

Resource revenue increased in 1982-83 to $770 million. And in 

1983-84 there was a modest decline, but not below what they 

got in 1981-82 — it was $760 million. And what about 

1984-85; did resource revenues go down? Of course not. They 

increased to $865 million. 

 

And while those revenues were going up in that kind of 

magnitude, this government was running ever a brighter and 

greater deficit, so that today when the minister stands up and 

moves a motion for interim supply, he is asking for money to 

pay for the interest that this government has to pay for the debt 

which this government has incurred through its 

mismanagement. 

 

This year through this interim supply Bill and the final passage 

of this budget, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are going to have 

to pay in excess of $300 million in interest charges on the debt 

that this government has accumulated because it did not pay 

attention to good management. In spite of the fact that it had 

increasing resource revenues and, over the longer period of 

time, stable resource revenues, it still accumulated a huge 

deficit. 

 

But what is so wrong, Mr. Chairman, as we are asked to provide 

this money is that while there have been massive increases on 

citizens who work in our cities and in our towns, and who farm 

in our rural areas to the extend that, since this government was 

elected, a family of four has seen a tax increase of $2,160 while 

their incomes have either stayed about the same or in many 

cases have been reducing — while that was going up, this 

government tells those people who pay those additional taxes 

that urban capital grants are going to be eliminated; that the 

education development fund is going to be cut in half; that 

school grants are cut; that urban revenue sharing is cut; that the 

farm fuel rebate program was cut by more than 50 per cent — 

so much for these great spokesmen for rural Saskatchewan — 

that there were savage cuts to technical institutes. Youth 

employment programs, while our unemployment among youth 

is growing rapidly, youth employment programs are being cut. 

 

We now have a net out-migration of people from this province 

to the extent of 14,000 in 1986 and even more in 1987. And 

whereas the Minister of Finance should be standing here today 

and saying, I need some money in this interim supply to pay for 

youth employment programs, his Minister of Social Services, or 

whatever the new title of that massive department is, says, we 

don’t think that jobs are important for our young people. The 

deficit is more important. 

 

Those are the kinds of priorities, Mr. Chairman, that make it 

more difficult for the opposition to pass this interim supply Bill. 

While the government is saying to those people that I have 

mentioned in those municipalities and those school boards, if 

you want to be able to operate, you go and get more money out 

of the property taxes, are they treating some of their friends in 

the same way? No,  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2883 

 

they’re not. 

 

If you look at the list of friends of the politicians opposite and 

of the Conservative Party who’ve been appointed to lucrative 

positions, the list is almost endless. And this interim supply 

resolution and Bill which we’re dealing with today is asking for 

money to pay for some of that. I give you the example of one 

Mr. Paul Schoenhals, the chairman of the potash corporation. 

We’re asked to find money so that he can live in great comfort 

— defeated cabinet minister. There is one George Hill, who is 

the former president of the Conservative Party. He, too, is not 

having to sacrifice. A former cabinet minister, Tim Embury, is 

part of an organization which we estimate is now receiving 

somewhere in the area of $3 million to instruct the government 

on how to down-size government, but he’s already done that 

with this budget. Mr. Embury is doing very well, while 

everybody else is being asked to pay more in their taxes. 

 

(1445) 

 

There’s another MLA who was defeated in the October 1986 

election, one Keith Parker, from Moose Jaw North, who’s now 

living very comfortably as an executive assistant in 

Saskatchewan Liquor Board. Another cabinet minister, Paul 

Rousseau, off in London, England, as the agent-general. Mr. 

Dutchak, who was for a while the acting president of the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 

 

Why, Mr. Chairman, do the taxpayers of Saskatchewan have to 

pay more and more taxation and get fewer and fewer services, 

and therefore sacrifice, but these people who are close to the 

Conservative government cabinet don’t have to do the same? 

Why do we have to have this double standard, where some can 

get all they want whereas the vast majority of people have to 

pay more so that those some can get what they want? 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I won’t pursue the full list here, but I 

could just quickly draw to your attention the way in which the 

new Ombudsman was appointed. And I’m not critical of him as 

an individual, but this legislature was never asked in the 

appropriate way with consultation among the leaders of the 

parties on who the Ombudsman should be. This interim supply 

Bill is going to pay part of his salary. We have the new property 

management corporation, and there’s in that corporation a Buy 

Saskatchewan agency. It’s headed by one Ron Dedman. I don’t 

know Mr. Dedman, but I do know that he was the former 

ministerial assistant to the economic and development minister, 

the member from Kindersley. He’s moved along very well. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there is a former federal Conservative candidate 

by the name of Gordon Dobrowolsky. He’s earning something 

like $40,000 a year as an assistant to the Premier. One Gordon 

Currie, who’s been named chairman of the board governing the 

drug and alcohol treatment centre in Yorkton; there’s a 

part-time chairman of the Labour Relations Board who, I’m 

told, in 1985-86 — part-time chairman — was paid $122,000. 

Now is it so difficult to understand why Saskatchewan 

taxpayers would be concerned about paying more taxes when 

the Minister of Finance will ask for money in this House, as  

he’s asking today, to pay for these kinds of patronage 

appointments. I share that concern of the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer. They have a right to expect fairness on the part of 

their government. They don’t have a right to expect otherwise. 

 

Now the other concern I have here, Mr. Chairman, is the lack of 

accountability. We have seen over time this government ask for 

money, spend the money, and then refuse to inform the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer how they’re spending that money — 

example being — one example being the Public Accounts for 

1985-1986 which did not get tabled till July of 1987, 17 months 

after the close of the year for which those Public Accounts are 

supposed to be reporting. 

 

We have a case of a deficit now, as reported in this budget by 

the Minister of Finance, where he was out in his deficit 

prediction by $800 million. I suggest to you that the Minister of 

Finance and the government knew, when they presented the 

budget over a year ago, that their deficit was going to be greater 

than what they told the Saskatchewan public. But the Minister 

of Finance and the government denied it even in as late as 

August of 1986. They misled the public. And now we have the 

case of a budget which was not shown to the legislature or the 

people until June 17, the latest period of time ever in the history 

of the province. 

 

Another example of this lack of accountability is the whole 

issue of SaskPen, which was raised in this legislature. That 

involves the expenditures of taxpayers’ money through their 

pension funds. But we have received a report in the Public 

Accounts Committee — and I read it for accuracy purposes — 

in which a senior officer in the Department of Finance has 

reported that SaskPen audited financial statements for the years 

ended 1984 and 1985 are now being finalized, and I say 1983, 

1984 and 1985. And it goes on to say: 

 

The delay in their finalization has been due to concerns 

expressed by the Provincial Auditor about the valuation of 

certain real estate properties. 

 

Now the minister has stood in the House and said, oh, that’s 

quite normal. Well it certainly may be normal that investments 

have been made in property in the past, but it’s not normal for 

financial statements to be three years late. That’s lack of 

accountability. That’s taking people’s money and either 

spending it or investing it and then refusing to tell them where 

you spent it, how you spent it, or where you invested it. 

 

That kind of lack of accountability is unacceptable in this 

legislature. It’s unacceptable to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

who today are being asked to approve another one-twelfth of 

the budget of this government to spend on their behalf. If they 

thought that this expenditure was going to be done correctly and 

in their best interests, I think they would mind less. But they 

know by experience and by the refusal of this government to 

account for those expenditures, that they’re not being asked, 

they’re not being spent correctly, and they’re not being reported 

to them. 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2884 

 

And the final point I want to make, Mr. Chairman, is the matter 

dealing with the Provincial Auditor. Now here is the one key 

officer of this legislature who oversees the expenditure of 

government. The Provincial Auditor is an officer of this 

Legislative Assembly, not an officer of the government, not an 

officer of the opposition. He answers to neither of us 

individually; he answers to this Assembly. 

 

All throughout his report, the latest report which we have, he 

reports of inappropriate expenditure of money. He expresses 

concern that the government is proposing to amend The 

Provincial Auditor Act, which will even reduce more his power 

to oversee the expenditures of the government and report to this 

Assembly, which means reporting to the Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Now I object to the fact that the minister was not being accurate 

the other day. When questioned on this issue, he said that the 

Provincial Auditor had asked for the proposals submitted by the 

private sector audit companies to be able to do the audits of the 

Crown. 

 

And yes, he had asked for that, but the minister did not finish. 

He stopped and used selective information in order, I suggest to 

you, to mislead, because the Provincial Auditor was not 

requesting only that. The Provincial Auditor, and I quote him, 

was requesting, I quote: 

 

. . . requested from Crown Management Board copies of 

their communication to private sector auditors in which I 

want to know the content of those communications to 

private sector auditors to make sure that the private sector 

auditor has been told that he will be doing the same thing 

as I was doing. 

 

In other words, it is important that the private sector auditors — 

and it’s not the issue of whether the private sector auditors or 

the Provincial Auditor — the issue is to assure that the private 

sector auditors will do the work that the Provincial Auditor has 

prescribed, because of the legislation that puts him into place, 

the work that must be done. 

 

And this government has instructed . . . And the Premier and the 

Minister of Finance and the Deputy Premier are all on the board 

of the Crown Management Board. And that board, that group of 

politicians, has instructed the officers of the Crown 

Management Board not to provide the Provincial Auditor this 

information. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, that’s lack of accountabililty. That is 

saying to Saskatchewan people that on September 28, today, we 

are going to ask you for one-twelfth of the budget so we can 

spend those hard-earned tax dollars which you give to this 

government. But if you ask us how we spend it, we’ll decide 

whether we will tell you how we spend it. That’s the kind of 

attitude this government is having with regard to accountability. 

 

And I say, Mr. Chairman, they will rue the day for treating — 

or I should better say mistreating — the Saskatchewan public in 

this way. No elected government in a democratic state or a 

democratic legislature should have the right, or even the nerve, 

to refuse to account for how it handles the public money. 

This government has refused on many occasions, or has delayed 

on even more occasions, and because of that its accountability 

is questionable. And for that we are very reluctant to approve 

this resolution which will be followed with a Bill of interim 

supply, asking for one-twelfth of the money for the government 

to spend in this year’s budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 

participate in this debate this afternoon and really try and 

express my frustration to the Assembly and to the people of 

Saskatchewan, as they have expressed their frustrations to me 

with regard to the Conservative government. 

 

We have seen a government come forward in 1982 and get 

elected on a number of promises that they made with respect to 

fiscal responsibility. They made promises about good 

management and how good management of government should 

be undertaken. They made promises of better health care 

services, and of course they made the famous promises — or 

infamous promises, as we see now — of lower taxes. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I feel a sense of frustration because up 

until about 1980, ’81, ’82, people had some sense of 

understanding that government would be fair in its dealings 

with people; that if an individual, whether it be a business man, 

or a lawyer, or a person who works at IPSCO, or a farmer, who 

got involved in politics and got elected on the basis of their 

word was their bond, that if they became elected to the 

government, that things that they said during the course of an 

election campaign would be real; that things that candidates 

who became elected officials and members of a government, 

saying things during an election campaign and prior to, that 

they were going to do, that once they got elected that those 

things would become real; that they were actual, sincere 

thoughts and sincere words. 

 

And what we’ve seen, Mr. Chairman, is that kind of 

understanding that most people in this province had of their 

elected politicians at the municipal and provincial and federal 

levels has been destroyed. People no longer accept the words of 

Conservative politicians when they say we’re going to (a), (b), 

(c), or (d). They don’t accept any more the word of the member 

of Finance who says in all of his forecasts and deficits that this 

is what we’re going to undertake to provide in terms of a 

deficit, and he’s way off base. They can accept a 4 or 5 or even 

a 10 per cent error in judgement or forecast because that’s what 

forecasting is all about. It’s a ballpark figure; it’s not a precise 

figure. 

 

What this government has done, is introduced into our society 

and to Saskatchewan, and even the Mulroney government 

federally has introduced into our country, is no ballpark 

forecasts and no credibility in terms of what people say and that 

they mean what they say. They have, on the other hand, Mr. 

Chairman, introduced a sense of incredibility, that you cannot 

believe the words of Conservative politicians. 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2885 

 

The member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the Minister of Finance, 

very clearly made a forecast of a deficit for the ’86-87 fiscal 

year that was 205 per cent off the mark. And now what he is 

doing in this Assembly through his budget, and now asking for 

some money again with no real sense of commitment, is for 

more money to provide money to pay for debt and pay for 

services that people in this province feel a bit concerned about. 

 

We see the minister making a forecast of $557 million for this 

year alone, and that’s more than a half a billion dollars in a 

deficit forecast for this fiscal year, which is a jump of 48 per 

cent over the previous deficit forecast for ’86-87. And when 

you look at the forecasts, Mr. Chairman, you see that in 1982 to 

’83, the forecast for the Minister of Finance was about $219 

million deficit. That was the forecast for that fiscal year. The 

actual was $227 million, which was about 4 per cent higher. 

That’s not a bad, bad forecast. 

 

(1500) 

 

In ’83-84, there was a deficit forecast of $316 million which 

was a 50 per cent jump over the previous year’s forecast. But 

the actual expenditure was only 5 per cent higher than the 

forecast, so it’s still not bad. But the 50 per cent increase was an 

alarming precedent, Mr. Chairman. In ’84-85 the forecast was 

$267 million, and the actual deficit expenditure was $379 

million, which was a 42 per cent error — a 42 per cent error in 

terms of the forecast of the deficit. 

 

The 1985-86 fiscal year, which was the year that many 

Conservatives believed that we would have an election 

campaign, there was a forecast of $291 million which was a 10 

per cent increase from the previous year’s forecast, but the 

actual expenditure was $584 million, or 101 per cent off the 

mark. That’s almost as bad as black and white, or yes and no. 

It’s not even within the realm of a forecast. It’s way off the 

mark. And of course we’re seeing the reasons for that incredible 

forecasting job of the Minister of Finance. 

 

The 1986-87 forecast deficit was $389 million, which is 30 per 

cent higher than the previous year’s forecast. But this was the 

year, Mr. Chairman, of the famous forecast, the incompetent 

fiscal irresponsible expenditure of the Minister of Finance, 

which was 217 per cent greater than what they had forecasted 

— 217 per cent off base. 

 

And now we’re seeing in this fiscal year, Mr. Chairman, an 

increase over the 389 of 48 per cent or up to $577 million 

deficit. And that, Mr. Speaker, is very alarming. We have the 

fastest-growing deficit in all of North America. We have, for 

every individual that is living in this province — whether they 

are born five minutes ago, or whether they will be born 

tomorrow, or whether they are adults — an outstanding, 

long-term debt of $3,400, which is about $13,200 per family of 

four. And that’s just the debt; that doesn’t count the interest 

payments that we have to raise, or the government now has to 

raise through taxes and other means. 

 

Rather than looking at becoming a little more efficient and 

following the philosophy of the Conservative Party to reduce 

red tape and to have less government, what they  

have done is created a massive amount of red tape, and not just 

for businesses, but they’ve now passed on their incompetence 

of red tape and bureaucratic handling of paper to the registered 

vehicle operators of this province. Rather than having a few 

thousand businesses with some red tape, they’ve expanded that 

to about 461,000 vehicle licensed operators in this province 

who are now involved with the red tape, plus all the gas stations 

that are in business in this province and the operators that are 

working therein. 

 

We’ve seen the members opposite, the Conservative Party, talk 

about in 1982 eliminating the gas tax. And we went through the 

speeches in this House about their false meanings, that they 

promise one thing and they mean the opposite; that they say one 

thing — whether it’s in writing or whether it’s right here in the 

House on their feet, it’s always the opposite, or they deny 

having said it. 

 

And I think what we have here, Mr. Chairman, is a government 

and a party which has lost so much credibility because of its 

incompetence, because of it’s betrayal of its own philosophy to 

the people of this province in its own programs, that people just 

disregard anything that they say or do. Or if they do, have the 

Premier or a cabinet minister get up and say, we’re going to do 

a, b, and c; the people of this province know that’s not going to 

happen because they’ve broken every other major commitment 

they’ve ever made as a government and a party. 

 

We heard about the promises of less taxes, Mr. Chairman. They 

made commitments to eliminate the sales tax. We don’t see an 

elimination; we see an increase of 40 per cent — from 5 per 

cent to 7 per cent. They promised a 10 per cent decrease in 

person income tax. We have seen a 24 per cent increase in 

person income tax — not a 10 per cent decrease but a 24 per 

cent increase — with the introduction of the flat tax. And that is 

money that is being used to attack or to pay for their deficit 

problem, but not to attack the reasons for the deficit. 

 

What have they done with regard to their mismanagement? 

What have they done with regard to the patronage 

appointments? They have done nothing at this point other than 

to accelerate the amount of money that they commit to 

patronage appointments and to their mismanagement of the 

government services. 

 

We’ve seen, Mr. Chairman, not only a cut in the . . . or an 

increase of 24 per cent in the personal income tax rate, but we 

have seen as well a total disregard for — and a misleading, I 

might add — but disregard for their commitment to provide a 

government that is managed; that we have a balanced budget. 

 

They promised that they would balance the budget. The 

Premier, before he was Premier, was travelling around the 

province saying that even if you were incompetent you could 

balance budgets. By definition, by the theorem, the axiom of 

equality, if an incompetence could balance a budget, what does 

that make the Premier of this province? Surely, it’s not even at a 

level of incompetence. He’s below that, by his own definition, 

by his own words, and I think the people of this province 

recognize that, Mr. Chairman. 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2886 

 

But whether it’s the promise of balanced budgets, or the 

promise to never reimpose the gas tax, the promise to eliminate, 

to cut the provincial . . . eliminate the sales tax, or the promise 

to cut income taxes by 10 per cent, or the promise to introduce 

the farm purchase program and keep it going, or the promise to 

protect our health care system — the PC provincial government 

has in every instance betrayed the people of this province on 

those commitments, every single instance. 

 

Whatever they say, whatever the Minister of Finance says, or 

his government says about a commitment to the people of this 

province, they do the opposite. Whatever they promise, they 

betray; they betray the promises; they double-cross people with 

promises they’ve made, and of course whatever they suggest in 

terms of things that a government might do they deny, deny 

ever having suggested those things. 

 

But on every major commitment to the people of this province, 

Mr. Chairman, the Progressive Conservative government under 

the Premier have betrayed their trust, and I think that that is 

something that will not go unnoticed for a very long time. 

 

The government has indicated today that they want to introduce 

this interim supply Bill, and it’s, as my colleague from Regina 

North East has indicated, the fourth such interim supply motion 

that we’re undertaking to approve in this Assembly. 

 

What has not been said today is that $928 million of 

government expenditure, which is almost a billion dollars, was 

undertaken prior to the approval of interim supply in June. And 

that was done by cabinet order. It was not done with any kind of 

accountability to the people of this province. It was done 

without any accountability to the members of this Legislative 

Assembly. The cabinet opposite believes that the money that 

the taxpayers pay for taxes in this province is money of the 

cabinet, not money of a Government of Saskatchewan, and they 

showed that very clearly back in June. 

 

But what they are saying is that rather than attack their 

incompetence and prove their incompetence, rather than 

improve their mismanagement, rather than make choices that 

will protect and help people, they have made choices to increase 

taxes to the families of this province. Two thousand, one 

hundred and sixty dollars in provincial taxes have been levied 

on a family of four by this provincial government in the last 

four years — $2,160. A family earning $15,000 a ;year has had 

a tax increase on top of that by the federal government, by the 

federal Mulroney Tories, of a 92 per cent increase. They’ve had 

an increase of 92 per cent. A family of four earning $100,000 

has only had a tax increase of 4 per cent in the last four years 

under Mr. Mulroney, under the last three years. 

 

And so we’ve seen not only a massive tax grab, provincially 

and federally, but we have seen who their targets are. Tax cuts 

for their corporate friends, tax increases for ordinary people, 

and not only provincially but federally. And I think, Mr. 

Chairman, that that is . . . I believe very sincerely that that is not 

going to sit very well  

with the people of this province. 

 

If they were able to receive some services for the increased 

taxation, if they were to receive a clear accounting of their 

dollars in terms of job creation, if there was money spent to 

create jobs, if there was money spent to improve health 

services, I think many people would undertake to accept the tax 

increases. But that has not happened. 

 

We’ve paid more money for taxes and we’ve received less. 

We’ve paid more money . . . we’re paying more money for 

some services, but the services aren’t helping the people. What 

is happening is that they have privatized the drug plan; they’re 

increasing taxes here. But what does that mean? What does the 

privatization of the drug plan mean to the people of this 

province? It doesn’t mean that they pay less. It means that they 

pay more. 

 

What does the privatization of the dental plan mean to families? 

It doesn’t mean that they’re going to have a better service and 

they’re gong to have a cheaper service. It means they’re going 

to have less service and it’s going to cost them more, because 

now parents are going to have to take time off work to take their 

children to the dentist if they can afford to do that, plus they’re 

going to have to pay their travel costs. In the city, travel costs 

aren’t that great, but you still have to pay your parking costs. In 

the rural areas you have to pay significant costs, in terms of 

travelling, in distance and time. 

 

We’ve see the Tories gutting the health programs. We won’t 

even talk about the others. What does all of this mean? What 

does the government opposite plan to do for the people of this 

province with the increase in taxes? Well all they really do with 

the increase in taxes, Mr. Chairman, is that they provide more 

revenues to fuel their patronage machines; and they provide 

more money to cover up their mismanagement; and they 

provide more money to their friends, the oil companies — 

Texaco and Exxon and Shell, and those small, small, starving 

local companies. 

 

But they have forced out hundreds of dental therapists who 

have provided the children of this province with years of 

dedicated and competent service. And there’s 411 of them, to 

our count, that are out of work now. And they say, by their own 

accounting, that’s going to save around $500,000, which is 

about two years salary of one patronage appointment, Mr. 

George Hill, who is the chairman of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation — 411 people out of work because of that decision. 

 

That just has not a negative impact on the families of those 

people who are working, but what it also does in terms of our 

economy is that it means less business for our businesses. For 

every dollar the government spends, whether it’s through 

salaries or other job creation activities, the economic multiplier 

generates another three times that amount. So rather than 

having all of these dollars being spend in our local economy in 

the small towns and cities of this province, that money is going 

to pay interest payments to our international bond dealers and 

bankers. 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2887 

 

And of course the government has also provided less services 

than they promised. They promised more nursing staff; we’ve 

received less. They promised to increase grants to the 

Saskatchewan ambulance boards, and that has not been done. 

And of course they’ve even cut the number of visits a person 

can make to chiropractors when they require them. 

 

There’s even talk by some optometrists that the government is 

now investigating the possibility of eliminating insured services 

for adults, which means — the chairman and I wear glasses, and 

we have to go for a check-up once every two years, which is 

covered by our medical plan. The optometrists are saying 

there’s speculation in the Health department that they are 

considering even eliminating that. And it’s very important for 

people who do not have 20-20 vision to have their eyesight 

checked on a regular basis. Even people with 20-20 vision, it’s 

important that they have regular check-ups. 

 

An Hon. Member: — There’s none over there with 20-20. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — And my colleague from Prince Albert-Duck 

Lake says that no government members have 20-20 vision. And 

I think he means they can’t see beyond their noses when it 

comes to running a government with some competence and 

some clear administrative objectives. They just don’t have those 

kinds of things in their minds. 

 

I guess the final thing I’d like to say, Mr. Chairman, is that we 

see here today in this interim supply Bill a reminder of what 

this government has done. They have promised that they would, 

if elected, provide responsible, fiscal management; that they 

would have some fiscal responsibility; they would look after the 

tax dollars in a very cautious and objective way. 

 

(1515) 

 

And what do we have now, Mr. Chairman? We have the fastest 

growing deficit in North America, and we have services being 

cut daily to the people of this province. They’ve preached fiscal 

restraint time after time, but they practise unrestrained spending 

time after time. 

 

They promised as well, Mr. Chairman, good management. They 

promised that in writing. And you, Mr. Chairman, in your own 

literature have promised good management along with these 

other things. But what do we see? We see the list of patronage 

appointments that my colleague from the constituency of 

Regina North East read out. The Paul Schoenhals appointment 

at potash corporation, the George Hill, Embury appointment. 

The $3 million study on the taxpayers; Mr. Dutchak who was a 

part-time adviser to the Minister of Urban Affairs for $7,000 a 

month. And the list goes on. 

 

We also have seen a commitment broken of lower taxes. They 

promised lower taxes. They promised to eliminate the E&H tax. 

We’ve seen a 40 per cent increase from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. 

They’ve promised a 10 per cent reduction in person income tax. 

We’ve seen a 24 per cent increase in personal income tax. And 

they’ve  

promised never ever to reimpose the gas tax, and we’ve seen 

that one out the window with the imposition of the great 

bureaucratic red-tape-laden gas tax before this province. 

 

And finally, Mr. Chairman, we have seen this government 

opposite make commitment after commitment with handwritten 

pledges and sealed pledges with the leader of the Conservative 

Party’s name on it, and the Minister of Finance’s name on it as 

well, saying that we will protect medicare, and we will never 

ever injure the program as it is now set up. And the people of 

this province feel double-crossed as a result of that. 

 

So on those four areas I think the government’s record is 

coming forward before the people of this province loud and 

clear one more time — that you cannot trust a Conservative 

minister for what he says or she says, and you certainly cannot 

trust the Premier for what he says because in almost every case 

what they say is the opposite. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, the budget in the spring 

raised a question of fundamental trust for the people of 

Saskatchewan, as does the interim supply Bill before us. 

Ultimately trust is an important ingredient of any budget or any 

government strategy designed to lead us in difficult times, and 

these are difficult times. A government must have the trust of 

the people if its programs are to succeed. If there is trust, there 

will be understanding, and with understanding and trust there 

will come support of the government’s programs. Government 

programs will have an opportunity to succeed — succeed when 

the government is in office, and continue after their time. This 

budget, or the budget of the spring and the interim supply Bill 

which flows from that budget, do not generate trust. Indeed, the 

budget and the government’s actions have created distrust. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan people are tough and resilient 

people. They are not strangers to hard times. They’ve survived 

depressions, droughts, and depressed grain markets. They know 

that they’re in touch times now. They know because they’re 

intelligent, and they are aware of global economic conditions. 

And I would say that perhaps they are more aware of most 

people of any jurisdiction in Canada, and that is because they 

have always had to contend with the fluctuations in the grain 

markets in a very direct way. 

 

They’ve come to understand the precariousness of our resource 

economy. Given our history, it’s understandable then that they 

are sensitive to the circumstances in which we find ourselves 

today. In these difficult times Saskatchewan people want strong 

leadership. They want strong leadership so that we can all come 

together in a co-operative way to make the best of a bad 

situation. People expect, they know, that difficult choices will 

have to be made by their government, given our circumstances. 

 

And if there is a sense that the burden of dealing with difficult 

decisions is shared equally, Saskatchewan people are prepared 

to sacrifice, and that’s their proud  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2888 

 

and very strong tradition. People are prepared to pitch in when 

there is a problem. People are prepared to help out if they 

perceive to be a challenge. People are prepared to help out if 

they perceive that help is needed by those who are less able to 

help themselves. 

 

We see plenty of examples of that in our Saskatchewan history 

and even in a very contemporary sense. I don’t think we have to 

look much further than the history of the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders, even in this year, to understand that Saskatchewan 

people, in the face of challenges, in the face of a crisis — it’s 

the type of crisis we have now in our economy — that people 

are prepared to help out. Saskatchewan people have shown that 

they’re prepared to help out, say an institution such as the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders, to make sure that something like 

that survives, and are prepared to put out because they have a 

pride in that type of institution. 

 

They’ve shown for example, Mr. Chairman, in the case of Brad 

Hornung, a Regina Pats hockey player who was tragically 

injured, that they’re prepared to put out. They’re prepared to 

lend their support; they’re prepared to give their dollars so as to 

help the family and to help that individual with the kinds of 

challenges and problems that we will now face for a lifetime. 

 

They’ve shown through things like the Telemiracle that they’re 

prepared to help out the less fortunate. They’ve shown that they 

give more on a per capita basis, through a process such as that, 

than people anywhere else. They show that they’re a generous 

and they’re a giving and caring people, and they’re prepared to 

help out, Mr. Chairman. 

 

We see only a few weeks, or a week ago, that in the case of a 

farm woman at Theodore, Saskatchewan, which is close to 

Yorkton, where the woman’s husband passed away and she 

really did not have the means to bring in the crop herself, where 

the whole community pulled together in a fantastic and warm 

way. They pulled together to help that woman out of her 

circumstances. And these are farmers who had crops of their 

own in the field, who helped out for the day to help someone 

who was in a less fortunate circumstance. That’s the kind of 

people we have in Saskatchewan. That’s their tradition, and 

that’s their history. 

 

A few days ago, Mr. Chairman, I had dinner with some friends 

who are moving to California, and these people are Americans. 

They had moved to Saskatchewan because of the kind of 

opportunities that existed for them here some years ago, and 

they’re now moving to California because the kind of 

opportunities that they need, in terms of their growth and 

development, are simply not present here any more. 

 

I asked them to reflect on their time here, what things stood out 

for them. And they commented on the clean air that we enjoy. 

They commented on the civilized nature with which we deal 

with medical care and health care and social services. They say 

this is unlike the kind of tradition and unlike the kind of system 

that they have in the United States. They commented on the 

lack of crowding; but basically they commented on the attitude 

of the people — a sense to them that Saskatchewan  

people were far more hospitable than any group of people that 

they had had the opportunity to meet elsewhere, a real sense of 

neighbourliness, a real sense of wanting to help out. And they 

provided the example, and the thing that impressed them most, 

was that if your car gets stuck in the winter-time in 

Saskatchewan, people will automatically come to help us you 

out of a snow-bank. There’s just no question about that, that 

Saskatchewan people will help out in that way. And that’s the 

thing that impressed them the most about Saskatchewan people. 

 

And so it is, Mr. Chairman, with the people of Saskatchewan, 

that they are prepared to help out, prepared to put out, prepared 

to sacrifice. And I would submit to you that so it is with 

Saskatchewan people when it comes to the government that 

they have. If people perceive the problem to be stuck in difficult 

circumstance, I would submit that they are prepared to help out, 

provided that they feel, firstly that their leaders are being honest 

at all times in describing the circumstances in which we find 

ourselves; and secondly, if they perceive that their leaders are 

being fair and even-handed in apportioning the burden that we 

must all share if we are to overcome the difficult situation in 

which we find ourselves. 

 

If a government fails these tests, I would submit, I would 

submit, then that government will lose the trust of the people 

that they were elected to serve. And I would submit to you, Mr. 

Chairman, that this government, this PC government, has failed 

these tests as evidenced by their budget and by, of course, today 

this interim supply Bill. 

 

And the question, I guess, that must be put, Mr. Speaker, is how 

have they failed? And I would say that the government has been 

less than honest in making a clear statement, in being articulate, 

in being honest about our circumstances. 

 

Before the election of October in 1986, we did not find the kind 

of characterization about the situation in which Saskatchewan 

found itself that we found subsequent to the election in the 

throne speech. We did not find then the Premier going around 

the province to elucidate and to throw light on the visions of 

one Drucker, his economic guru. We did not find the Premier 

talking realistically, honestly, and completely about the kind of 

circumstances in which Saskatchewan and its people found 

themselves. We did not see the Premier doing that. 

 

There was no indication at that time that somehow the deficit, 

which was projected at that time to be about half a billion 

dollars, would in fact have ballooned something in excess of $1 

billion. And there is every reason to believe, and Saskatchewan 

people know this, that the deficit was not as it was projected to 

be at that time, but was in fact something greater, but that the 

government was simply not relating the truth, simply was not 

being forthcoming, simply was not being honest in its appraisal 

of the situation in which we found ourselves. 

 

After the election, after the election we see a process beginning 

of the government trying to level with the people of 

Saskatchewan, or are they? That’s another question. But we see 

some signs of the government  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2889 

 

beginning to level. 

 

First there was what must be, perhaps, a more realistic budget 

projection. There was in the Speech from the Throne a more 

realistic appraisal. Even if we disagree with some of the 

specifics, we at least saw some realistic appraisal of the 

economic circumstances that Saskatchewan people found 

themselves in by virtue of the grain markets, by virtue of potash 

prices, by virtue of a number of resource indicators. And even if 

we disagree with the government — and people might disagree 

with the government about the particular causes and the 

structure of the weaknesses in the economy — they choose to 

believe an economist and a management consultant by the name 

of Drucker, and we may have different interpretation — surely 

there can be no disputing that Saskatchewan is in serious times. 

But we didn’t see that appraisal before the election. We didn’t 

see that until after the election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — And when it comes to the budget this 

year, the question is, is the government levelling now? And if 

it’s levelling about our deficit this year, then the question is, 

why is it choosing to exclude certain revenues which should 

rightfully be in the budget? Why is it choosing to exclude those 

revenues, because if those revenues were included, it might 

provide a different picture of the kind of situation that we’re in, 

at least with respect to our fiscal situation, at least with respect 

to our deficit? 

 

And why is the government choosing to ignore, for example, 

the fact that there is in excess of $100 million in accumulated 

Liquor Board profits which, if those profits were included in the 

budget, might provide a different picture, might provide a 

different story, in terms of the deficit, in terms of the fiscal 

situation, in terms of how we need to respond to our situation. 

And the question is: will these accumulated Liquor Board 

profits, will these be hidden until just before the next election? 

 

There is also a question in terms of the projection of resource 

revenues. We had grossly optimistic projections in last year 

deficit . . . or in last year’s budget to provide a very different 

indication of what the deficit will be. But of course that was the 

budget and the deficit leading to the election in 1986. This year 

we sensed that resource revenues are underestimated, 

underestimated so as to provide a different picture again of 

what the deficit will be, trying to show that the deficit is a much 

worse situation than it actually is. 

 

And the government is not playing its full hand. It’s keeping 

some cards up its sleeves, and I would tell you, Mr. Chairman, 

that with any dishonest card shark, when you keep cards up 

your sleeves, the people will find out about it and will treat 

them in kind. And my question is, if you try to keep people in 

the dark about the real circumstances, is this any way to earn 

their trust? 

 

(1530) 

 

If you boast, as the Minister of Finance does, that Saskatchewan 

people have, as an example, the lowest  

level of personal taxes and charges of any province in Canada, 

but at the same time increase the tax load for the poor and shift 

the tax burden to people who can least able afford it, is that fair? 

Is this any way to ear the public’s trust? When they get elected 

on the basis of reducing taxes, but subject people to the most 

massive tax increases in Saskatchewan history, is that how you 

earn the people’s trust? When government members promised 

to eliminate the sales tax, but increased that sales tax instead, is 

that any way to earn the people’s trust? No, Mr. Chairman. 

 

When the Premier says one day, in one election campaign, that 

we’re going to be number one in health care in Canada, but now 

says that we cannot aspire to lead, now says that we must 

satisfy ourselves with diminished health care resources, that we 

must satisfy ourselves with being something less than number 

one, is that any way to earn the trust of Saskatchewan people? 

No, Mr. Chairman. 

 

When the Minister of Finance says, in one election, that he will 

expand the prescription drug plan because it’s not good enough, 

and now says that it must be radically altered and radically 

diminished, is this how you earn the trust of Saskatchewan 

people? No, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And when the Minister of Health says that the radical alteration 

of the children’s dental program will save us money, and it 

won’t, and that’s recognized, and then says it will provide a 

better level of care, and the people know different, a better level 

of care than what was conceded to be the very best program of 

its kind in North America, do the people of Saskatchewan 

believe him? Is this how you earn their trust? And when the 

Minister of Urban Affairs says that massive cut-backs to 

municipalities resulted from consultation with municipal 

leaders, and this is simply not the case, is this how you earn the 

trust of Saskatchewan people? No, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And when the government says that because of the difficult 

situation that we find ourselves in, because of the circumstances 

that we have and because of the drastic plight of the 

resource-based industry in Saskatchewan we must lay off 

thousands of people, we must fire thousands of people, we must 

do all these things, and then turns around and gives the green 

light for the chairman of the potash corporation to hire his 

daughter, is this being fair? Is this how you earn the trust of 

Saskatchewan people? No, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I could go on and on and 

on about how this government has failed to earn the trust of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

A government can earn the trust of its people, and they can do 

this in difficult times. People will not just simply support a 

government because times are good. They will not re-elect 

governments simply because the times are good — everybody’s 

got a job, the economy’s booming, and that’s their only 

yardstick for re-electing a government. 

 

People will also support a government if they perceive  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2890 

 

that government in light of very difficult circumstances, in light 

of very difficult circumstances, levelling with them, being 

honest with them, being realistic with them, being forthcoming 

with them, being discreet with them about the situation in which 

we find ourselves, and being straight and being solid and being 

full and being complete about how we must all come together to 

pick ourselves out of the problem that we’re in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I spoke earlier about my friends who are moving 

to California, and the thing that impressed them most about 

Saskatchewan people was the fact that Saskatchewan people are 

prepared at any time in the winter-time, if they see a car being 

stuck in the snow, that they’re prepared without question to help 

push that car out. And I would submit to you, so it is with 

Saskatchewan people, that they are prepared to help out. 

 

But if those Saskatchewan people perceive a Premier and a 

cabinet in the front seat saying, the push is out, but at the same 

time having their friends from the banks and having their 

friends from the major corporations and having Peter 

Pocklingtons and having the chairman of the potash 

corporation’s daughter all sitting in the back seat also saying, 

push harder, then I would tell you that Saskatchewan people 

will say, we ain’t going to push this car out. We’re not going to 

help in this situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — And so it is with this interim supply 

Bill, that Saskatchewan people are cynical, sceptical, about 

what it is that the government is doing; cynical and sceptical, 

because they do not believe that the government is being 

completely honest in portraying the circumstances that we have 

before us; that the government is being less than fair and honest 

in terms of apportioning the burden that we must all share to 

help get us out of this mess created by the government opposite. 

 

Mr. Chairman, having said that, I just want to say that we 

understand why it is that government needs interim supply 

measures. I just want to say that Saskatchewan people are 

incredulous when it comes to this government. When this 

government says through its budget, and now through its 

interim supply Bill, that you must follow us, that you must 

believe us, that you must come with us in the course that we’ve 

chartered before you. I want to say that Saskatchewan people 

are not prepared to follow under these circumstances; that 

Saskatchewan people do not believe the budget that has been 

brought before us; do not believe the words of the Finance 

minister; do not believe the words of the Premier. Because too 

many times now, too many times those two members of the 

House, and other ministers in this cabinet, have simply been 

less than forthcoming, have simply been less than honest, have 

simply been less than complete about portraying the picture and 

the circumstances that Saskatchewan people find themselves in. 

 

I thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 

want to address a few words on the interim supply Bill. They’ll 

be very few, but measured, I say to the Deputy Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from Regina North East pointed 

out, this is the fourth interim supply Bill. That is a record in this 

legislature. That speaks volumes about the incompetence and 

the mismanagement to which this government has subjected the 

province. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this problem goes back to the very beginnings of 

this government. In 1982 they ran a campaign which was wildly 

unrealistic, so much so that any one of them who thought about 

it must have known that it was irresponsible. They came into 

office, cut taxes, created an immediate deficit. And I think it’s 

fair to say in retrospect, I think most Saskatchewan people 

would say that they never felt the benefit of those tax cuts. I 

think in retrospect this government will get very few thanks for 

the tax cuts it implemented. 

 

The vast bulk of it went to oil companies, to travellers, highway 

— be they truckers or commercial travellers. And the tax cuts 

which were the source of the problem, I think, went largely 

unseen by the public. It was their first mistake. 

 

The second mistake was that they failed to control expenditures. 

Mr. Chairman, in a period in time in which inflation has 

increased 30 per cent, this government’s expenditures have 

increased 40 per cent. It’s a matter of public record. At a time 

when this government has been cutting services, their 

expenditures have gone up considerably faster than inflation. 

There’s a reason for that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this government from the very beginning has 

used as one of its corner-stones of public policy — patronage. 

That’s normally a sign of old age in a government. In this 

government it was a corner-stone of their policy from the very 

beginning. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we saw from the very beginning, people 

appointed at exorbitant salaries. This government come into 

office and right from the start it paid the highest salaries of any 

provincial government in Canada to executive and ministerial 

assistants, followed it up with some truly spectacular salaries: 

100,000-plus to Dennis Ball; 100,00 to Terry Leier. These 

$100,000 figures became common. Now they’ve moved into 

the $200,000 range with the likes of George Hill. 

 

That, Mr. Chairman, patronage has largely soaked up the 

additional 10 per cent. Once again you’d find very, very few 

Saskatchewan people who’ll say that they believe the level of 

public services has increased, or that they can see the additional 

10 per cent in real growth in spending. In fact very few people 

would actually . . . very few people would believe that 

government spending has gone up faster than the rate of 

inflation. Most people would believe it’s gone down. It has not. 

 

The third problem which this government created and  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2891 

 

which led to the current day, was the purge of the public 

service. This purge began from the moment they were elected. 

It was uncaring, unfeeling, unfair, and never-ending. It has 

made it virtually impossible for this government to develop the 

kind of smooth working relationship with the public service 

which is essential if services are to be delivered in an efficient 

and economical fashion. 

 

What’s the result? The result is a deficit which is truly 

spectacular. One must remember that other deficits, that of 

Washington, that of Ottawa, or for that matter, that of 

Winnipeg, which members opposite are fond of referring to — 

those deficits have accumulated over decades. This government 

came into office with a substantial surplus. In five years, Mr. 

Chairman, they have . . . In five years, Mr. Chairman, we have 

the fastest growing deficit in Canada. We also have a 

government, Mr. Chairman, which is borrowing a larger 

percentage of what it spends than any government in North 

America, and that’s an accurate statement. All that has 

accumulated within five years. 

 

One may say of the federal government, they borrow some 30 

per cent of what they spend. That’s true, but those problems 

have developed over a couple of decades. We’re borrowing far 

more than 40 per cent of what they spend and . . . far more than 

30 per cent of what we spend, Mr. Chairman, and that’s 

accumulated in five years. As well, as I think was inevitable to 

anyone who thought about it or cared, interest payments are 

becoming a very sizeable portion of this budget. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the last budget shows that interest payments are 

the fourth largest expenditure in government, gone from being a 

nil item in the budget four years ago, to the fourth largest 

expenditure. One Health, Education and Social Services, in that 

order, comprised larger expenditures than interest. Next year 

it’s almost certain that we’ll spend more on interest than we will 

on Social Services, and interest will then go to be the third 

largest expenditure. 

 

(1545) 

 

I predict, Mr. Chairman, that before this government leaves 

office, payments on interest will be second only to Health in 

terms of provincial government expenditures. That means, Mr. 

Chairman, when you spend more and more on interest, you get 

into a tighter and tighter strait-jacket. Your room to manoeuvre 

is less. You’re less a master of your own house, less flexibility 

in developing new policies and new programs which meet the 

needs of the public, and more and more, you’re someone else’s 

serf. More and more, you become a slave to the bankers, the 

bond dealers, and those with whom you’ve borrowed the 

money. We see that in the federal government where they’ve 

got less room to manoeuvre; we’re fast getting into that position 

provincially. 

 

One might ask what kinds of things . . . We also see, I might 

add, less and less accountability as this government gets less 

and less anxious to talk about it. The mismanagement which 

comes about from a deficit they can’t control, from a public 

service with whom they cannot work, shows up dramatically in 

this year’s Provincial Auditor’s report. 

As chairman of the Public Accounts Committee which 

reviewed this document, I think it’s fair to say that we’ve never 

had a Provincial Auditor’s report like this. The first 12 pages of 

this document talk about accountability and how this 

government is not accountable. He asks, is information received 

on a timely basis? — concludes it isn’t. Is the Legislative 

Assembly auditor able to have the mandate to report to the 

Assembly? — concludes he doesn’t. 

 

Mr. Chairman, instead of pursuing a greater degree of 

accountability which would assist the government firstly and 

the public secondly in coming to grips with what is fast 

becoming a serious problem, we see this government moving in 

the opposite direction. 

 

I am not enamoured with the notion of having private sector 

accounting firms audit Crown corporations. There is a sharp 

and important distinction between private corporations and 

public corporations. The different is that . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . If the member from Kindersley would be quiet 

for a moment, I’ll explain to him what the difference is. The 

difference is that in private sector corporations, there’s a real 

distinction between the shareholders and the directors. The 

auditors are responsible to and nominated by the shareholders, 

and they thus have some degree of independence from 

management. That is completely lacking in the public sector; 

the management and the shareholders are all the same thing. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Chairman, if you really believe that you’d ever 

get from any private sector auditor, the sort of comments which 

form the introduction to this year’s Provincial Auditor’s report. 

Of course you wouldn’t. Of course you wouldn’t. 

 

The only reason . . . I will venture to say, Mr. Chairman, that 

this government will never give us a reasonable analysis of the 

difference in the cost between getting the Provincial Auditor to 

do it and in getting private people to do it, because I don’t think 

such an analysis would ever stand the light of day. They’re not 

doing it because it’s cheaper. They’re doing it because they 

don’t like what the Provincial Auditor’s got to say. 

 

I think, Mr. Chairman, the public should be alarmed when the 

government (a) doesn’t like what the Provincial Auditor’s get to 

say — that in itself would be alarming enough; and (b) decides 

that it will use a majority of the legislature to muzzle the 

Provincial Auditor. And that’s what’s happening with respect to 

Crown corporations; that is what is happening. 

 

We will, I have no doubt, get accurate financial statements from 

private sector auditors. We will not from private sector auditors 

get the kind of analysis and the kind of comments which we 

have got from the Provincial Auditor’s report. And that, Mr. 

Chairman, is a real shame. 

 

Crown corporations in this province are as important to this 

economy as this government is. Roughly, very roughly, they’re 

as large, the spend as much. And this legislature has lost an 

important tool in keeping control of the Crown corporations. 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2892 

 

I say, Mr. Chairman, that the government is doing the opposite 

of what it should. Faced with such massive problems, it should 

be increasing its accountability so that it has the tools it needs to 

control this problem, and the public have the tools they need to 

judge their performance. But instead, what is happening is the 

exact opposite, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I just want to make one other comment, and that 

is the — it’s been made before so I won’t labour on it very long 

— and that is the lateness of this session. This session was 

clearly delayed as long as possible in the hope that the public 

wouldn’t be listening during the dog days of summer. In that at 

least the government has been wrong. The public have been 

listening to this session. The public are upset with what they’ve 

seen, both the policies that this government has introduced and 

their ability to manage the government. On both scores this 

government has been found to be sorely lacking. 

 

It makes no sense, Mr. Chairman, to vote against an interim 

supply Bill since the bills have to be paid. It is a real shame, Mr. 

Chairman, that there isn’t some effective means by which the 

public of Saskatchewan could register their displeasure. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Chairman, I have an idea, actually. I think there is a 

means by which the public of Saskatchewan could, in a minor 

way, pass judgement on this government’s misperformance. 

There is a seat vacant in Saskatoon. And I say to the members 

opposite, if you don’t agree with me, if you think your record 

will stand the light of day, if you think the policies and 

programs which you’ve introduced are saleable, then call that 

election in Eastview and let’s have at ’em. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a few 

comments to make regarding this interim supply Bill, and I 

would like to if I could, spend a few minutes talking about 

what’s been happening in rural Saskatchewan because of the 

budget that was introduced — very late, I might add — and the 

kinds of problems that it’s created in the province, in rural 

Saskatchewan; and the kinds of problems that it will in the 

future create, and what kind of a change we are going to see in 

rural Saskatchewan because of this government’s 

incompetence, because of their mismanagement, because of 

their betrayal of the people of this province. 

 

And I ask where all this money is going, in light of the fact that 

the grants, the kind of programs that have been cut in rural 

Saskatchewan are a long, long list. The people in rural 

Saskatchewan are too asking where this money is going when 

they see the funding to the travel that the veterinarians were 

able to pass on, the savings in that funding last year. This 

government paid out some $317,000 in travel grants and 

$130,000 in operating grants. And now those farmers are asked 

to pay the mileage that this government was once helping them 

with. 

 

And there are some changes that are going to change rural 

Saskatchewan I think in a very negative way. The provincial 

funding to agricultural fairs and exhibitions  

will be phased out over the next four years. And no longer will 

those boards be able to count on help from the provincial 

government that they came to expect so that they could keep the 

prices down, so that rural people could gather and show their 

wares, and visit with their neighbours and their friends. But 

that’s gone. And I say, Mr. Chairman, it’s gone because this 

government has been incompetent in their spending since 1982 

and has created a situation where they’ve cut back on those 

kinds of programs. 

 

Funding for the 4-H clubs throughout this province, the regional 

programs, will drop 25 per cent each year until it disappears in 

1990 and ’91. And I say on behalf of the young people in rural 

Saskatchewan who have been involved in the 4-H movement 

for a number of years, and in some families for generations, I 

say that they’re unhappy with your decision to cut those funds. 

And I say on behalf of those people that they feel they’ve been 

unfairly dealt with. And I think they realize that the reason 

you’re cutting these programs to their communities and to their 

families is because of your incompetence and the fact that you 

now have to take money out of the provincial revenue, send it to 

the bankers who you’ve borrowed all of this money from. 

 

And I say as well, they’re unhappy when they see a situation 

where you take $317,000 of travel grants to people involved 

that used to be able to use that subsidy when they brought a vet 

to their farms; when they see you paying George Hill and Paul 

Schoenhals the kind of money that you do. I say they’re 

uncomfortable with your decisions to cut these programs, and I 

say to you that you’ll pay come the election. 

 

I say on behalf of the people of rural Saskatchewan that they’re 

not happy that you’ve put gas tax on their school buses, and that 

they know they’re going to be paying increased taxes because 

of that. And I say that they’re upset that the rural municipalities 

now have to pay 7 cents a litre on every vehicle to travel around 

in the R.M.s. And they know that their increases are going to be 

because of your incompetence and your mismanagement and 

the fact that you’ve had to come back, betray them, put on a 

fuel tax that you promised would never exist in this province. 

 

And I say that they’re unhappy in the decrease in the 

revenue-sharing grants to the municipalities, the 1 per cent cut, 

because they know that that money is coming out of their 

pockets. And I say that they’re upset with what you’ve done to 

the dental plan and the drug prescription plan. 

 

Funding cuts to PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery 

Institute), the livestock cash advance program reduced, the hog 

incentive program reduced, the farm purchase program — and 

remember, Mr. Chairman, a program that was promised to the 

people of this province. When they need it more than ever, what 

happens? You start scrapping it. 

 

The soil testing lab, a cut of $100,000. And these figures don’t 

mean much unless you put them all together and you 

understand what kind of a tax grab it is on rural people in this 

province. 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2893 

 

The phasing out of the beef stabilization plan. All of these 

programs benefited the rural people in this province. But 

because of your incompetence and because of this government’s 

incompetence, Mr. Chairman, they’ve had to be reduced and in 

some cases scrapped. 

 

And I want to go to some of the words that were mentioned by 

the member from Regina Victoria when he said that 

Saskatchewan people are willing to share in tough times — and 

they are; and I know that, having grown up in rural 

Saskatchewan. We’ve been through tough times in this province 

before, although I admit not as bad as under this PC 

administration. But we’ve seen tough times and we’ve banded 

together, and we’ve worked to make things better for ourselves. 

But when there’s a perception that the government has betrayed 

them, they’re hesitant to support the kind of cut-backs that this 

government has thrust upon them. 

 

We all understand the need for the interim supply Bill. But I 

say, Mr. Chairman, that the people won’t follow this 

government blindly, because they want some responsible 

government. They want a reasonable administration in this 

province, as they had once, and as they will have again. But 

they understand clearly that it won’t come from a right wing PC 

government. And I say to you that they’re disappointed. 

 

I said before that they won’t follow blindly. They don’t believe 

your budget, and they’re not satisfied with the kind of budget 

that was delivered in this legislature. I’ve had it said to me on 

more than one occasion, is there no way, is there no process, is 

there no way we can get this government out of office? Is there 

no impeachment process? And I say, if ever there was a need 

for impeachment and if ever there was a reason to impeach a 

government, the Premier of this province, his cabinet, and the 

back-benchers are good reason for that kind of feeling out there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — In closing, Mr. Chairman, I want to say 

to you that on behalf of the people of rural Saskatchewan who 

this government and this Premier has betrayed, we’ll be up on 

our feet, and we’ll be speaking for the people in rural 

Saskatchewan. They know you can no longer be trusted. I think 

it’s a matter of damage control, and I think that that’s what 

they’re asking the members on this side of the House to do, to 

control the damage that you and your government has thrust 

upon this province. And I make a commitment that the 

members on this side of the House will do just that for however 

long it takes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We’ve been 

through this debate now four times, and there’s only been one 

new item raised through all of that time. I think one thing that 

should be clarified, that we’re here through this four times not 

because of the actions of government; it’s because the 

opposition wants to delay and stall and get very tedious about 

the estimates, and very repetitive. 

 

(1600) 

I think that the public has seen that and knows that that’s why 

they can’t pass a budget, Mr. Chairman, because they can’t 

make up their minds on different issues. They’ve had 

conflicting positions across the board, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

little doubt that the length of this session, because of the delays 

by the opposition, have cost the taxpayers nearly $5 million. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what it costs, and the public knows that’s 

the reason. 

 

But there was something new, and I’d like to respond to it. It’s 

from the last member who participated in the debate. 

 

I suppose it was a shock to everyone to find out the new course 

of action of the New Democratic Party opposition when he says 

he’s going to start speaking on behalf of people of rural 

Saskatchewan. We’ve now been through the fourth time that 

we’ve had an appropriation Bill, and for the first time a member 

of the New Democratic Party has stood up and said, we’re 

going to start fighting for the farmers. 

 

Where have they been for the last four and a half months, Mr. 

Chairman? Where have they been when people were going on 

strike down East and they didn’t say anything? Where were 

they in the budget debate when they refused, their agriculture 

critic refused to participate in the budget debate — absolutely 

refused — an historical first where the agricultural critic for a 

party refused to participate in the budget debate? And now he 

says he’s going to speak on behalf of the farmers. 

 

Well the farmers will be interested to hear, Mr. Speaker, what 

the hon. member says, because all they’ve heard to date is a 

deathly pall of silence as the NDP have repeated over and over 

again by silence why they were virtually wiped out in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe that the hon. member just came to 

an awareness of the difficulties facing rural Saskatchewan, but 

if anybody is trying to minimize those, then I think that would 

be a sorry spectacle for the people of this province to see. 

Farmers face serious difficulties — very serious difficulties, 

Mr. Speaker — and this government, and this Premier, have 

taken more action on behalf of the farmers of Saskatchewan 

than any other government in the history of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — To hear, Mr. Speaker, there may be one 

saving grace for this rather prolonged session by the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, that finally a member from the 

opposition has awakened . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now I 

know he wants to shout me down, Mr. Speaker, because he 

doesn’t want the public record to indicate just how poor he and 

his members of the opposition have been with regard to 

agriculture and the farmers, and he doesn’t like the fact that he 

may be the first to finally wake up. 

 

If there’s any saving grace in this session, Mr. Speaker, this 

long, prolonged session of repetition and cost to the taxpayers, 

is that one — one New Democratic member has awoken and 

awakened to the difficulties of agriculture and said that he’s 

now going to start fighting  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2894 

 

for the people of rural Saskatchewan. Four and a half months it 

took. Four and a half months it took Mr. Chairman. 

 

And I’m glad that the eyes have opened, that the hon. member 

somehow over the weekend made his road to Damascus where 

he had a conversion, Mr. Speaker, and realized that farming 

wasn’t something that just happened outside of Prince Albert, 

that perhaps it was very important to the people of this 

province, and that finally he was going to say something about 

it. He very pointedly didn’t say anything, Mr. Chairman. 

 

But you know, conversions sometimes don’t come all at once. 

Sometimes the conversion goes in stages, and the fact that he 

recognized that rural Saskatchewan is facing some difficulties 

— the first New Democratic member — I think, may come as 

the highlight of this session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been through this debate, as I said, four 

times. There’s only been one new item. The hon. member 

deserved, and I think was expecting me to call attention to it 

and, Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the hon. member for wakening 

up to a serious situation in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that . . . and there probably will 

be more, because there’s no indication that the session is 

winding down. I think the debate today proves that, Mr. 

Speaker. So when the hon. members say there’s 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 

Appropriation Bills, whatever it takes, that they recognize that 

the reason for those number of Appropriation Bills that the 

members opposite have been delaying and holding up the 

estimates for the longest period of time and don’t want to 

debate and vote on the budget, Mr. Speaker. We’re prepared to 

do that at any time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1988, the sum 

of $289,033,400 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: 

 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $40,397,400 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending 

March 31, 1988. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1988, the sum 

of $40,397,400  

be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTION 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 

move the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the resolutions 

read a first and second time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 

 

That Bill No. 45, An Act for Granting to Her Majesty 

certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Year Ending on March 31, 1988, be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

first time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, and under rule 

48(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I wonder if I could have leave for the 

Minister of Energy and Mines to give third reading to Bill No. 

21. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to Amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 

1983 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

No. 21 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1615) 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Department of Economic Development and Trade 

 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I wish to direct some 

questions and some comments, perhaps, to the Minister of 

Economic Development and Trade pertaining to the subject 

matter of free trade which, sir, you and members  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2895 

 

of this legislature know is probably the corner-stone of, or at 

least one of the corner-stones of, the policy of this government 

with respect to economic diversification. 

 

It seems as though the government’s approach to free trade is 

such that with the current status of the discussions being 

somewhat uncertain, if I may describe it that way, one will have 

to ask some questions as to what alternative strategies the 

government would have in the eventuality of an actual final 

cessation of the discussions, but I’ll get to that in a moment. 

What I really wish to pursue with the minister for the moment 

are a few questions pertaining to exactly what is going on with 

these discussions. 

 

I have in front of me, Mr. Chairman, a copy of the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix of a few days ago, dated Thursday, September 24, 

where the front page story has a picture of our negotiator, Mr. 

Simon Reisman, and the heading on the story says, “freer-trade 

talks ‘terminated.’” I find that an interesting little journalistic 

slip that they have fallen into, converting the original “free” 

trade to the new buzz word of “freer” trader negotiation, but 

that’s an irrelevancy. 

 

But you’ll note the word there, Mr. Chairman, is “termination”. 

In fact, from the body of the story of the Canadian Press, Simon 

Reisman said that: 

 

He has terminated freer-trade talks with United States, 

saying that “as far as I’m concerned, it’s over.” 

 

That seems to be, Mr. Chairman, a pretty clear, unequivocal 

statement that as far as the chief negotiator, the person who’s at 

the table, these free trade talks are over. It seems, however, that 

the political masters of Mr. Reisman have another view, 

because the story goes on to say in that very same context in the 

next paragraph in fact, the following: 

 

Although Prime Minister Brian Mulroney earlier in the 

day left open the door for more trade talks, officially 

discussions were merely suspended. His chief negotiator 

said there would be no more dickering. 

 

So we have this situation — judging by this news report, at least 

in my assessment of it — the free trade ambassador, 

Ambassador Reisman, who is doing the negotiating for Canada, 

says that as far as he’s concerned, it’s over; it’s terminated. 

 

Subsequent to that statement the political boss, the Prime 

Minister of Canada, says, no, notwithstanding what 

Ambassador Reisman says, they’re not terminated; they’re 

merely suspended. 

 

Now I asked some questions of the Premier a few days ago in 

this House precisely as to that situation, and question period 

being the forum that it is, doesn’t provide a full discussion of it. 

I’d like to ask the Minister of Economic Development and 

trade: what is the Government of Saskatchewan’s understanding 

with respect to the current situation? Is it as Ambassador 

Reisman indicates, terminated, period; or is it suspended, 

implying that there are ongoing discussions and/or  

negotiations as to how to get these talks going again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Our understanding of the — in response 

to the specific question of the hon. member — is that . . . The 

stated position of Mr. Simon Reisman, Ambassador Reisman, is 

that when he walked away from the negotiations, on last 

Wednesday I believe it was, he indicated that he was 

suspending negotiations. 

 

As I understand the gist of what he was saying — and I suppose 

we can look at various newspaper articles as to what they mean 

or how much faith we want to put on them — but that Reisman 

indicated that he was suspending negotiations primarily because 

the Americans were not being serious in their negotiations; that 

he had left his bottom line with the Americans, and that he was 

not prepared to take up negotiations again unless the Americans 

clearly demonstrated a significant willingness to change their 

positions and to meet the Canadian bottom line. 

 

As I understand, negotiations have not taken place since that 

time. The American cabinet, particularly treasury secretary 

Baker, has, as I understand, made representations to Canadian 

ministers as to some movement on the American’s part. As I 

understand, what’s going on now is not negotiations but rather 

discussions — and perhaps that’s a play on words for the 

average person — discussions as to whether or not there is 

room to go back to the negotiating table. If that last effort to 

find that discussion does not bear fruit, then I think probably 

we’re at the situation where you call “suspensions” become 

permanent as we run towards the October 4 deadline for an 

agreement. 

 

So not unlike what the Premier indicated to you in question 

period today, negotiations have been suspended. The 

negotiating teams, the teams that have dealt with a whole host 

of issues on these bilateral trade negotiations — are not 

meeting. The clock is ticking. Some people are exploring 

through discussion as to whether or not there is a resolve, and 

that resolve is primarily whether or not the Americans are 

prepared to modify their position and seek a way to either bring 

negotiations back or terminate negotiations altogether. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I again have to refer to 

the only documentation that I have — unfortunately the only 

documentation that Canadians have — that is the 

documentation provided by our daily journals. It’s possible that 

there can be a journalistic error in the reporting of this matter. I 

highly doubt that in the case of the Canadian Pacific or 

Canadian Press. It’s possible, but I don’t see any contradictions 

or denials from these stories, and I simply want to refer to this 

point to elaborate again on this issue to clarify with the hon. 

minister. I’m still referring to the same article about the story 

being terminated and it says as follows, Mr. Chairman. Quote, 

referring to Ambassador Reisman: 

 

Reisman said the only way he’ll return to the bargaining 

table is if Americans were to come and belly up to the bar 

and do what they need to do to give us a good agreement 

for Canada. 

 

But, the story says, again and again Reisman emphasized,  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2896 

 

“the negotiations are over.” 

 

Now the question that I want to ask the minister, since these 

words seem to be fairly clear cut — he may wish to answer me 

by saying that it’s a possible misquote — but the question I 

want to ask is: was Ambassador Reisman correct? Is it his 

understanding, his government’s understanding, that the 

negotiations are over? And I mean over not only at the time of 

the announcement, but over as of today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think if — and I haven’t read the 

article — and I take that’s from the Star-Phoenix, and I haven’t 

read the article in the Star-Phoenix — but I thought, just 

listening to what you were reading, Reisman saying that the 

only way negotiations will start again is for the Americans to 

belly up to the bar. Now if Reisman is saying the only way we 

can get negotiations going again is for the Americans to do . . . 

perhaps we would want to state it better than bellying up the 

bar, as Reisman chooses to use, but he must anticipate in what 

he is saying of starting negotiations again. The only way he will 

return to the bargaining table is if Americans were to come up 

and belly up to the bar. Now Reisman, if he’s saying at the one 

time, she’s over, period, why would he then turn around and say 

the only way he’ll return to the bargaining table? And he can’t 

return to the bargaining table after the 4th of October. So I take 

it from that that he leaves out some hope, small as that might 

be, that there could be renegotiation . . . we could get back into 

negotiations. 

 

I think what I’ve heard best of Reisman, watching him on 

television, etc., saying that in his judgement the deal’s over and 

that we will not go back to the bargaining table, and that she’s 

over. But I think he does leave this open in this statement. I 

would take that to be what it means. And I think that his 

walking away from the table, and his public statements, and the 

statements of various other Canadian leaders on this particular 

question, I think has lobbed the ball back to the Americans and 

say, you know, you guys really aren’t being serious about this, 

and either you get serious in the next 10 days or forget it. And I 

would guess that’s really what we’re talking about. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well is it the position of your Premier, Mr. 

Minister, and your position, that as of this day the discussions 

are terminated or suspended? Which of those two options, as of 

this moment of examination, are we looking at as far as the 

Government of Saskatchewan is concerned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well our view . . . Of course, the only 

formal meeting has been the last first ministers’ meeting along 

with the Prime Minister. Following that, Reisman walked from 

the table. Our view is that the negotiations are suspended with a 

very, very tight time frame — October 4, which is what, next 

week? Early next week, I think, and it’s all over. 

 

So my guess is that they’re suspended, and I would say that 

most thinking right now is that it would probably take a miracle 

for any negotiations to continue. So that for those looking for an 

agreement, it looks rather bleak that they would have an 

agreement. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I assume, Mr. Chairman, that your  

government is being kept abreast of developments, and that 

being the case, will you advise the House, or are you able to 

advise the House, what’s the purpose of the current round of 

discussions now going on in Washington, apparently involving 

Pat Carney and Mike Smith, on behalf of the Government of 

Canada, and the American people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We are being advised. Of course, we are 

being advised in confidence, as all provinces are being advised 

in confidence, and have been requested, because of the delicate 

nature of the talks, that if a statement would be coming out, it 

would be coming out from Mike Wilson, not Mike Smith and 

Pat Carney. 

 

Those are, as I understand . . . The Canadian officials have been 

invited to Washington by the Americans to explore whether or 

not there’s a way to get discussions or get negotiations back on 

track. And that’s precisely what it is. As to why they’re taking 

place in Washington as opposed to New York, I am advised, or 

we are advised, that treasury secretary Baker, the meeting of the 

IMF (International Money Fund) is presently going on in 

Washington. He is the point-man from the American . . . the 

American cabinet minister that is the point-man, and 

Washington is therefore convenient, as opposed to Ottawa, 

because of IMF meetings in Washington. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, can the minister 

advise the House, in general terms in any event — perhaps if 

you had a document which you could table with us it would be 

even more helpful — what comprises the bottom line? What 

comprises the bottom line which resulted in the suspension of 

the talks, or termination of the talks, and what is that bottom 

line from which presumably the Canadian government will not 

vary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As I understand, the Premier sent a copy 

of that to the hon. member of the six points . . . five points. 

Does the hon. member have a copy of that? That’s our 

understanding on what the Canadian government’s bottom line 

has been. These have to be dealt with in a bilateral agreement 

before we would be prepared to go back to the table. They have 

to be acknowledging that they’re prepared to deal with this or 

come very close to this. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the minister — perhaps it 

was just a general phrase that one uses — but he did close off 

his answer by saying: “or (pretty) close to this.” I remind the 

minister that some several weeks ago in question period in this 

legislature, members of the opposition asked the government 

whether or not an arbitration process or a binding dispute 

settlement mechanism was part of the bottom line. And I use 

that phrase “the binding dispute settlement” in the context of 

today’s question period, but more particularly in the context of 

what point five means. 

 

So I put it to you specifically and directly. Is it still the 

Government of Saskatchewan’s position that in the absence of a 

binding dispute settling mechanism, an arbitrator, a body to 

which the United States Congress presumably has surrendered 

some of its powers,  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2897 

 

constitutionally and from a treaty point of view, that unless that 

is agreed to, that that is a part of the bottom line that will not 

have been met, and that there is no further progress in these 

discussions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, I think that if we wanted to put this 

in terms, perhaps understandable terms, is number one, we need 

the clear rules. Even with a body with given power, without a 

clear set of rules as to what they do and do not do, or what is or 

is not a countervailable move, or what is a subsidy or not a 

subsidy, what is an acceptable subsidy, that type of thing, 

without the rules a dispute settlement mechanism doesn’t mean 

a great deal either. 

 

So you need (a) a clear set of rules; and (b) you need a 

mechanism, whether it’s an arbitrator or some other similar type 

form. Our view has always been, I think from Saskatchewan’s 

point of view, is number one, you need the rules very clear; and 

two, you need a referee with authority. 

 

What we have now is a . . . and the referee should be at least 

one from each side of the border, so that’s the only way you’re 

going to arrive at something that’s fair — international joint 

commission, something like that type of a mechanism that deals 

with it. 

 

So that’s what one would look at. So you can get into a whole 

host, as you know, as to what is an arbitration form. There’s a 

variety of forms for arbitration: which one would be appropriate 

in this type of situation; how do you choose the people — that 

type of thing. 

 

But I think (a) the rules must be clear; and (b) there must be a 

body that interprets those rules. And that body must be how you 

appoint it, and the recommendations of that board or the 

decision of that board must carry a dimension that binds the 

particular issues that were involved. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I take it, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 

that one of the major problems, of course, is what subject 

matters, if I may use that term, are subject to the jurisdiction of 

any such third-party body, arbitration mechanism, whether it 

involves everything which is in the non-tariff sector or hidden 

barriers sector, ranging all the way from buy-American policies 

to health regulations with respect to the importation of 

Canadian hogs into the United States. 

 

To a large extend this will define, of course, the nature of the 

dispute settling mechanism where those particular subject 

matters are to be determined and to be ultimately resolved. If 

you have a very narrow area of jurisdiction, then I would argue 

conversely, at the other end of the teeter-totter, there would not 

be as great an onus to have as finally a binding arbitration 

mechanism because fewer areas are involved, and in any event 

there may be variations of the classical arbitration structure that 

could be acceptable in a limited jurisdictional scope. 

 

So my question to you, sir, is this: what general . . . in general 

terms, what is the scope of the subject matters which the 

Canadian government and the Saskatchewan government are 

urging should be a part of the resolution mechanisms of any 

such third-party dispute . . . binding  

dispute settlement mechanism? Is it everything, or is it like the 

accordion, squeezing in and out, depending upon the whims of 

the political bosses from time to time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think perhaps if I read the final point 

of the . . . in the Prime Minister’s release the other day which is: 

 

The rules governing discipline apply to fair and unfair 

trade, example, subsidies and countervailable duties, 

dumping and anti-dumping duties, import surges and 

safeguard actions, and other trade remedies. 

 

We are, as a province, I suppose, primarily interested in the . . . 

primarily our concern is directed towards the types of the 

actions that the Americans have been perpetrating against us 

and against much of the other trading world — the shingles and 

shakes type of thing, the softwood lumber countervail, the 

anti-dump against potash — those types of things. 

 

Now to say, is everything that one could argue to be a subsidy, 

and how do you define “subsidy”, I think is probably an area 

that requires a fair degree of negotiations before a final deal 

could be arrived at, and will that be an all encompassing effort? 

In other words, will the rules be clear enough to cover 

everything, or will they be refined into something less than sort 

of everything covered? 

 

And I think that’s probably where the negotiations — if you go 

back to the newspaper — the so-called “big deal” that Reisman 

talked about — the question is, will there be a big deal with this 

particular thing at the end of it, if one at all? That is still, I 

think, significantly up in the air and something that we haven’t 

yet quite frankly heard back from. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Would the minister agree with me . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Why is the minister on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’d like to ask for leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce 

in the Speaker’s gallery two honoured guests who are with us 

from Ottawa, the Hon. Jean Charest, Minister of State (Youth) 

for Canada, and his chief of staff, Robert L. Velcrof. And I’d 

like them to rise please and be recognized. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Perhaps we 

should on this side say bienvenue to the guests from Ottawa, 

and wish that you could be on the floor of the House to answer 

some of these questions for us. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2898 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Trade 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I want to ask the minister whether or not he 

would agree with me that, as he has indicated in his last answer, 

the complexity of the meaning of subsidies in the context of 

free trade but being one example, that is would be virtually 

impossible to negotiate a free trade arrangement between the 

United States and Canada which would prevent, in effect, the 

United States, either as a nation or collectively as individual 

states, interpreting some of their laws and their policies under 

the guise of something other than the spirit of the free trade 

agreement. 

 

To give you the specific example: when we import Canadian 

hogs to South Dakota, and if the state of South Dakota says, we 

are barring the importation of Saskatchewan hogs, not because 

we can within the context of any free trade deal — the free 

trade deal say they can come in — but we’re barring them 

because we don’t like the medicine that the hogs take, for 

example, that there are hundreds of not thousands of those kinds 

of examples which would essentially fall beyond the scope or 

outside of any reasonable interpretation by any binding dispute 

settlement mechanism; or if you will, outside of any context of 

a possible definition of what subsidies or other non-tariff 

barriers designed to cover by this agreement might embrace. 

And that as a consequence, to continue my argument to a 

logical conclusion as I see it, that it is really folly to try to 

negotiate a free trade deal, given those vaguenesses and 

uncertainties and potentials for abuse by the American 

authorities. 

 

Does the minister not find any merit to that argument at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — On the question of technical barriers is 

the way the negotiators described that particular issue, the 

chloramphenicol, or whatever it’s called, that was used in the 

hogs that they objected to. 

 

Clearly people that are bent on restricting imports can use their 

imagination to create any type of guise to get around what 

people agree to be a rule or a law, no different than people can 

agree how to get around the Income Tax Act by inventing this, 

that, or the next thing. 

 

That particular . . . the technical barriers refers to in this 

statement as well as the subsidies and that type of thing. Clearly 

that’s a valid thing, what we would envisage in those types of 

situations if they were . . . that would be the type of thing that 

the offended party would be able to refer to, the so-called 

dispute settlement mechanism, for a resolve of it. 

 

I would . . . I think the wider question the hon. member asks is: 

is it realistic to think that any nation would in fact give up that 

type of power or share that type of power. I would refer the hon. 

member — and perhaps not to the best example that one could 

use and doesn’t work, perhaps, perfect in all situations — but 

let’s go back and  

look at what is the purpose and the function of the GATT, the 

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Because again, while 

it might be loose and while it might lack the type of teeth that 

we would like to see in this particular mechanism, would it not 

also arguably, for the Americans, who, quite frankly, 

spearheaded GATT after the last war, one could argue as well 

with a GATT type arrangement the Americans are in fact giving 

up some of their power that Congress would otherwise have. 

And unless we are going to bring some stability to trade in the 

world through a GATT-type arrangement or a bilateral trade 

negotiation arrangement, there has to be rules and has to be 

someone independent to interpret those rules. 

 

So I would throw out the argument being that basically that is 

the purpose and the function of GATT, and I would think it 

would be similarly the purpose and the function of a body we 

would create between our two nations. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister is partly 

correct at what I’m trying to get at. I think there are two aspects 

to the problem which I frankly can’t get my mind around in the 

sense of accepting the current thrust of the negotiations: one is 

the one that you’ve talked about. I don’t understand how it is 

that, either historically or from a constitutional or from a 

political point of view, the United States Congress could be 

expected to give up its constitutional mandate to deal with 

trading matters by referring — and here’s the difference 

between GATT and itself — by referring a whole host of 

important subject matters and areas between nations to a third, 

in a sense “congressional” body, a third-party dispute 

mechanism which is binding, as opposed to meeting on a 

regular basis internationally and negotiating through the Geneva 

agreements on trades and tariffs, a range of entries or exits of 

commodities amongst the nations of the world. I find that to be 

in an entirely different category. 

 

I think building some order to the world’s trading arrangements 

is obviously something which this world particularly needs 

desperately. But why it is that anybody would argue that the 

United States Congress at any time historically — I doubt that 

that’s the case; I stand to be corrected by your advisers or by 

yourself — would be prepared to in effect, delegate, let alone 

do constitutionally, that kind of decision making power to a 

third body struck me as being naivety, with the greatest respect, 

of the highest order in the initiation of these discussions. 

 

But that’s one dimension of the problem, Mr. Minister. The 

other dimension of the problem — let’s leave that aside — what 

I was really trying to get at is this, talking about naivety; I can’t 

envisage a circumstance where we could, as Canadians, 

negotiate successfully and with precision those kinds of things 

which would be the subject of the arbitration of a third body, let 

alone the mechanisms for the rules of the application of that 

third body, which could cover the huge array of potential 

non-tariff, hidden subsidy barriers that the United States now 

employs which could cover successfully — using my hog 

example again, or any other example — on an ongoing basis. 

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2899 

 

I think that there is, with the greatest of respect — I don’t mean 

this necessarily to you, although you and the Premier are very 

big proponents of free trade — a very naive belief that all of 

these areas can be covered off. Surely one of the biggest 

arguments for free trade with the United States is access to the 

United States market. And I’m saying, how can access to the 

United States market be guaranteed if at the end of the day, 

even with the dispute settlement mechanism, even with a 

jurisdiction defined for that body, there still is, like that 

accordion, a variety of interpretations as to what is allowed 

access or what isn’t allowed access even under the masquerade 

that health really isn’t health, it’s really a trade barrier because 

South Dakota doesn’t want our hogs. 

 

So I think it’s a two-pronged problem. Number one, the naivety 

that we could negotiate such a deal of which there must be 

hundreds of examples, even ones that you just recited, each one 

of them is pregnant with various meanings and definitions that 

we could even do that in the Canadian-U.S. context. And 

secondly, how it is that your government and the Canadian 

government — and I don’t mean this in any political 

argumentative terms — would believe what historical or other 

evidence there is to support the notion that the United States 

Congress would be prepared to surrender its authority, given 

their distinctive and separate system of government. 

 

Do you have any studies or any indications or communications 

from the Prime Minister to the Premier of this province which 

would allow us to assume that this thing wasn’t anything else 

but a quixotic venture — and you’re perhaps saying I’m not 

being inflammatory — but basically thought up as a last 

moment response to what, I think, happens to be a very serious 

economic crisis in Canada, and therefore offered as some sort of 

a solution to the Canadian public as an ease of the crisis 

economically with respect to jobs and the like? 

 

What is the minister’s thought in this regard? How is it that we 

can satisfy the public of Saskatchewan and Canada that indeed 

this thing wouldn’t have more holes in it than the sieve that we 

use for our day-to-day purposes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me try to go at that question from a 

broader way. Historically we can look at a variety of trade 

arrangements or trade agreements. We have the free trade 

arrangement between Australia and New Zealand, completed 

what — two to three years ago? You have the most recent trade 

agreement between Israel and United States, a trade agreement 

that perhaps lacked on certain areas. You have another totally 

different type agreement which is the European Economic 

Community where you delegated . . . each of the countries of 

Europe delegated significant power again to a congress or a 

parliament and therefore quite different from what we’re talking 

about. And then you have the example of GATT. 

 

If we were to say that we are unable as Canadians and 

Americans to come to some kind of agreement with regard to 

technical barriers and that technical barriers will doom this 

thing from the beginning, let’s look at the challenge that we 

face, as a world, at GATT, which is to define subsidies and to 

eliminate subsidies. 

 

Traditionally what GATT has done, has been to reduce  

tariffs. And you know, I understand your argument, which 

basically says tariffs are easy to define compared to a technical 

barrier, in fact, any kind of non-tariff barrier. And perhaps the 

technical barrier is even more difficult to define than a subsidy 

is. And I would agree with that as well. 

 

The question the becomes: how do we as a world, where tariffs 

are not really the leading problem of trade disputes any more as 

much as is the question of subsidies or non-tariff barriers, so 

how do we as the world define non-tariff barriers in a way that 

we can come to some common sense and fairness in the trading 

patterns, whether it’s between us and the Americans or whether 

it’s between the world as it deals with GATT. 

 

And if you look at what GATT is negotiating now in Geneva, 

for example, is two fundamental things: trade in services- and 

as you know, how you define services becomes pretty tricky; 

it’s not like a merchandise trade necessarily — plus the defining 

and valuing of subsidies in agriculture, in effect saying, let’s 

eliminate all subsidies to agriculture. Both of those are very, 

very formidable things to try to overcome. 

 

I think the hon. member makes a good point with regard to the 

technical barriers. Clearly, if one was looking, you would say 

tariffs would be the easiest to deal with, probably followed by 

subsidies, then followed by the technical barriers. Technical 

barriers, while at this point in time perhaps not the biggest 

cause of our concern, certainly are a cause of concern. I simply 

would say that we would have to, I guess, be able to refer that 

to some kind of a body who would have to weight — not unlike 

a court — weight on a preponderance of evidence whether it 

was really designed for legitimate health reasons or whether it 

was simply a sham to stop trade. And that’s the wrestle that 

they’re trying to do, and obviously, one technical rule is very 

difficult to address. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Which, Mr. Minister, leaves me again . . . 

Perhaps I come from a particular bias of which your Premier 

accuses our side of having, but which leads me to the 

conclusion, trying to look at it as rationally and non-politically 

as I can, that the easier task for Canada would be to tackle the 

question of access of the United States market on something 

like a sector-by-sector basis. A carefully defined sectoral 

situation where we, as Canadians, can both produce a product 

on an efficient basis and would seek access to the United States 

where you could define the ground rules fairly clearly, even 

have an arbitration board, in the case of dispute, deciding where 

there are violations of that agreement from time to time. 

 

I know this is something that your Premier has rejected on the 

sector-by-sector basis. And I find that a little bit strange given 

the obvious complexity that you and I have agreed these talks 

are fraught with — complexity and almost unprecedented 

attempts at getting the United States of America to give up, as I 

say, its congressional power to decide on treaty arrangements of 

this nature and what’s in the best interests of its political 

constituents. 

 

But I’m interested about another dimension to this, Mr. 

Minister. You may care to make a comment about my  

  



 

September 28, 1987 

2900 

 

sector-by-sector suggestion. 

 

I’m interested about another aspect about these whole 

discussions, and that is — with the greatest deal of respect to 

you and the Premier — the degree to which provincial 

governments have been really made meaningful parties to the 

subject matters which are on the negotiating table or were on 

the negotiating table. You’ll appreciate that apart from a 

consultative basis of input, which comes from one of your 

officials who’s seated beside you and to support staff that he 

will have, apart from meetings once every there months for a 

limited number of hours in Ottawa, there doesn’t seem to be 

very much by way of specific input as to the negotiations and 

the direction that those negotiations are taking. 

 

I’d like to know why it is that the provincial government has 

not insisted upon — and perhaps you would even care to offer 

an explanation — obtained a specific representative sitting at 

the table as our watch-dog with Mr. Reisman, in the 

negotiations between the United States and Canada. And 

perhaps we have obtained such a person. If so, I’d be pleased to 

know who he is, or she is, and what the full mandate and role 

happens to be there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Two observations. First, with regard to 

the sector-by-sector basis. The former Liberal government 

attempted to enter into negotiations in 1984 — I think it 

culminated in 1984 prior to the election — where the process of 

sector by sector didn’t work. The reason it didn’t work is they 

went — the American negotiators, the Canadian negotiators — 

to try to agree on a list of things that they would deal with on a 

sector-by-sector basis. And of course they couldn’t come to any 

agreement on what the lists were. There also would be a danger, 

in our view, of a sector-by-sector basis. Because of the nature of 

the way this country functions, we would maybe end up fixing 

up Ontario problems a lot sooner than when we fixed up 

western Canadian or Maritime problems. If you look at, I 

suppose, historically the Canadian negotiators at GATT, for 

example, were very quick to not push agriculture. They let that 

fly off the table at GATT very quickly, because they were more 

concerned about other issues — primarily automobiles and the 

manufacturing sector. Now historically that has been the case. 

 

So, one, if we were to go down there and say, fine, okay on a 

sector-by-sector basis let’s deal with resources, you’re likely to 

hear the people from central Canada say, ah, just a minute, if we 

could come to some agreement on resources, does that mean 

that at the end of the day something else is going to be put on 

the table relating to us. And so you get flipped back and forth. 

 

Now it was able to be done in the auto pact back 20 years ago, 

which is such a large part of our economy. And I suppose if we 

wanted to be on a sector-by-sector basis, and we went first, and 

it dealt with our industries from western Canada, well fine and 

good. I’m not sure the Americans would be prepared to say, 

well what’s in it for us? We don’t export any resources to 

Canada, so what is in our advantage there? And there’s the type 

of problem that you would face. 

 

The second question . . . What was the second question  

about? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Provincial participation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Oh, yes, on the provincial participation. 

The process that’s in place now was dealt with in many 

discussions between the Prime Minister and the premiers, either 

at premiers’ conferences or otherwise; I attended many of those. 

I think it would be fair to say that there’s probably some 

provinces that would tend to be somewhat suspicious of Simon 

Reisman and the process. They all agree that this was the way 

we had to go, in a sense; that Simon Reisman or any negotiator, 

in a bargaining situation, which is what we’re in, had to have 

the freedom to sit at the table and run and organize the 

bargaining process. He would then report back. 

 

I suppose it’s not unlike a government. When you were in 

government, or when we are now in government, if you are 

negotiating with the union, you have to appoint your point man 

to do the bargaining, and then he comes back and reports to you 

as to what’s going on. 

 

I think most provinces, it would be fair to say, that the reporting 

process back has been reasonably good. We’ve been fairly 

satisfied with that. We believe that we have been kept up to 

speed with regard to the negotiations. 

 

The second problem with it would be as follows, and this would 

be the tricky one to deal with. If we as Canadians wanted to be 

at the table, if you like, as one negotiator in the fed and 10 

negotiators from the provinces, would the Americans counter 

by saying, well we’ll want Peter Murphy and we want a guy 

from each of the 50 states and then we want a representative 

from Congress, and you know the Congress system works 

whether we have the majority on Congress or the minority. Or 

do we have those leaders there, and would it even be 

manageable? 

 

I mean, the problem is large enough to try to negotiate between 

two guys. Could you do it in that wide sense with hundreds? 

The unanimous view of the provinces when I was there, is that, 

quite frankly, that this was probably the way it had to go. And I 

think for the most part, if you ask any Premier, they would 

believe that they have been well informed and well briefed — 

their people and the premiers — as to what has taken place. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


