













































September 1, 1987 Hansard Evening


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 1, 1987 

 

 

2217 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 39 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, just before we broke for supper, 

we were discussing the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park and the 

proposal of your government to privatize the park, to lease it 

out to private interest, private developers. And I was attempting 

to get some assurances from you, if in fact you proceed with 

that plan. We were talking about the gate admissions and 

keeping the park accessible to people. 

 

And you will realize that I do have some concern in this regard 

when I read media reports concerning the privatization of the 

Blackstrap operation, and I read through the media that, after 

that leasing out to a private interest, the cost to a family for a 

pass on the Blackstrap ski lift went from $200 to $500. That’s a 

150 per cent increase, and so you will understand my concern 

about the admission charges for the animal park. 

 

On another area, I also read, concerning the privatization of 

Blackstrap, that 15 people lost their jobs through that 

privatization. 

 

And so I would appreciate your assurance tonight that if indeed 

you go ahead with this proposal – ill-advised as it is – to 

privatize the animal park, would you assure me and this House 

that no person currently employed at the animal park will lose 

his or her job. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, that might be a very 

difficult assurance to give depending on the nature of the 

activities that would subsequently be taking place within the 

park. The key work used by the hon. member was “if.” So at 

this point in time, this is strictly hypothetical. We don’t even 

know what kind of expressions of interest do exist out there. So 

that’s a rather difficult assurance for me to give. 

 

I would say, that, naturally, nobody likes to see anybody losing 

their job, and we’ll take every possible mitigating measure open 

to us to ensure the viability, not only to the parks, but the people 

who work there. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I guess we’ve seen such a large 

number of people lose their jobs over the course of this spring 

and summer that we find it a little difficult to accept your 

assurances. 

 

Mr. Minister, just to sort of come to some conclusion on this 

line of questioning. On May 14 of this year, I heard an official 

of your department being interviewed on CBC radio and say 

that if this fall the city of Moose Jaw did not find itself able to 

take over the animal park, and if no private developer, if no 

lease proposal was acceptable, that in fact the animals in the 

part may be disposed of and that in fact it would become little 

more than a glorified  

picnic ground. 

 

I would appreciate your assurance tonight, Mr. Minister, that 

that no longer is the position of your department, and that 

failing an acceptable proposal, failing the city of Moose Jaw, 

that in fact your department will continue to maintain and 

operate the animal park. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I spoke with that official 

personally, and as he put it to me, he was asked a hypothetical 

question and he gave a hypothetical answer. I’ll leave it at that 

for now. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I would ask you not to leave it at 

that. Just, can I have your assurance that if no proposals are 

acceptable, and if the city finds itself unable to take over the 

park, will you ensure that the park will remain a wild animal 

park, that the animals will in fact not be disposed of, and we can 

look forward to another good season in the park next year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We would endeavour to do everything 

possible, Mr. Chairman, to make sure that comes about, but I 

can’t give a cast-iron guarantee that we could continue to 

operate a park losing $250,000 a year ad infinitum. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, then, how long can you, in your 

judgement, continue to operate the park before you dispose of 

the animals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Again, Mr. Chairman, we’re dealing 

with a hypothetical situation. I don’t honestly believe it’s going 

to come to a position where we’re looking at being forced to 

close that park at all. I think that park will be open next year, 

will operate as a wild animal park, and will have some degree 

of success doing that. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I sincerely wish that the 

minister could say more than, he thinks the park will remain the 

park that we know and enjoy today. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think, had the events of this summer not taken 

place, I might very well have come into this House and been 

willing to congratulate the minister and the government for 

continuing the initiative at the wild animal park in Moose Jaw, 

an initiative begun during a time when we were in government. 

 

Through initiatives of both of our governments, we have put in 

place a park of outstanding quality, a park that is accessible to 

families for their enjoyment. We have built, as I’ve said, a 

show-case of indigenous species; we have created what has 

become a major tourist attraction and, in many ways, a centre of 

education. 

 

Of course this kind of park costs money – of course. Of course 

it’s going to take some tax dollars. But I submit that taxpayers 

in this province do not mind their tax dollar going into parks, 

going into the kind of facility that we have at the Moose Jaw 

Wild Animal Park. Every park costs money – you know that, 

Mr. Minister. We have in the city of Moose Jaw a beautiful 

downtown park called Crescent Park. It doesn’t’ generate one 

dollar of revenue, but the taxpayers in the city of Moose Jaw are 

happy to  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2218 

 

fund Crescent Park because it’s a place of beauty, a refuge. 

 

But you can’t expect the city of Moose Jaw to bear the total tax 

bill for the wild animal park and so, frankly, I think it’s a 

mistake, the direction you’ve undertaken. I think it is 

unreasonable to ask the city of Moose Jaw to do it, and if you 

do indeed persist in this plan to privatize the park, I continue to 

fear for accessibility to that park; I fear that the nature of that 

park could be dramatically changed; I fear that the quality of the 

park may suffer because of someone’s search for profit. And 

fundamentally, I think it’s wrong. I think it’s wrong to take a 

public facility, an investment that has been built on goodwill, 

beginning with the Green family way back in the 1920s through 

to the contribution of the Lions Clubs, from local government, 

and then to the province. We’ve invested a great deal of the 

taxpayers’ money in this park – since 1978, the figure you gave 

me, $2.5 million. And I think it’s wrong to take that public 

facility and to put it into private hands for private gain. 

 

I believe you have a responsibility as minister and as a 

department to provide parks for people and rather than trying to 

shift your responsibility on to the city of Moose Jaw or rather 

than threatening to dispose of the park, dispose of the animals 

and so on, I think that we should be looking at constructive 

ways to help meet that deficit and at the same time continue the 

park in the provincial parks system and continue to make it a 

park of quality and accessible to all people in this province. 

 

And so I ask you, Mr. Minister: will you join with the majority 

of public opinion on this one? Will you join with the majority 

of public opinion and stop the ill-advised proposal of 

privatizing the park or trying to put the weight on the city of 

Moose Jaw and maintain it in your department? And let’s talk 

then about some constructive future directions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member made 

some good points. He talked about profit. He’s talked about 

accessibility of the park. He’s talked about perhaps we should 

look at a philosophy of parks for people and not worry too 

much about the cost. Well the fact of the matter is, Mr. 

Chairman, our expenditures on parks in this province, just parks 

alone – forgetting all the rest of the facets of this large 

department; just the parks – is $7 million, and revenue is $2 

million. So the net loss every year is $5 million. Now I have 

never said that I believe that parks ought to or should break 

even. And I rather feel that they won’t break even unless we 

took some really Draconian measures in terms of jacking up the 

fees and the entries which – to use the hon. member’s point – 

could have some restriction on accessibility. And we don’t want 

to see that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

But I do believe we have to narrow that gap of 7 to $2 million, 

somehow. I’m not sure it is fiscally responsible to say that 

we’re going to operate an urban park in the city of Moose Jaw 

with the taxpayers’ money from all of Saskatchewan when 90 

per cent of the benefits go directly to the city of Moose Jaw. 

Now I do concede that it is important in terms of economic 

diversification for the city of Moose Jaw. And that’s why we’re 

taking the  

measures we are, Mr. Chairman, to try and ensure the viability 

of the park, that it can continue, perhaps with some added 

facilities, in there that would make it more attractive to a larger 

segment of our population and to other tourists from perhaps 

beyond our borders. That’s the goal. That’s what we’re trying to 

do. 

 

I can give the member the assurance that I am most sincere in 

wanting to see the park stay open, primarily as a wild animal 

park, but perhaps with some other facilities that would prove to 

be a good drawing card, not only for the park but for the city of 

Moose Jaw also. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

Before I enter the field that I intend to question the minister on 

this evening, I would like to allude to a remark he made prior to 

supper. And he was indicating that on the Diefenbaker Lake, 

the Elbow harbour area, they were spending public funds 

because they were having problems getting private 

entrepreneurs to invest in that area. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, the area I’d like to deal with tonight is the 

Douglas park area, where you have had some success in getting 

a young entrepreneur to venture into the private enterprise 

world, and I believe, Mr. Minister, as well, it’s his first venture. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to speak a few moments tonight about 

Douglas park foods and the family that have invested in a food 

concession and a confectionery there. In 1985, they opened 

their operation. They invested some $60,000 of their own funds, 

and July 1, I believe, was their opening date. And in my 

conversation with this family they indicate to me that some 

commitments were made from your department to them in 

terms of the kinds of facilities that would be available to the 

people who would come to Douglas park, not only because of 

their business operation there, but because of the kinds of park 

facilities that in Saskatchewan we would like to see and that 

Saskatchewan families are used to. 

 

I would ask, Mr. Minister, if you’re familiar with the situation, 

and if you might want to ask your officials to bring out any 

documentation that they have. I’ll give you the name of the 

store – I’ve asked that it be used and there was no problem. The 

name is Douglas park foods, if you could get your officials 

ready with that. 

 

Mr. Minister, one of the main complaints that the people in that 

area were finding was that although there was money invested 

in this confectionery and fast food operation, that, as I said 

before, the facilities that people expect in parks aren’t there. 

 

In 1985, when this business was established, he was under the 

understanding that there was a commitment from your 

department to have a service centre facility located there very 

shortly. Mr. Minister, to this date there is still no facility there – 

showers, toilets – to service the camp grounds, the camp spots, 

and I ask you, Mr. Minister, when might they expect this to 

happen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m advised, Mr. Chairman, we’ll be 

starting that particular facility this fall, early October. 

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2219 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to remind you, Mr. Minister, that 

this man has established this business in 1985. He’s gone 

through, I believe, now his third season without the kind of 

facilities that you, as a department, should be committing 

yourselves to when you would get someone to invest in a 

private enterprise operation in a park. 

 

And I’m glad to see that that facility will be started this fall but, 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to read a couple of quotes from letters to 

yourself and to other MLAs, and I’d like to read into the record 

what his attitude is to the kind of treatment that you’ve given 

him since he established his operation in 1985. And I’m quoting 

from a letter. 

 

I do not mean to appear ungrateful, but I spent $60,000 on 

my building and equipment and the government never made 

an effort to have anything ready for the use of the public until 

late in 1985 to assist my operation. 

 

So what he’s saying is, he committed himself, expecting the 

department to commit themselves, and the kind of promises that 

you committed yourself to, as I understand from his 

correspondence to you and to others, simply wasn’t followed 

through. I ask you, Mr. Minister: are there any other facilities 

for Douglas park, that you are under the impression that he 

would expect, that you still haven’t put in there, that you might 

be willing to put in in the near future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I’m 

advised by officials who’ve handled this situation in the past 

that they did not, in fact, make promises to the individual 

concerned. What they had indicated was the things they’d like 

to be doing in the park, and in that general area. And we 

wanted, I’m told, to have started that service centre in ’86. 

Circumstances didn’t allow it to happen in ’86; it is going to go 

ahead in ’87. 

 

And you asked what had been done in the area — $200,000 

spent on a boat launch and road, $50,000 on beach front and 

landscaping, and 50 new campsites placed in the park. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We appreciate 

your noble efforts to make this an environment where he can 

make a living, but I want to remind you that he struggled 

through, and this is his third season that he’s had some 

difficulties. And I think what I might want to do for you this 

evening is to quote from some of the letters and some of the 

correspondence that he’s had with government officials. This is 

a letter to Gerald Muirhead, the MLA, of June 26, 1986, and I 

quote: 

 

There were promises to provide showers, more electrified 

sites, paving of the boat launch road, paving of the parking 

lot road, and a playground. But the most crucial requirement 

is the showers and more sites. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, he also indicates to me that last winter your 

department came in and bulldozed what are to be sites for 

campers and since then nothing has been done. Can you 

indicate to this House when those campsites will  

be completed and what the total number will be when you’re 

finished? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to address 

two issues or two separate questions. I’ll take your latter 

question first, if I may. 

 

You had asked about campsites. I’m advised that’s ongoing. 

Yes, we did some preparatory work earlier this year; and yes, 

we put campsites in; and yes, we’re ongoing and there will be 

more added in the coming year to that particular area. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Next year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, they should be ready next year. 

 

Now we were talking about a business at Douglas and some 

problems they encountered. And I wasn’t aware of the specifics 

because I hadn’t dealt with the gentleman personally, to the best 

of my knowledge. But one of my officials just sent a letter this 

past week to that same individual – I’m not sure if you’re aware 

of this – and we are voluntarily reducing the lease fee that he’s 

charged in there for last year, with credit applied to this year. 

And I may say this is something which he had already agreed 

to, that particular lease fee, Mr. Chairman. 

 

We voluntarily, as a gesture of goodwill and spirit of 

co-operation and to demonstrate that we’re not at all 

unreasonable and do recognize that he had some difficulties, are 

quite willing to reduce that lease fee down for this year and last 

year with a credit applied to this year. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s very noble. 

This fellow’s been struggling to make a living out there since 

1985 and what we get for help is an indication that the lease fee 

is going to be reduced and, as I say, I commend you for that. 

 

But I just want to draw some of the other problems to your 

attention, and the reason that he’s having problems paying his 

lease fee and the reason that he’s having problems making a 

reasonable profit out there. 

 

He’s done without the service centre – we’ve established that – 

and you’re bringing that in this fall. I understand, and that’s 

fine. Electrified campsites, I assume, are going to be done in the 

year of 1988, as you’ve indicated. But, Mr. Minister, he still 

have a problem. And in a note from him just the other day he 

tells me that they’ve got no beach out there. They’ve got 

nothing but mud and weeds, and repeated suggestions to dump 

sand on that beach have apparently fallen on deaf ears. 

 

He indicates to me that the playground for the children that 

attend that park consists of a swing and three tractor tires. He 

indicates to me that the facilities, the docking facilities for 

boats, are slim to nil and, in short, not acceptable or not 

conducive to bringing people to that park. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, he also has another problem that he feels 

unjustly done. He feels that the fact that you put up a  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2220 

 

toll booth there at the same time he opened his establishment, 

without putting those services in there, was very unfair to him. 

And, Mr. Minister, from what I understand now, I have to agree 

with him. 

 

And if that’s the way we’re going to be treating private 

entrepreneurs, unless they happen to be friends of the 

government, and I’m not sure what this gentleman’s politics 

were – it’s none of my business and I wouldn’t ask – but I’m 

hoping that this individual will get the same kind of treatment 

that the Darryl Binkleys and others in this province will get. 

 

And that’s the commitment, Mr. Minister, that I would ask from 

you tonight, that this operation have the same opportunities to 

make a dollar – private enterprise at one of our provincial parks 

– that any other person in this province might get. 

 

Mr. Minister, as well, I’ll ask for the answers to the questions 

that I’ve asked, but while I’m on my feet, I may as well indicate 

to you that he feels the increase in the camping fees that have 

been placed upon the people in this province and those that 

come to this province has been unfair. He indicates to me that 

the number of people coming to that park are not what it could 

be or what it should be or what it might be because of those fee 

increases. 

 

I have some other figures, Mr. Minister, and you can correct me 

if I’m wrong, but I believe them to be right. In the year of 1986 

some 390 children took swimming lessons at that park. I would 

assume the majority of those are from that area that do their 

annual swimming lessons, as my children and as your children 

probably have done. The fee for those swimming lessons, Mr. 

Minister, used to be $5 a week, I understand that that fee has 

been raised to $12.50 this year, and as well I understand the 

number of children that are taking lessons at that park this year 

has dropped from 390 to 113 children. 

 

If that isn’t an indicator that we’re pricing those children away 

from those parks, it’s  . . . A lot of that area in there is farming 

community. We understand that, and we understand that the 

farming community is fairly hard pressed right now. And if 

those figures aren’t an indicator that we’re chasing our own 

people away from those parks, then, Mr. Minister, I don’t know 

what is. 

 

I’ve asked a number of questions, and if you have some of them 

ready, I’ll take my seat and listen for the answers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps I could revert to 

the business man at Douglas Lake first. 

 

I will say that he wanted that business, and he wanted to get 

into it obviously, so he submitted a proposal. And department 

officials did negotiate in good faith with them. In fact, we did 

some landscaping for him that was not an inconsiderable sum. 

And behind his establishment we put in grass and trees, and the 

problem, I’m told, with the beach is the water level. And there 

are some difficulties there and we acknowledge that. 

 

If we can do something about it that is not going to end up 

being an exorbitant amount of money for us, we would be  

pleased to take a look at it. We don’t want his business to 

suffer, obviously. We’d like him to be a success, as we would 

with any business operating anywhere in the province 

regardless of whether it’s in a park or anywhere else, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

As regards the swimming fees, yes, they did go up. They were 

$5 a week and the figure quoted by the hon. member is correct. 

Again, it’s not a fee that actually makes a profit or makes 

money for the people involved in it, but it does close the gap on 

the amount that is being lost in that particular activity. 

 

I’ve been through some of the park numbers and park fees and 

some comparisons with other members earlier in estimates a 

few weeks ago, and we don’t really think that the fees that we 

are charging in our parks are out of line with what is going on 

in other provinces, or what was proposed earlier in the year in 

other provinces, or in national parks. They vary slightly but 

we’re not really that far out of line, Mr. Chairman. 

 

We won’t know for sure on the numbers until mid-October 

when they have been compiled for the whole year, and I’d 

already assured some of your colleagues on that side of the 

House that those numbers would be made available to them. I 

believe it was  . . . (inaudible interjection)  . . . Yes, and we 

would get that information to you as soon as it’s compiled. 

 

We had numbers for the early part of the year, and they did not 

seem to be significantly down in terms of park visitations. I 

have been advised, however, that due to some inclement 

weather in the latter part of the summer, we did experience a 

dip in the number of visitations; and yes, it did affect swimming 

lessons, and I can attest to that in my own constituency on 

Chitek Lake. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I think if I were 

to offer a suggestion to your department, and I’m hoping it will 

be taken in the spirit that is intended, that this particular 

business man knows full well that the visitation rates are down 

in his park. I know full well they’re down in the park that’s 

adjacent to my cabin at Murray Point on Emma Lake, and that, 

I’m sure, will prove to be correct. 

 

(1930) 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I’d like to spend a little bit of time tonight 

dealing with forestry, and I just want to make a few remarks 

before I do. And what I’d like to indicate, Mr. Minister, is that 

I’m a little disappointed that this government hasn’t seen fit to 

treat forestry – one of the major industries in our province and 

in western Canada, but especially in our province – with the 

respect that it does indeed demand. 

 

I’m curious as to what’s going to happen in these estimates, Mr. 

Chairman, because I’m not sure if there’s one department that’s 

totally in charge of forestry, or if some of the questions that I 

might ask regarding the forest in our province might be shunted 

to another department as we’ve seen in other estimates. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s SFPC’s (Saskatchewan Forest  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2221 

 

Products Corporation) department. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Pardon? 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s SFPC’s department. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well those are questions  . . . The 

Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation, I understand, is 

under the minister from Meadow Lake. I am hoping that I can 

get answers that I want this evening from you, because as I said, 

I feel a little bit disappointed that this government hasn’t seen 

fit to handle forestry with a department – a department of the 

stature that it does really require because of the future that it can 

give our children and the people of our province, and, as I said, 

that disappoints me. 

 

Mr. Minister, I don’t want to take a lot of time tonight, although 

I’m sure we could spend a couple or three hours dealing with it, 

but I’m going to try some questions on your department. And 

let’s hope the shoe fits because I don’t want to be chasing 

around three or four different departments here asking questions 

that people have asked me to bring to this House. 

 

And I’d like to ask you, Mr. Minister, about inspections done 

by resource officers with the forestry branch of your 

department. I’d like to know, are the inspections done at the 

operations of the various companies identical, or do they vary 

depending on the size or whatever that might be? I’m asking, 

Mr. Minister, if the procedures vary depending on the 

companies involved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I tell the hon. member 

he’s asking the right minister with that particular type of 

question, and if your questions relate to reforestation, 

silviculture, forest management in general, then yes, you’re 

speaking to the right minister. 

 

In answer to the question the hon. member just asked, there are 

no distinctions made between companies. Foresters, and in 

some cases resource officers, are responsible for on-site 

inspections and checking levels, checking quality of work that’s 

being done, and the standards are the same for everybody. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, you indicate that there are 

no restrictions placed on resource officers of the forestry 

branch, and I would like to know if that pertains to 

investigations involving Weyerhaeuser. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, specifically as it relates 

to Weyerhaeuser, as the hon. member knows, a forest 

management agreement was negotiated with Weyerhaeuser 

which places upon them, contingent to the FMLA (forestry 

management licensing agreement), specific requirements. Now 

the requirements don’t vary significantly from what is required 

of everybody else, and as FMLAs are in place with all 

companies, they will all reflect the same requirements. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I wasn’t asking the 

situation of the forest management licence agreement. We’ve 

all seen that; we all know what it does. I was asking the role of 

the resource officers in the forestry branch of your department. 

When they do inspections  

during Weyerhaeuser cutting operations, is there any 

difference? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, just a point of 

clarification, if the hon. member wouldn’t mind. You’re saying 

resource officers. Now we’re not talking about the role of 

conservation officers who have seen some duties in the forest, 

you’re speaking about resource officers within the forestry 

branch of the department. Am I right? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you. Essentially, Mr. Chairman, 

they’re not being treated differently than anybody else. The 

resource officers have been instructed to work with them 

because they are a licensee. They are site-specific because of 

the FMLA and because of requirements that have been built 

into it. What we are interested in is good utilization of the forest 

and good management. And our resource officers work with the 

licensee to ensure that will happen. And when we negotiate the 

FMLAs, or finish signing them with the other companies, the 

same requirements will be in place, and the same type of 

relationship will exist where the officers go and deal directly 

with the licensee. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Maybe then, I could get you, Mr. 

Minister, to explain the procedure. I’d like, I guess, to know 

what will happen say in the instance of a trespass cut, where an 

operator is out and cuts in an area that they weren’t authorized 

to cut it. Can you explain to us, what do the officers do? Who 

do they issue instructions to? Who do they report to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, at one time, I’m 

advised, it was automatic to fine people if they strayed into an 

area which was not in their cutting rights. In other words, if 

they didn’t have cutting rights in that area and they were in 

there, it was regarded as trespass, and at that point, officers who 

would be out checking on them would bring them in and they 

would be fined. 

 

What is happening now is that we are negotiating with groups, 

we advise them when they’re in areas that they shouldn’t be in 

or if there has been no clearance to be in that area, and we 

discuss it with them rather than automatically imposing a fine. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Then I would ask you, Mr. Minister: 

when these officers fill out a report on forest operations, can 

you perhaps tell me what the process is there? Do they have any 

direct  . . . These resource officers, do they have any direct 

contact with Weyerhaeuser, or are they sent to senior officials 

in your department where they might be buried? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the resource officers do 

have contact in their field with operators who are out there, 

whether it be Weyerhaeuser or other companies. They do deal 

with them directly. 

 

If they have a problem with one of the operators and it is 

something that can be resolved, then it is indeed passed up the 

line. It’s not buried, however. It is passed up the line because it 

comes in a written form. It would go to the regional forester and 

ultimately to the executive director  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2222 

 

of forestry branch. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — So you’re telling me then, Mr. Minister, 

if one of your officers is in the field and finds a problem, that 

they’re to report back to the department where it goes to senior 

levels, and senior levels will deal with, as an example, 

Weyerhaeuser, as opposed to the people. If this is in case the 

fact, Mr. Minister, isn’t this a major shift in policy, in 

government policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, Mr. Chairman, I’m advised it’s not 

a major shift in government policy. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, let me go back to this now. Prior to 

this change in  . . . in this supposed change in your type of 

administration, or the way you administer this, the resource 

officers would perhaps deal with the camp foreman, or the 

people at that level, to try and resolve the dispute. Now they’re 

asked to pass it on to senior levels who will deal with perhaps 

Weyerhaeuser at senior levels. Is that what you’re saying the 

change is, and you’re telling this House that isn’t a major shift? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s only handled  

. . . it’s only passed on if it can’t be handled at the field level 

and resolved. If there’s some problem that constitutes a dispute 

of some type, then it would be referred to officials within the 

department who would then deal with the problem. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well now  . . . I’m not really clear. So 

you’re saying then if the resource officer can’t come to an 

agreement with the camp foreman, or who’s ever in charge of 

the harvesting company, that only in the case of a dispute 

between those that can’t be resolved at that level does it come 

up to senior levels. Is that what you’re saying? 

 

Because I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that’s not what your 

officers feel, and that’s not what the direction they have 

indicated to me that they’re getting is. They’re telling me that it 

goes to senior management level who deal with the forest 

operations at a senior management level, and that basically the 

role that they have as resource officers and people who should 

then be there to protect the forests of this province, that they no 

longer have a role because of this change in your direction and 

this change in your philosophy. 

 

I want to say to you this: if there is a dispute, those people know 

full well what their job is. They know the conditions of the 

FMLA and the cutting rights that these people are given. I know 

that many of those have been in that business for many years 

and worked for this government and for this department for a 

number of years and know full well what their job should be. 

And you’re telling me that this doesn’t constitute a change in 

government philosophy where the control is taken out of the 

hands at the local level, the people that know those forests? It 

goes up through the chain of your government department’s 

bureaucracy, and then your government deals with 

Weyerhaeuser, and you’re telling me that that’s not a change in 

direction, and are you telling me that that’s better for the forests 

of this province? 

 

(1945) 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, ‘twas ever thus. That’s 

the way it’s been done for years. Now I don’t know to which 

resource officers the hon. member has been speaking, or which 

officers are particularly unhappy with forest management, or 

which ones may even be unhappy with the presence of 

Weyerhaeuser in the province, but I’m advised that was a 

system, that’s the way problems have always been handled. 

 

Resource officers at the field level attempt to ameliorate 

whatever difficulties they find. If it’s a problem that they can’t 

handle themselves and conversely, if it’s a problem that the 

field staff of the company involved can’t handle, then they take 

it to their superiors, our officers take it to their superiors. They 

get together, discuss it, and hopefully a resolution is 

forthcoming. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I will make this very clear, 

that you’re not going to know which resource officers that I’ve 

been talking to because I think they’re professionals who’ve 

been doing their job and want to continue doing their job and 

care very much about what’s happening in this forest and care 

very much about what’s happening in this province. 

 

I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister, that it’s not an isolated case of 

one resource officer that I’ve talked to. I’ve talked to a number 

throughout this province, and they indicate to me that they were 

given instructions that they weren’t to give any instructions to 

camp foremen or to contractors. Now if this is the case  . . . And 

it’s clear by your statements tonight that you have taken some 

responsibility away from them in terms of protecting the cutting 

areas. It’s pretty clear to me that that’s happened; and I think 

it’s clear to the people of this province. If that’s the case, do you 

not feel that centralizing the power within the upper 

management level of your department as opposed to letting 

resource officers do their work is the wrong way to go if you 

have the interests of this province and of those forests at heart? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Perhaps I’m reading something into this 

the hon. member doesn’t intend, but it appears to me that 

there’s an allegation being made that somewhere, whether it 

comes from my office because ultimately I’m responsible and 

the FMLA is under my jurisdiction, my administration, and 

exists between Weyerhaeuser and my department, for which I 

have stewardship – that somehow the direction comes either 

from my office or the deputy minister, assistant deputy minister, 

down the line to the resource officers to do something perhaps 

untoward. That allegation is simply not true, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The resource officers are empowered to do their job in the field, 

whether it be inspecting a logging plan and making sure it’s in 

order to looking at cutting rights and areas. That’s their role, 

that’s their job. And they haven’t been told to do anything 

untoward. I would just have to assume the hon. member will 

believe whatever he wants to believe. 

 

He talks about professional resource officers. Well I guess we 

may have a slight difference of philosophy there, but I would 

deem those civil servants less than professional if  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2223 

 

they feel obligated to run with stories to a member of the 

opposition rather than deal with it internally where it would 

belong. Now maybe that was not the inference; if not, then fair 

enough, we’ll just be disagreeing on upon it. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I’m not going to stand here 

and debate the professionalism of a resource officer or 2 or 3 or 

5 who have worked for this government for longer than your 

government has been around. And the fact that they can’t get 

any kind of response through your department doesn’t make 

them any less professional than if they were able to get answers 

through your department, that they wouldn’t have to go the 

opposition in order to get help to make their case. 

 

There seems to be a difference of opinion there, and, Mr. 

Minister, there will continue to be a difference of opinion in 

terms of that. 

 

I would like to carry on, and I’m afraid that the length it’s taken 

you to get answers back to me, we would be here for many, 

many weeks, and many weeks longer than I think the 

government side or the opposition side want to be, because it’s 

clear, Mr. Minister, that you don’t know your department. In a 

half an hour it became clear to me, when I have to wait for five 

minutes for an answer to what should be a very simple question, 

it tells me that there is a problem over there, and that’s maybe 

why you have some disillusioned or disgruntled staff. 

 

Mr. Minister, I will pass on these estimates to the member from 

The Battlefords – he has a few questions to ask of you – and if 

time permits this evening, get back into some questions on 

forestry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I was going to give the 

member the last word. Good manners cost nothing, so I was 

quite prepared to just let him have the last word. I realize, you 

know, he’s got to score his political points – that’s the name of 

the game. Certain members of this side of the House were in 

opposition at one time, and, I guess, they didn’t do anything 

particularly differently, so I’ll just leave the comments of the 

hon. member from P.A.-Duck Lake and move on to the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We certainly 

appreciate your good manners, Mr. Minister. 

 

I would like to, first off, before I go into forestry – I do have 

some questions on forestry I would like to talk about with you 

this evening – but I would like to ask about a question you had 

taken notice on last time you were here in estimates, and it 

concerned the hiring procedure at The Battlefords Provincial 

Park golf course in which ultimately one Mrs. Hamilton was 

hired. And I had asked you as to what the hiring procedure was. 

You had indicated that there were three other people who had 

been offered the position and had, in fact, turned it down, and I 

was wondering if you were in a position now to answer as to the 

hiring procedure, and as to actually who the other three people 

were who had turned the job down, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I asked staff to 

check out that particular situation and get back to me, and I am 

assured that everything was done above-board;  

everything was done according to the rules. There was no 

hanky-panky in this at all, otherwise I’m sure we’d have heard a 

grievance filed by somebody else. 

 

I do have the names of the three people who had been offered 

the position and chose not to take it; they were from other areas. 

I’m not sure I’d be serving them well by reading their names 

into the record this evening. 

 

I felt, Mr. Chairman, that I came here to estimates to talk about 

things like the North American water-fowl plan; the heritage 

marsh program; the prairie pot-hole project; The Critical 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act; major thrusts in forestry, where 

we want to go in the next five years with planting seedlings. 

 

And in all honesty and in all sincerity, Mr. Chairman, I don’t 

know how we’re serving the people of Saskatchewan, the 

members of the legislature on either side, by wrangling over 

one hiring of a summer position of one person which was 

handled in a fair and equitable manner. Otherwise, as I say, 

there would have been recourse through union or PSC (Public 

Service Commission) for a grievance procedure. I just feel that 

we should be doing all these other things that are so much more 

exciting and things that people really want to hear about and 

things that they’re concerned about. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, you had indicated that it 

was important the last time we appeared in estimates. You had 

indicated that in fact you would release that information. In 

fact, if I can recall your words from memory, you had an 

official running out to the telephone to get that information for 

you, and I don’t know what the change of heart has been since. 

I agree there are many other important situations to go on to. I 

find it difficult to take what you say at face value, when you say 

one thing when you’re in estimates at a prior date and 

something totally else when you appear in estimates at this 

time, here this evening in this House. 

 

Are you saying to us that even though you have said you will 

release that information as to what the procedure was, who the 

three individuals were who were offered the job – you’ve said 

you would give us that information – are you saying here this 

evening you will not give us that information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, here’s the procedure. No 

local employees were on lay-off in that particular park, 

therefore out-of-town employees were considered. The 

department approached and offered this particular vacancy, a 

sales and service attendant 1 vacancy, to three non-local 

employees who were not been recalled to their own jobs. These 

employees rejected the offers. A long-standing PSC practice has 

been that names of applicants for vacancies are not disclosed 

because often the individuals involved consider this process to 

be confidential and personal. 

 

This particular position is an entry level position, was filled 

from an inventory of applicants held by the Public Service 

Commission. And the filling of entry level positions in this 

manner is in accordance with the SGEU (Saskatchewan 

Government Employees’ Union) agreement. 

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2224 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your 

partial answer, Mr. Minister, and I won’t pursue that because I 

think it’s likely a waste of time trying to get you to, in fact, 

reveal the information in the hiring practice that you’ve 

instituted within the department. 

 

I would like to, Mr. Minister, ask you about a very serious 

situation, and it involves an individual that was released from 

your department. This individual is a resource officer in 

Melfort, one Mr. Barry Steward. Apparently Mr. Steward was 

charged by the department, or by the government, whichever 

the case might be, on two individual charges. When Mr. 

Steward went to court, Mr. Steward was not found guilty; he in 

fact beat the two charges that the government took him to court 

on. I understand that the department is considering appealing 

the decision of the courts. I would like to know from the 

minister whether or not there is going to be an appeal filed by 

your department or by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, essentially the facts as 

presented by the hon. member are correct. I can advise him the 

Department of Justice did put in an appeal. It had to be done 

within 30 days, and the Department of Justice did that. It’s not 

really in our hands, so it’s rather difficult for me to comment 

upon it, but there is a grievance procedure with SGEU. There 

will be a full hearing; it will go the full course, and I’m sure that 

justice will prevail. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, the individual and his 

family have through a lot of turmoil in their lives since he was 

released from the department, and it has cost him large sums of 

money and personal concern. He has had to move from the 

community of Melfort. 

 

I’m wondering whether or not if, in the appeal process, if the 

Department of Justice does in fact appeal, and the appeal court 

in fact holds up the ruling of the preliminary findings of the 

court, whether or not the department will consider taking Mr. 

Steward back on as an employee of the department or 

acknowledge that he was wrongfully dismissed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that this 

will be going to arbitration, in any event, despite the appeal and 

the outcome of the appeal. And should the individual win the 

arbitration we’d be bound by any decision that was handed 

down by the arbitrator. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Chairman, I was wondering if the 

minister could describe the arbitration process. Has Mr. 

Steward been given notice that this will go to arbitration? Is the 

SGEU involved in the arbitration case? Does Mr. Steward have 

representation on his behalf by the union, or is he to appear 

himself? Is there a location? Could please provide us with the 

details of the arbitration, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I think I can give 

you that information. It’s gone through the grievance procedure 

with SGEU and it’s now gone to arbitration which goes before a 

three-member panel: one independent member, one 

management appointee, and  

one from union. And he’s represented by an SGEU staffer. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I was wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could 

tell us the name of the arbitrator in the case. There’s three 

individuals on the arbitration committee or the arbitration 

board, whichever the case might be. Could you tell us who 

those individuals are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry, we don’t 

know the composition of the three-member panel. We don’t 

have names of those members. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well I would think that the department would 

nominate the arbitrator in the case for the committee. I’d like to 

know: first, whether or not you put forward a nomination as the 

arbitrator; and secondly, Mr. Minister, whether or not there has 

been a date set and whether or not Mr. Steward has been 

notified of the date for the first hearing on this arbitration 

matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that this is 

handled under the auspices of the Public Service Commission, 

and indeed the management rep would not be appointed from 

within this group you would see here. It wouldn’t be from the 

department; it would be appointed elsewhere. 

 

I don’t have specifics of dates or that kind of information, but 

we can certainly find out and send it to you. I’ll have to go back 

to the Public Service Commission, however, to get that because 

it’s not handled within this department. It’s handled through the 

Public Service Commission. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I’d appreciate if the minister would look into 

that or have one of his staff members in fact look into it, 

because it is a very serious case. Although it may not be for the 

minister or for myself or other members, it’s certainly a very 

serious situation for Mr. Steward. 

 

I understand that the arbitration process, Mr. Minister, comes 

about by way of the government appointing one individual, the 

Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union appointing 

another individual, and the two of them agreeing on an 

arbitrator – and I see the minister acknowledging that that is the 

correct process. 

 

I’m wondering whether or not the SGEU and the Government 

of Saskatchewan – whoever represents the Government of 

Saskatchewan – has met to put forward names for an arbitrator 

in this case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the process as outlined 

by the hon. member is correct. The department meets with 

Public Service Commission and agree on a management 

representative. The union representative, I believe, is already 

appointed. I also believe the management rep and the union rep 

– whoever they may be, because we don’t have the names – 

have met to decide on a third party arbitrator. And those names, 

as I say, I’ll have to check with Public Service Commission. I’ll 

have my staff check that through the Public Service 

Commission to find the names, or I imagine you could get it 

direct from Public Service Commission, if you so choose. If 

not, then I’d be happy to try and find it for you. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, the individual was a former  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2225 

 

employee of the department that’s represented by the minister, 

and I would appreciate that if the minister or someone in your 

department or your office, if you in fact, Mr. Minister, would 

give me your undertaking that in fact you will communicate 

with me to make sure that Mr. Steward is aware of the process 

that’s involved, the requirements of him, and in fact when he 

has a chance to present his case before arbitration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’ll attempt  . . . 

Well I don’t need to attempt; I know I can find your 

information. The officials say that we’ll get a hold of Public 

Service Commission, have the three names, and send them to 

the hon. member. Obviously he has been represented by a 

SGEU staffer, so I’m sure SGEU have made him aware of the 

situation and his rights in this particular case. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, I appreciate 

your responses. I say again, it’s a very serious situation, 

certainly for Mr. Steward, and I would hope that there is some 

remedy found through arbitration even though he has not been 

able to find a remedy through the department till this point in 

time. 

 

I’d like to turn now, Mr. Minister, to some things involved in 

forestry, and I was wondering if the minister could tell us in fact 

what the situation is at the tree nursery in Prince Albert. 

 

At the tree nursery there, as I understand, they had reached a 

maximum production of seedlings of some 11 million per year, 

and in subsequent years that has been reduced to about 6 

million, and in fact this year there’ll only be about 3 million 

seedlings produced from the Prince Albert forestry nursery. I 

find that a difficult situation to accept. I think that trees are 

being taken out of our forests at a much more rapid rate than 

what they are being replaced and that will cause serious 

repercussions for the forestry industry in Saskatchewan in years 

to come. 

 

So my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: is it in fact correct that 

this year there will only be about 3 million seedlings produced 

from the Prince Albert nursery? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the inventory count for 

this year is 6 million. For next year, however, we’re gearing 

that up to 10 million to meet our goal over the next five years. 

We have a commitment. There was a decision of cabinet, I 

believe it was in June, to plant 50 million over five years so we 

have to gear up our nursery capacity to handle that, which 

would be 10 million per year. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — So, Mr. Minister, you’re saying to me that the 

Prince Albert nursery will turn out 6 million seedlings this year. 

Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, that would be between P.A. nursery 

and the Big River nursery. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, how many seedlings will the 

Prince Albert nursery turn out this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That would be approximately 3.5  

million seedlings, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, there’s also an operation at 

Chitek Lake, I understand. It’s a private concern that supplies 

trees to the department. Could you tell us what that private 

concern at Chitek Lake is turning out this year, or what the 

department is going to be taking from  . . . the number of 

seedlings that the department will be taking from the Chitek 

Lake operation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The Chitek Lake operation was a 

government operation, Mr. Chairman. It’s not in operation this 

year. We’re not going to be operating it. It had a maximum 

capacity of about one and a half million. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I understand that there is a 

nursery in the Macdowall area as well. Could you tell us what 

the numbers are that will be coming out of Macdowall this 

year? 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The Macdowall is a  . . . We call it 

south branch, which is again a satellite nursery. Chitek Lake 

and south branch were both satellites with a maximum capacity 

of about one and a half million. We are not operating south 

branch this year, and south branch has an inventory on hand of 

just under half a million, which we will be salvaging and using. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, could you tell us, in total, 

out of the Prince Albert nursery, including the satellites, how 

many seedlings will be produced this year – not counting ones 

that are in reserve at Macdowall, but the total number of 

seedlings that’ll be raised this year out of the Prince Albert 

nursery with the satellites. How many seedlings will we have 

grown out of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The number shipped from both those 

nurseries this year will be approximately 6 million. That doesn’t 

reflect future capacity, or on hold for new program. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, could you now tell us how 

many seedlings Weyerhaeuser will be providing this year and 

where, in fact, Weyerhaeuser are obtaining their seedlings from. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. The total for 

government and industry for this year will be approximately 6 

million, as I’d said, and Weyerhaeuser will be responsible for 

almost 1.7 million. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Could the minister tell us where 

Weyerhaeuser is obtaining their seedlings from. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we supply them. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Would the minister care to explain? You told 

me the total requirement for this year is 6 million; 1.7 million of 

those are coming from Weyerhaeuser. 

 

An Hon. Member: — To Weyerhaeuser. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Oh, 1.7 of the 6 million are going to  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2226 

 

Weyerhaeuser for reforestation. Is Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Minister, 

providing any seedlings from outside the province of 

Saskatchewan in order to reforest the areas that they’re cutting 

in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, Mr. Chairman, they’re not using 

anything from outside the province. I do know, having visited 

several of the nurseries and looked at some of the experiments 

that are taking place, they have been working with some 

high-grade stuff. It’s not a significant amount, but that’s in the 

province. I’m sorry if I misled the hon. member. I don’t believe 

I did. I didn’t use the wrong preposition there, I don’t think. 

 

We supply seedlings to the companies. That’s our responsibility 

and we’ve always done that. So to Weyerhaeuser would be 

approximately 1.7 million, and Simpson Timber, approximately 

375,000 and so on. We supply those, and the total would be 

about 6 million for this year. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Could the minister tell us, at the present 

harvesting rate of the forests in the province of Saskatchewan, 

what the number of seedlings would be to replace the 

harvesting operations that deplete the forests. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, under the terms of the 

forest management licence agreement negotiated with 

Weyerhaeuser, which is a model for the other agreements with 

the other companies – L&M has already been signed; Simpson 

is in the works; MacMillan Bloedel is in the works – 

negotiating those. What we’re trying to do is put the onus for 

reforestation and forest management back on to the companies 

so that they will be reforesting as they go and sites will be 

scarified and prepared for reforestation. Specifically, are we 

cutting down more trees than we are planting? Yes, we are. But 

I point out that we have still not cut down the first tree that was 

planted as a seedling in Saskatchewan, given the length of time 

it takes to grow a commercial forest. 

 

With the change in the mix of woods that are now being utilized 

within Saskatchewan, and as technology has changed so the 

aspen, poplar, has become more popular and usable, it’s 

changing the forecast for what we need for future harvest 

schedules. Because the companies are moving more away from 

the softwoods to the hardwoods and it’s kind of changing the 

picture of what is required, not just in this province but in other 

provinces across Canada too. 

 

We recognize that there has been some shortfall in planting in 

years gone by. But contrary to some published reports, I’d like 

to reiterate that in the last four years of the former 

administration they planted approximately 39 million trees. 

Corresponding over the four-year period – the first four years of 

our administration – we planted 45 million trees. Now I’m not 

using this as a statement to say, ha, we beat you or we’re better 

than you. Quite frankly – 39 million, 45 million – there are 

those on both sides of the House who would argue that neither 

is enough. And we have set our target for the next five years. 

And this year, and I stand here and admit is not a good planting 

year for us, but given the next five years we’re committing to 

put in 50 million in the next five years. 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wasn’t here to get you 

to make a political statement. What I asked you was, to what 

the reforestation rate would have to be. If you look at the 

current depletion rates of taking forests out, how many 

seedlings do we have to put back in per year to keep up with the 

current rate of depletion of the forests? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, and this opens up 

all kinds of interesting debate about what the future of forestry 

is in Saskatchewan, given our climate, and given the length of 

time it takes to grow a commercial forest here, as opposed to 

some other parts of the country where the climate is somewhat 

more favourable towards a quick growth. But we can’t grow a 

commercial forest of softwood in under probably 75 years; in 

fact, to maturity and to a full harvest schedule, would be closer 

to 90 years. But if we were going to say one for one, a tree 

harvested to a tree replaced, we’d probably be looking at about 

17 million a year, but that would be based on the premise that 

we would be using only the softwoods and nothing else. 

 

But what has happened in the last few years is with the demand 

for aspen, that has come down and in fact the volume that will 

be harvested by companies and individual operators I really 

believe will decrease on those softwoods, as the demand for the 

hardwoods increases. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I don’t want to unduly delay the estimates, 

Mr. Minister, but I would like to turn very briefly to the issue of 

wood-fired electrical generators, and I’m wondering whether or 

not your department has done any studies or has had any 

communication with companies or other interests that would be 

interested in looking at using the aspen, or what are considered 

traditional waste woods in the province, for producing electrical 

power plus other by-products from that operation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I recall about 40 years 

ago there were studies done, but it was done under the auspices 

of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and not, I believe, this 

department. 

 

I remember meeting with groups from other provinces who 

were interested in getting into that business in Saskatchewan, 

and I wasn’t the minister of forestry at that particular point in 

time. But where they wanted to go was in my own constituency. 

That’s why I was involved with the discussions. I can tell the 

hon. member if he wants to get into that with the minister 

responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation when his 

estimates are up, you’ll find he is very knowledgeable on that 

particular subject. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I want to give my other 

colleagues a chance at you in your department. 

 

An Hon. Member: — With. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — With you? Well, certainly. 

 

But I would like to find out from the minister what the status of 

the application is by Weyerhaeuser to do some spraying to do 

defoliage of broad-leaved trees in northern  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2227 

 

Saskatchewan. We understood during the environmental 

estimates, from the Minister of Environment, that 

Weyerhaeuser had made application to your department to do 

some spraying in northern Saskatchewan, and I’m wondering 

whether or not you are aware of that, and whether or not, in 

fact, you’ve granted permission for Weyerhaeuser to do the test 

spraying in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, Weyerhaeuser has 

not submitted any application to the department for a spraying 

program. About two years ago, three years ago, the former 

company, PAPCO, had submitted an application and then they 

withdrew it. I believe, however, that the Canadian forestry 

service has submitted a 2.27 hectare experimental proposal, and 

that’s where it is now. Candle Lake was the  . . . yes, the area 

that they were talking of using, and nothing has happened with 

that yet, as far as I’m aware. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Have they made the application to your 

department to do that spraying, Mr. Minister? 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’m sorry? 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Have they made the application to your 

department to conduct spraying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, they have made an 

application for that small plot. It hasn’t been considered yet; the 

application would still be under review. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, it’s indeed a pleasure to 

finally get to speak to the minister responsible for Parks, 

Recreation and Culture, directly. I want to discuss with him a 

topic of concern that I have corresponded with him about for 

some time now and that is the privatization of the Blackstrap ski 

operation, about 25 miles outside of Saskatoon. And that 

operation is of significant importance to the people of 

Saskatoon because a number of people use the skiing operation 

in the winter-time. 

 

As the minister will recall, I first started to correspond with him 

shortly after the election. My first letter was sent to him on 

November 24. I then sent another letter to him on December 12, 

and I was asking a series of questions about the arrangements 

made between the department and the commercial operator of 

the facility. The minister did respond on December 19, but his 

response was less than satisfactory. I then wrote him again on 

January 13, February 5 and February 24. I did finally receive a 

response shortly thereafter. I wrote again March 23 and May 6, 

and in my final letter to him I told him that I would appreciate 

receiving a response to my letter of February 24, and that if he 

intended not to respond to my request for information I would 

appreciate an indication from him to that effect. 

 

(2030) 

 

Well it’s interesting, Mr. Chairperson, the minister finally did 

respond on July 13, 1987 – some three months after I’d initially 

wrote my letter in May. 

 

So in order to stop the paper war, I think I’ll ask the  

minister some questions directly. And in particular, Mr. 

Minister, I want you to advise the people of Saskatchewan, and 

advise this House, the name of the person who leased the skiing 

operation at Blackstrap; how that person got to lease the 

operation. Was it put out for public tender? Could you also 

advise us the amount that that individual will be paying for the 

year 1987-88 to lease the operation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. As the hon. 

member is aware the lessee is one Lloyd Hedemann. He was an 

existing lessee at Blackstrap. He and his mother had operated a 

pro shop, food service, lessons, for some time. Policy within the 

department has been – and before I got there – that a new 

business would be offered to an existing lessee. And the new 

business which was being offered, and he was interested in it, 

because he’s a professional – he understands skiing very well – 

was to take over the operation of the ski hill. So in actual fact 

there are two separate leases in existence here. The first lease is 

on the shop operation and the second lease is on the hill, for 

which we receive some $30,000 a year, plus in each of the next 

five years an extra $2,500 per year. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I’m quite aware that Mr. 

Hedemann did run the shop. Can you advise me when he first 

started operating the facility surrounding the ski hill. I’m not 

talking about the pro shop or the concession booth, I’m talking 

about the facility that skiers use when utilizing the ski hill. Can 

you tell me when he first got into that side of the operation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — According to notes that I have, it would 

be May of 1985 because that’s when the department entered 

into a one-year fee for service agreement with Headway 

Management Limited, which is of course operated by Lloyd 

Hedemann, for the ‘85-86 operation of the Blackstrap ski area. 

I’m assuming that was the intent of your question. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So if I’m correct  . . . Am I correct in saying 

then he entered into a rent for service contract with the 

department, and that, for the most part, the department provided 

the staff for the operation, they made the snow, and they did the 

grooming and repair and maintenance around the operation? Is 

that correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is 

essentially correct. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you advise me whether or 

not it is true that in the 1985-86 year of operation that the 

Blackstrap ski operation had its very highest deficit in the 

history of the Blackstrap ski hill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, no, that wasn’t the 

highest operating deficit that it experienced. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, in the information that 

you gave me in your letter of February 5, 1987, you sent along 

to me a revenue/expense sheet for the year ‘78-79 through to 

‘85-86. And I found it quite unusual to see that in 1985-86 – 

and I’m looking at this unaudited statement that you provided 

me – that that was the year in which we had the highest deficit 

ever at the Blackstrap  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2228 

 

ski operation. So I find it curious that you are privatizing the ski 

hill operation, giving it to a lessee who has had one year of 

experience running the hill, has had the full advantage of the 

department of parks and renewable resources staff, and for the 

most part has used the staff to run the ski hill operation and to 

do the snow and do the grooming and that kind of thing, and yet 

this small-business person, or business man, experiences the 

highest deficit at the Blackstrap ski hill ever in the history of the 

hill, as far as my information is concerned – information that 

you supplied me with. 

 

Now nevertheless, I had asked you for a copy of the leasing 

agreement between the lessee and the department. I was able to 

obtain that, not through you but through other means. And I was 

interested to see that one of the provisions in the agreement has 

to do with personnel, and it says here that: 

 

The lessee shall employ an adequate number of competent, 

neat, and obliging personnel in order to carry on the 

operations, and shall comply with all federal, provincial, and 

municipal laws respecting employees. 

 

If that is the case, can the minister explain to me why this lessee 

is violating section 37 of The Trade Union Act that states very 

clearly that employees who are employees of one particular 

operation and then they become employees of another operation 

– the operation is transferred from one person or company to 

another – that under section 37 the new employer has an 

obligation to those employees? My interpretation of your lease, 

signed between the department and Mr. Hedemann, is that he is 

violating one of the provisions in your own lease, and that is to 

abide by provincial laws, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, with regards to 

that section 37, there was a ruling handed down, and what it 

said was the SGEU would be the bargaining agent for the 

employees and now they have to sit down and bargain. So I 

don’t know if he’s in contravention of any laws, I’m not aware 

of it. I was aware of the judgement when it came down and that 

was the interpretation given to me. 

 

Now let’s revert to a couple of other things the hon. member 

brought up. The ‘85-86  . . . I am assuming – you may nod your 

head or shake as you so choose – I’m assuming the figure you 

got was $142,193. I’m sorry, the figure was wrong. And I’ve 

got it scratched in by hand down here, and there was a little 

asterisk beside it. It didn’t include entry gate revenue. So in 

actual fact, the figure was considerably lower than that and 

certainly lower than the year before. 

 

But I would point out that since that year he’s taken over the 

operation, there is no deficit because it cost us nothing and he’s 

paying for the whole operation. And by all accounts, and I 

won’t bore you or take up your time by reading newspaper 

reports to you, but the Star-Phoenix itself ran a column saying 

how much better the skiing was, how much better the 

conditions were now that Hedemann was looking after it, and 

it’s not costing the taxpayers any money at all. 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, wasn’t the real purpose of this 

little revenue and expense statement to show me why it was 

such a great benefit to the people of this province to have this 

particular facility, that the people of Saskatchewan have bought 

and paid for, privatized? And so when you now tell me that the 

information you gave me was much overstated and 

over-inflated, I’m suspect as to why you sent me faulty 

information in the first place. I’m suspect because I think what 

you were trying to do was paint a case for privatization. And so 

anything you say is suspect in view of the fact that you did not 

give me the proper information in the first place. 

 

Now getting back to the employees under section 37 of The 

Trade Union Act, 15 employees were dismissed from their jobs 

at that Blackstrap ski operation, dismissed by your department 

because Mr. Hedemann wanted to hire his own employees and 

he didn’t want to pay union wages. Isn’t the real purpose of 

privatization not only to so-call lower your deficit, but to lower 

the real wages of working people in Saskatchewan? Isn’t that 

the real purpose of privatization when it comes to parks and 

other facilities that have been owned and operated by the people 

of this province for many, many years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, the bottom line 

here is that public participation does provide Saskatchewan 

citizens with more recreational opportunities than they had 

before and at a comparable or expanded level of service, in the 

case of existing facilities, and at no increased costs to the 

government, and in many cases, with significant savings to the 

government. And I think that just indicates a measure of fiscal 

responsibility, Mr. Chairman. 

 

If a private operator can run it and run it well, and yes, maybe 

with a facility that was built by taxpayers or built by the 

government – yes – but pays us for the privilege of being there, 

pays us a reasonable lease fee, we have no deficit. It costs the 

taxpayers nothing and we have some income coming in. Any 

activity that would take place in a park, or anything else that 

we’re running, is subject to regulation and non-negotiable 

standards to protect the environment. 

 

(2045) 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, I think I can say that as a representative of 

taxpayers, my job is to provide them with the best services 

possible and, at the same time, make wise use of their money. 

And I’m not sure that there would be widespread sentiment or 

support for the position being advocated by the hon. member. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just want you to be 

very clear on one thing, and that is that the men and women that 

were working at that facility, prior to your privatization move, 

made fairly decent wages, and many of those people were 

working on that facility as off-farm income earners. And once 

again your government is penalizing people who require that 

income in order to support the family farm. 

 

And I hold by my theory that the real reason for the 

privatization scheme is to significantly reduce real wages  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2229 

 

in this province so that we have poverty wages and that so 

people of Saskatchewan can’t have a decent standard of living. 

 

But nevertheless, the one final question, depending on your 

answer, is: would you please advise me why you decided to 

forego park entry fees for the Blackstrap ski operation this past 

winter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, that was waived 

because it was built into the lease fee that the operator is 

paying. 

 

Now just one point I’d like to throw out for the hon. member, 

and one or two members on the other side were talking about 

park entry fees and raising them, hear of a situation – and I 

think the member for Saskatoon South had raised this with me 

at one point – where there isn’t an entry in there and now we’re 

saying, well, we should have had an entry in there. It seems to 

me to have been fair and equitable to get  . . . We’re more than 

compensated in revenue and what we’re receiving from Mr. 

Hedemann and his lease fee than we would have had charging 

an entry fee at the gate. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well I have to respond to this. It’s very 

interesting, Mr. Minister, because what you’ve done is foregone 

about $20,000 in gate entry fees. In exchange, you’ve got a 

$30,000 lease. So it’s costing Mr. Hedemann  . . . you’re 

making about $10,000 here. Not much of a return. In exchange, 

what do you have to do? You have to paint the buildings; you 

have to look after the parking lot, repair and maintain it; you 

have to maintain the furnace and the water heaters and all of the 

other equipment that goes into those buildings. And what have 

we really gotten in exchange? We’ve given our park, our 

facility, over to a private operator who has in some cases 

increased the fees from $200 to $500 a year – all of the ski tow 

tickets have gone up significantly. And some may say that we 

have a better service out there. Some may say that, but I’m not 

so sure about that. And it’s costing us a lot more as taxpayers in 

terms of the public use of that particular facility that was built 

for and paid for many years ago by the people of this province. 

 

So we’ve given up a great deal so that you can say you’re 

reducing your deficit, and I don’t really think we’ve gotten a 

whole lot in exchange. What we have lost is 15 jobs that paid 

decent wages, Mr. Minister. Some bargain. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, it was a bargain 

because we’re not losing any money at all. We’re saving 

$140,000 a year that we would have been spending of 

taxpayers’ money. Yes, we do some maintenance out there, and 

yes, we still make money from the lease, and it does belong to 

the public because they can go and use it any time they want. 

And it’s comparable with ski hills of that ilk anywhere else in 

the country, and it’s still reasonable skiing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. My question, 

Mr. Minister, concerns the Primrose Lake Air Weapons Range 

agreement. Under the agreement compensation is provided to 

the province for loss of  

revenue due to lack of access to resources within the range, and 

compensation is also apparently provided for provision of fire 

fighting and fire protection services. I’m wondering if you 

could tell me what payment was received by the provincial 

government from the federal government under the terms of this 

lease agreement this past year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I can advise the hon. 

member that the financial provisions – I’ll go back to 1981 — 

$561,500 per year, 1981 through 1983; $391,500 per year from 

1984 to 1987; and reimbursement for fire fighting credited to us 

was $250,000 on January 14, 1987. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — So to make sure that I understand correctly, 

the total for 1987  . . . the total payment then received in 1987 

would be what? And it would be broken down in what fashion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the information I gave 

the member was correct and the amounts that are being paid to 

us. The amount varies according to the number of fires and the 

expense incurred in fighting of fires. The actual figure in 1987 

was $430,840 that was forwarded because of fire. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — And what was the figure for loss of resource 

revenue? Was that 391,000? Okay. That was for the year ending 

March 31, ’87. What would the corresponding figure have been 

for the year ending March 31, 1986? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have the 

specific forest fire number for the previous year, but it was 

approximately the same, I’m advised. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Could you supply me with that. And now, 

I’m to understand that from ’83 to ’87 the $391,000 figure has 

remained constant – is that correct? – for the loss of revenue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, that’s correct. It remained 

constant. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — In what year does the agreement expire? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have the date 

when the first agreement was entered into, but I know it was 

renewed in the 1970s, in 1975 when the supplementary 

agreement was made. And it’s for a period of 20 years. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — In 1975 a supplementary agreement was 

signed for another 20 years. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Will the supplementary agreement be subject 

to any modification or amendment before the conclusion of that 

20-year framework? Is that a possibility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve already modified 

it in regard to forest fire fighting, and it comes up for review for 

details every five years, but it is renewable  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2230 

 

after 20. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Is there any possibility, Mr. Minister, of the 

agreement being cancelled before the end of the 20-year term? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe it 

will be. We are prepared to honour the agreement that was 

entered into by the previous government. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — You aren’t particularly concerned then about 

any of the terms of the agreement? You find the terms 

favourable to the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It can be reviewed every five years, Mr. 

Chairman, and when the renewal date is up, we would be 

pleased to take a look at the terms and the conditions and see 

how much leeway we have to move. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, I have a few straightforward questions I’d like to 

address to you regarding the operation of the White Track ski 

hill in Buffalo Pound Provincial Park. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is my understanding that the deadline for 

receiving of proposals for the operation of White Track was 

extended to August 24. I would like to ask, Mr. Minister, if you 

have received what you consider an acceptable proposal, and 

also, as a matter of fact, I would ask if you have made a 

decision regarding the proposals that were submitted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, no proposals have been 

submitted; we do anticipate receiving some. Certainly there 

have been no agreements made with anybody. I’ve not had any 

discussions with anybody. 

 

What I have been told is, there was a meeting the other day and 

nobody showed up because the people who were interested in 

the proposal already had the answers to the questions that may 

have been asked by someone not as familiar with the area. 

Apparently some local groups have got some interest in the ski 

hill and they were making a proposal. We haven’t received any 

yet. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Am I to understand that you’re still anticipating 

and receiving proposals prior to the operation of the ski hill in 

this coming winter season? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes. We’re hopeful we’ll receive some 

proposals, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, it will be of concern to 

skiers in the Moose Jaw and Regina area, and I ask you: will 

you give this House your assurance that in some form, at least, 

that White Track ski hill will be operating this winter? 

 

I would also ask you to respond, if I may combine two 

questions with one, if you will give your assurance that not only 

will it be operating, but with sufficient snow-making equipment 

as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — As the hon. member would be  

aware – certainly coming from the Moose Jaw area he’s 

concerned about the continuing operation of the ski track, and I 

understand that – we have suffered and incurred some fairly 

serious losses on the operation in the last few years and we 

would like to see a way to remedy that. And if we can do it by 

letting a local ski club or someone else run the operation and 

look after it, then we’d be pleased to do so. 

 

We would be interested in seeing it operate, certainly, in the 

coming winter. It would be rather difficult to give a cast iron 

assurance today, because I don’t know the status of the 

proposals. I have heard of about five different groups who have 

expressed interest – not to me personally, but to members of the 

department. So we’re hopeful that a proposal will come in, but 

at the moment it’s hypothetical and we won’t know what we’re 

going to be doing until the proposal date closes. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, if I may come back to the 

bottom line then – and I’m not planning to enter into a 

privatization debate with you at this point; there’ll be other 

opportunities for that. But simply in terms of assurance of the 

provision of that facility for skiers, if it does  . . . if the 

eventuality does come to pass that you don’t get what you 

consider to be a viable proposal, will you give your assurance 

that the province will continue to operate the White Track ski 

hill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, Mr. Chairman, we haven’t made 

our final decision on that yet. We’ve not saying it’s either/or at 

all. We haven’t taken that decision yet at all, I can assure the 

hon. member. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — I would appreciate it, Mr. Minister – and I know 

skiers in both the Regina and Moose Jaw area as well would 

have appreciated a little more definitive statement than that – if 

you feel that you could offer such a statement tonight. 

 

I note as well, Mr. Minister, that some positive things have 

happened, that last year’s operating loss at White Track ski hill, 

as a matter of fact, is almost exactly half of the operating loss of 

the two seasons prior to that. Obviously some of the right things 

are happening in order to make that possible. I would like to ask 

you, Mr. Minister, first of all, if you could make a more 

definitive statement in terms of the commitment of the province 

to see that the White Track ski hill will be in operation this 

winter. I’d appreciate that. 

 

But in the interest of time, if may I add another couple of 

questions here as well that your officials may be looking at at 

the same time: could you advise me as to how much money was 

spent in the last two fiscal years in advertising for the White 

Track ski hill, and what is planned to be spent on advertising for 

White Track ski hill in this budget year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, what we do with winter 

recreational opportunities in the province is we advertise them 

as a package. I’m sorry we don’t have that broken down. It’s 

part of the overall campaign for winter activity within parks, so 

I don’t have it specifically for White Track. 

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2231 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, would it be possible to break that 

down and advise me at some future time? Would that be a 

possibility? 

 

And at the same time, if I may ask, then, a general question. 

That is in the context that many people who have been involved 

in skiing at White Track have been of the opinion that one of 

the reasons for low usage of White Track has been the relatively 

small attention given to it by way of advertising. Can I ask, 

then, if the intention is to increase the profile of White Track in 

advertising for ski facilities – and I’m talking about the budget 

of the provincial government for the coming year, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Our last figure is promotion for winter 

programs was approximately $19,000. And yes, you know, I 

can buy your argument that perhaps if people were more aware 

of some of these facilities that the usage would go up. We did 

take some measures this last winter to try and cut down the 

operating deficit at that particular ski hill, and with some 

success. We still lost money. We had to alter the hours and 

we’ve had to look at the revenue picture. 

 

So you know, it’s not a totally bleak future, or I’m not feeling 

terribly pessimistic about it. Personally – and I know we could 

have a philosophical difference on this, obviously – but 

personally I’m still hopeful that someone will be submitting a 

proposal to take it over, do the promotion, and be business as 

usual. If that doesn’t happen, then I will have to make the 

decision on what we’re going to do for the winter. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Coming back to the advertising issue, Mr. 

Minister, because I think those who are concerned about the 

future of White Track have got a very valid claim. Just by way 

of example, let me point out that as I drive daily from Moose 

Jaw to Regina and back, you don’t see, anywhere on the 

Trans-Canada Highway, a sign advising you: (a) of the 

existence of White Track ski hill; and (b) directions to find it. 

And that would seem to me to be a distinct neglect by way of 

the province’s initiative to let people know even the basic 

things, that it exists and how to find it, as people are motoring 

up and down the Trans-Canada Highway. Could you please 

advise me as to whether that is something – and it’s a very basic 

issue – that you’re planning to address. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the member’s point is 

well taken, and I’ll be pursuing that with officials. I think your 

idea is correct. If we’re going to talk about economic 

diversification, promoting tourism, we’ve got to let people 

know what we’ve got. 

 

And I know you don’t like the phrase, “Saskatchewan has been 

a well-kept secret,” but virtually it’s true. When we travel 

beyond our own boundaries here, for instance, going down East 

they think there’s nothing but bald prairie. They don’t know 

about 18 million acres of commercial forest; they don’t know 

about the North; they don’t know about Cypress Hills. Your 

point is very well taken. I think we have done something in the 

last couple of years towards promoting the province. Probably 

we should be doing even more in the future, particularly if we 

want to achieve our goal of economic diversification. 

Mr. Hagel: — And if I may, if I may encourage you, Mr. 

Minister, we talked earlier, my colleague from Moose Jaw 

South spoke earlier this afternoon about concerns for the wild 

animal park, and I would simply offer the suggestion that I 

think both the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park and the White 

Track ski hill are very well kept secrets, and to a large extent, I 

think, some of that is easily remedied with some roadway 

signage on the Trans-Canada Highway as a very basic approach 

to provide some solutions. 

 

Mr. Minister, could tell me why it is that you’re planning to 

tender out the operations of the White Track ski hill, but not the 

Cypress Hills ski hill? What is the difference that causes you to 

conclude it makes sense to tender out White Track but not 

Cypress Hills? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, our losses at Cypress 

have fluctuated considerably over the years, and we don’t have 

snow-making equipment at Cypress. We depend on natural 

snow there. Some winters there is extremely poor skiing – no 

snow at all, especially subject to chinooks coming in in that 

particular part of the country. 

 

There has been a decision in the past couple of years within the 

department to keep one ski hill, and that was the one that we 

wanted to keep and operate. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, my question refers to treaty 

Indians and hunting in the La Ronge area. 

 

About four years ago, I guess, the concept of game preserves 

were put in and, of course, it would restrict hunting, including 

hunting by treaty Indians. Now when it first came in, a lot of 

people were a little bit concerned that this device may be spread 

out to engulf large areas, and a lot of the people were concerned 

that while they were restrictive in nature initially, that wasn’t 

too bad. 

 

(2115) 

 

But as time went on, as they looked at the new hunting 

regulations, it seems to me that they are expanding. And they 

cannot practise their treaty Indian hunting rights in those areas, 

and they have a great fear that they cannot hunt in the 

traditional hunting areas that they’ve hunted for all the time. 

They are wondering why it was that these game preserves are 

now just about engulfing the La Ronge area and they’re raising 

their concern to you, Mr. Minister. And I was wondering what 

you have to report back to us on that concept of game preserves 

and its relationship with treaty Indian hunting rights. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, in some areas of the 

province the moose population has declined severely; other 

areas we found a great improvement. And, I believe, I went 

through this with the member from Athabasca one afternoon as 

well. 

 

And one of the ways that we’ve managed to preserve moose 

population is not the game preserve, but road corridors, game 

corridors, whereby we eliminate casual road hunting by the side 

of a vehicle. What it means is there’s a 400-metre area on either 

side of the road that you must get out and walk through before 

you can hunt. And most hunters, most of the people I know – 

and  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2232 

 

certainly I’ve been a member of the wildlife federation for a 

number of years and many of my friends and colleagues are – 

don’t object to leaving a vehicle and walking 400 metres before 

they start hunting. And we’ve really found that the moose 

population in those areas have come way up to the benefit of 

everybody including the treaty Indians who would want to use 

them for food. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I guess, Mr. Minister, the person that I talked to 

mentioned the game corridor area, and he was under the 

impression that it was a way larger area that the 400 metres that 

you had just mentioned. And I had picked this up over the 

phone just a couple of days ago, and I hadn’t had time to look at 

the new hunting map areas for hunting this fall. And so I think 

it is more than, you know, that 400-metre corridor that you’re 

talking about. You mentioned something about the pink areas 

throughout. Maybe one of your officials can clarify that issue 

with me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, there was one 

game preserve added in that area. I had to look it up. Candle 

Lake is the area to which you’re referring where the moose 

population has dipped, but at the same time we dropped one, 

Woody Lake, where the population has come back up again. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, when your 

officials make recommendations to draw up these game 

preserve areas, do you meet with chiefs and councils in those 

areas, you know, as part of the consultation process? And if so, 

when did you meet with the chiefs and councils, you know, 

from that area in regards to that game preserve? I understand 

that you probably have, you know, from the implication of your 

previous statement, the consultation with the wildlife groups 

and so on. But I’m just wondering whether or not, because the 

concern did come from the band level, whether or not you do 

have the consultation process going with treaty Indians and 

bands in that area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the local biologist, 

the wildlife biologist, does consult with all user groups in an 

area, including Indian bands in the area. But what is happening  

. . . For instance, the P.A. district chiefs have approached us and 

said they would like a more formalized process to discuss this 

and to look at that particular issue, and we’ve agreed. 

 

We did have a native conservation committee at one time, and I 

was hopeful that it would progress from there and we could 

discuss these particular problems. It hasn’t met for some time. I 

think it’s kind of fallen by the wayside. I would be interested in 

resurrecting it, and certainly we would be interested in talking 

to the bank chiefs. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — So I can report back then that you are very 

open to the consultation with them. 

 

The next question refers to your letter of August 7, and that’s 

the one from the NorSask Native Outreach, and this regards the 

information  . . . this is the letter you sent us on August 7th. 

What NorSask Native Outreach wanted was specific 

information related to the temporary work camp permits. And 

the reason why they wanted them was, of course, their central 

goal was to get more people hired  

from that area. And sometimes they’re in a catch-22 situation 

basically, because if they don’t get the information, then they 

can’t perform. You know, one of their objectives is to provide 

the most up-to-date and effective information to prospective 

employers in the area. 

 

But in your letter you state that “because of confidentiality we 

can’t give that information out.” I was wondering why a system 

of confidentiality could not be examined a little bit more 

closely. I think that it is fair to say that confidentiality already 

exists. Now, all it would mean is probably to work with one 

other person from NorSask Native Outreach, and I’m pretty 

sure that that confidentiality could be respected, and the goal of 

employing more people from northern Saskatchewan would be 

enhanced if that question of confidentiality was looked at more 

carefully. 

 

I was wondering if you would want to re-examine that issue in 

the light of a lot of people looking for work and you also 

wanting to get more jobs in for people in that area. I was 

wondering, why is it that this confidentiality thing is so rigid? 

Could not a mechanism be arranged with NorSask Native 

Outreach to deal particularly with that issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, if I could address 

this issue for the hon. member, what NorSask would like us to 

do is give them a list of all the temporary work camp permits 

that are being issued so that they, in turn, can then contact and 

see what would be available and offer their services to the 

companies. 

 

One of the problems is most of these companies in the North 

right now are engaged in mineral exploration, and where the 

confidentiality comes in is that they’re not really anxious to let 

everybody know where they are, which would happen if their 

location was being spelled out publicly. 

 

What we have offered to do and, in fact, have started to do, is 

take the NorSask brochures and attach them to the work camp 

permit, so that when we issue them, we also provide them with 

a brochure and say, now here’s the organization and here’s what 

they can do for you. So the information is going to the 

employers. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — The other thing is that work camp permits are 

issued not only to mining companies but also in other work 

situations as well. And I was wondering, is that same procedure 

being followed up in that case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, that procedure is in 

place, and we’re following up on it. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Just one other point. In regards to the 

confidentiality question, maybe that could be re-examined again 

if at all possible, just to re-check it out to make sure that all 

angles have been covered, and also that indeed if the minister 

feels that confidentiality is absolutely necessary in regards to 

mining, then the other question may arise that the question of 

confidentiality may not be in the same situation as other work 

areas. And maybe the minister may want to examine that 

question again. 

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2233 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the member does 

make a good point. Not all work is of the same nature in that 

area, and certainly I would be prepared to review it. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. My 

question to the minister also relates to the Primrose Air 

Weapons Range and specifically to your government’s policy 

of supporting the testing of cruise missiles on the territory that 

you rent out on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to the 

Government of Canada. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Minister, you indicated earlier in this Assembly that you 

were receiving $391,000 a year on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan for leasing out the Primrose Air Weapons Range 

to the Government of Canada. Now last time that the lease 

agreement was signed back in 1975, of course no government 

had knowledge of the fact that that range would be used for 

nuclear weapons. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: basically, in my 

view, Mr. Minister, and in the view of members of this side of 

the House, you are now selling the soul of the people of 

Saskatchewan to the Government of Canada to allow them – 

and particularly the U.S. government – to test nuclear weapons 

in this province for a mere $391,000 a year. And you know full 

well, Mr. Minister, that the weapon that you’re allowing to be 

tested on the Primrose Air Weapons Range is upsetting the 

arms control process; in fact, it’s sending it back many years. 

It’s a highly de-stabilizing and dangerous nuclear weapon that 

you’re supporting to be testing on that range, Mr. Minister. 

 

And my question to you is simply this: are you now prepared, in 

light of the de-stabilizing and dangerous effect that the testing 

of the cruise is having in terms of the safety of the world, are 

you now prepared to go to the Government of Canada and ask 

the Government of Canada, indicate to the Government of 

Canada that you want to cancel your agreement with the 

Government of Canada on the Primrose Air Weapons Range? 

Or at the very least, Mr. Minister, are you prepared to go to the 

Government of Canada and insist that one of the conditions for 

continuing the leasing out of the Primrose Air Weapons Range 

by the people of this province to the federal government be that 

there be no testing of nuclear weapons on the Primrose Air 

Weapons Range in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No. The first agreement was signed by 

Tommy Douglas. The renegotiated extended agreement was 

signed by the current member for Saskatoon Riversdale, the 

incoming leader of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And, Mr. Minister, a question to the minister, 

Mr. Chairman: you know full well, Mr. Minister, that when 

those agreements were signed, the Primrose Air Weapons 

Range was not being used for cruise testing. It’s only been used 

for cruise testing since your government came to office. And, 

Mr. Minister, you have done nothing to indicate your opposition 

to that range being used for nuclear weapons testing. 

As a result of that, you, in effect, are supporting that testing, 

and I ask you, Mr. Minister, again, will you answer my 

question: are you prepared to go to the Government of Canada 

and insist that as a condition for that range being rented out to 

the Government of Canada there be no cruise testing or any 

other use of nuclear weapons on that range? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I am prepared to honour 

the commitment signed by the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you 

will have recognized that members of this side of the House 

have a good many questions concerning the Parks side of your 

portfolio, and I anticipate there may yet be more. But I would 

like us to move now for the time remaining tonight into the 

Culture and Rec side of your portfolio. 

 

I would like to begin with a line of questioning around what I 

would describe as some of the heritage responsibilities. I have 

in my hand, Mr. Minister, a news release which I’m sure that 

you’ve seen from the Western Development Museum people. 

And for the record, I would like to read part of this news 

release. It was dated August 17, 1987. 

 

The Board of Directors for the Saskatchewan Western 

Development Museums has developed a plan of action in 

response to the 12.1 per cent reduction in the provincial 

grant to the WDM system. The reduction which translates 

into approximately $155,000 will mean major changes to 

the WDM operation throughout the province. A review of 

these changes is as follows: 

 

Museum exhibits at the WDM branches in Moose Jaw, 

North Battleford and Yorkton will be closed to the public 

during the winter months (November through March). 

 

The Saskatoon WDM will be closed for at least one day 

per week during the winter months. 

 

Staff at the Provincial Service Centre in Saskatoon will be 

reduced. 

 

Mr. Minister, I submit that the cut in funding to the WDM’s 

(Western Development Museums) will in fact be setting back 

our Western Development Museums 10 to 15 years. We’re 

setting them back 10 to 15 years in this cut of 12 per cent to 

their funding. 

 

Mr. Minister, what the release does not make clear is in fact 

how many staff positions will be lost. How many jobs will be 

lost in the WDM system because of this cut? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, that would be a decision 

for the board, and I would quote the board chairman who said 

that the steps they were taking were what he considered to be 

prudent business decisions. 

 

I should point out that, overall, 97 per cent of the current 

number of visitors can and will be able to go to Western  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2234 

 

Development Museums – 3 per cent of the visitation, of the 

total visitation, takes place in the winter five months. The 

savings generated by the museums, as far as they are concerned, 

will be in the order of $75,000, and this is not out of line with 

what happens in other provinces. Other provinces do the same 

thing with heritage sites and museums. The board want to 

concentrate, Mr. Chairman, on improving visitation during the 

peak season and that’s why they’ve taken that particular 

decision. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I would appreciate an answer to 

that very specific question. How many jobs do you as minister 

responsible anticipate will be lost in the Western Development 

Museum system because of the cut in funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — A decision will be made by the board, 

Mr. Chairman, not by me, and they haven’t communicated that 

decision to me. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, it has been suggested in the 

media and in other forums that in fact six to seven positions will 

be gone. Would you anticipate that happening? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I have no idea, Mr. Chairman, how 

many positions. The board haven’t discussed it with me; that’s 

an internal decision that they will take in due course. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Because of the closures now in Moose Jaw, 

Yorkton, and North Battleford, and the one day per week in 

Saskatoon, even though you’re suggesting that only 3 per cent 

of the visitors attend in those months, how much revenue do 

you anticipate the museums will lose because of the closures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Revenue loss for Moose Jaw would be 

approximately $10,000 for five months. But I should point out 

their heating costs alone at that time in this last year, which was 

a mild winter, was $53,000. I believe the figure is 3 per cent, 

overall, revenue down. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Could you or one of your officials provide for 

me what, then, the total loss in revenue will be, not just from 

Moose Jaw, but because of all the closures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Projected, anticipated total admissions 

that would be down would be approximately 6,000. You’d have 

to average that out, whether it was adult, senior citizen, child, 

and so on, to get a dollar figure on it, however. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So the anticipated loss, Mr. Minister, would be 

$6,000 — $6,000? Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding that the 

Western Development Museums now receive somewhere – or 

have received somewhere – in the neighbourhood of $80,000 in 

grant money from the national museums, and that that money 

has been conditional on increased provincial government 

support; and in light of the cut-back and the closures, that in 

fact that money is now endangered, and it’s probably going to 

be lost. Is that accurate that we have to lose 80 to $90,000 in 

federal government money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, I’m assured that there would  

be no federal funding jeopardized whatsoever and that that 

would be safe. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I think it’s fairly obvious that if, 

in fact, the museums are going to absorb this cut in funding, it is 

going to mean some loss in staff, and that will likely mean for 

the WDM (Western Development Museum) some cost in terms 

of severance pay. It will also, and I think more significantly, 

mean that we’re going to lose some very qualified people. 

 

Some of the people in the system already are uncomfortable 

with the funding levels that have  . . . the cuts that have 

happened over the last few years. It seems fairly obvious we’re 

going to lose some very qualified people. They’ll be forced to 

leave our province. And will you agree that it’s going to be very 

difficult to get those people back? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, this will be a seasonal 

lay-off, so I don’t anticipate any pay-outs to anybody, and I 

don’t see why they’re be forced to leave the province. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think these people would 

hope to be working full-time in their chosen profession. They 

would hope to be working full time in the museum system, and 

if they can’t work full time in Saskatchewan, surely they’re 

going to look elsewhere, and I submit it’s going to be very 

difficult to get them back. 

 

Mr. Minister, another very significant thing that you know has 

happened with the Western Development Museums, and that’s 

sort of the increase of the role of the volunteer and support of 

the communities where the WDMs exist. I’m told that in North 

Battleford there are some 88 hours of volunteer work provided 

per week; I’m told in Yorkton there are 10 hours per week 

provided; I know for a fact in Moose Jaw volunteers are 

actively involved in restoring an aircraft and running the steam 

locomotive. I understand the current membership of the WDMs 

now has reached 850 people. Are you not concerned that this 

cut in funding, the closure, the sending the WDMs back 10 or 

15 years in their development is, in fact, going to threaten some 

of this volunteer support that’s built up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, that is not a major 

concern. Discussions I have had, and the indications I’ve had, is 

that that would not be affected at all. And I should point out to 

the hon. member the museums in their entirety are not closing 

down; some areas will be kept open. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, just to go back to an earlier point 

that you made, that in fact the six month closure period that 

we’re talking about is a time when only three per cent of the 

visitors are at the Western Development Museum. Your 

government has taken a position of wanting to increase tourism 

in Saskatchewan. Would it not make more sense to open one of 

the limited number of tourist attractions that we have in the 

winter season, to keep it open and try and encourage more 

visitors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’ve been informed that the board in 

this, as a matter of fact, are quite excited about this because they 

are looking for ways to increase the  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2235 

 

visitation during their peak season. We’re only talking three per 

cent of the total visitations over the five months of winter, 97 

per cent over the rest of the year, and that’s where they want to 

concentrate, just like has happened in Ontario and in the 

Maritimes. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, as you know – and I again I 

know this is particularly true in Moose Jaw, and I’m sure it’s 

happening elsewhere – the museums have sort of gone beyond 

their role as simply places where we are going to preserve our 

heritage; they’ve become in some ways a community centre. 

 

In Moose Jaw, I’m well aware of the fact that many community 

groups hold functions in the museum. It has indeed become 

kind of a community centre. Will you assure me that museums 

will still remain open for the kind of community function that 

we’re seeing happening in them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I do want to say that it seems to 

me a rather foolish move to save a limited amount of money. 

We are going to lose some admission revenues. I’m still of the 

position that we may, in fact, be losing some federal money. I 

believe we will be losing some qualified staff; we may, in fact, 

be losing some of the volunteer support. Artefact donations may 

fall off, and the savings are minimal, and so I would submit this 

is a rather foolish move on your part. 

 

We’ve seen the Western Development Museum grow, become 

very significant parts of our community, and a significant 

tourist attraction. And I think  . . . Well we’ve seen in the last 

number of years, cut-backs, so that a year ago the board was 

forced to increase the door admissions, and now again another 

12 per cent cut-back. It looks to me as we’re going back 10 or 

15 years with the western developments. 

 

If I can, I would like to, before we close tonight, turn to one or 

two other areas. Mr. Minister, I’m aware that you and your 

department have been approached by a Mr. Fred Light of North 

Battleford and Mr. Light’s family. He has offered to, we, the 

province, his Indian ethnographic collection of artefacts. I’m 

told that this, in fact, is a unique collection in our province, in 

many ways irreplaceable. He has offered the collection to the 

province for the province to purchase through the Museum of 

Natural History, I suppose. And the press reports that I’ve seen 

indicate that you’ve turned down Mr. Light’s offer. Is that your 

position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, initially we had 

turned the offer down; it just seemed that in times of economic 

restraint that – and as the member correctly identified a 12.1 per 

cent cut in funding to the Western Development Museums and 

some other groups that this department funds – that maybe the 

times weren’t right to be buying this particular collection. 

 

It wasn’t a question of Mr. Light wanting to leave it to the 

province – in fact, the gentleman doing the selling is not  

based in Saskatchewan, he’s based in Alberta – it was a 

question of he wanted to sell this collection to us. We didn’t 

condemn the whole idea out of hand by any means. There’s a 

certain significance to this particular collection, certainly. 

 

I’ve also been told that the hon. member mentions a home being 

perhaps a natural history museum. I’ve also heard that there 

would be some strong opposition in the city of North Battleford 

to the collection leaving North Battleford by residents of North 

Battleford and by the district chiefs in that area. So what we did 

do was recently communicate to Mr. Light that we would be 

willing to explore some other options if they were feasible and 

viable. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Minister, just to be clear. I did not 

intend, if I did, to suggest that the collection would be housed in 

the Museum of Natural History in Regina. I intended that the 

museum would be the agency who could secure the collection 

and that it would remain housed in Battleford. And yes, indeed, 

I am sure that the people of Battleford would be upset and will 

be upset if, in fact, the collection leaves their community. And I 

think there’s going to be a fair number of people in this 

province upset if the collection leaves our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, can you indicate to me when Mr. 

Light or his son, who now lives in Calgary as you indicated, can 

you indicate to me when they first approached your department 

with the offer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman, I can’t find 

the precise date. I only have the date of my reply to Mr. Light. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Judging by the date of your reply, Mr. 

Minister, can you just give me a ball park figure. In May? Of 

this year? 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m not absolutely clear from your first response 

just where we are in terms of Mr. Light’s offer. I am aware that 

he has received some significant interest from the provincial 

museum in Alberta, some interest from Eastern Canada, and 

some real interest from the United States of America. I think he 

indicated that he was willing to wait till the end of August for a 

response from our province. So, if Mr. Light were to call you 

tomorrow and say, are you interested in my collection, what 

would your response be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We’ve already communicated with Mr. 

Light, Mr. Chairman, indicating that a meeting will take place, 

and we’ll take a look at some options with him. He may not like 

the options that we’d be presenting, but we’re prepared to look 

at it. 

 

Of course, if he finds a buyer, I’ll swear he’s made no secret of 

the fact his interest is in selling the collection. In fact, I 

remember him referring to his retirement fund, and he said 

that’s what it was. So I don’t know if he’s got a great desire to 

leave this particular in the province or in Regina or North 

Battleford. I guess he must be a free enterpriser, and he’s out 

there going to make a profit on  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2236 

 

something he’s collected over the years. It’s heartening to see 

the hon. member defending the enterprise; I salute you for that. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, thank you. Mr. Minister, I believe 

Mr. Light does indeed have an interest in seeing his collection 

remain in our province. I’ll just quote  . . . You may have seen 

this article; it was in the Battleford Telegraph. In the article Mr. 

Light is quoted as saying: 

 

Between the federal and provincial governments, what little 

they are doing is taking history out of the province, and it’s 

really not a lack of money, it’s a lack of priority. 

 

Mr. Minister, before we close tonight, I want to encourage you, 

if I can, to look very seriously at purchasing this collection. 

This is, in fact, a once only opportunity. If we lose this 

collection, it’s gone. If this collection leaves our province, it is 

extremely unlikely, perhaps impossible, that another collection 

of its size and its kind can ever again be put together, and we 

are going to lose a very valuable piece of human history in this 

province. I would sincerely ask you to search your budget, find 

the money, and purchase this collection for the benefit of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

I believe I advised you towards the end of July that I would be 

asking a couple of questions with regard to the property 

management corporation and space that your department 

obtains from them and departmental consultants, and an 

explanation of the costs and the reason for consultations. And I 

wonder if the minister or his officials have that information 

prepared to submit at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I do have a significant 

amount of information of the nature requested by the hon. 

member. I would like to check it over and make sure that it’s 

complete. I know there were a number of things you asked for. I 

believe I have everything you asked for, but I’d like to take a 

look through it before I send it over the member. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Primarily, Mr. Chairman, I just wanted 

to make sure that I was going to get the information, and I’ll 

take the minister’s assurance that the information will be 

forthcoming. 

 

I did want to ask the minister one question about the level of the 

water in Lake Diefenbaker. I wondered if the minister is 

concerned about that, and I’m talking about the extreme 

variations in the level. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not aware of any 

significant problems with the levels on Diefenbaker lake. As the 

hon. member would know, the water Crown does have some 

responsibility for that; he may want to raise it with them. If he 

has a specific concern relating to my department with lake 

levels affecting beach or park, then I’d be pleased to hear about 

it because I can’t think of anything that’s a major concern right 

now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I move that we rise and 

report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would just ask the 

Assembly’s attention. I have taken notice that in the Speaker’s 

gallery there is a couple visiting us – a young couple who I do 

understand are celebrating their 31st wedding anniversary here 

in this next few days. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I want to extend the 

greetings of the opposition to the happy couple that are 

celebrating their anniversary and congratulate the lady on her 

endurance. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:59 p.m. 

 

 


