


















































October 29, 1987 Hansard Morning


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 October 29, 1987 
 
 

3635 
 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Speaker: — By special order of this House, oral questions 
will be at 2 p.m. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 56 - An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 
amend The Litter Control Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 57 - An Act to repeal The Scrap Vehicles Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 
repeal The Scrap Vehicles Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 58 — An Act respecting the repeal of The Agricultural 

Research Funding Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting the repeal of The Agricultural Research Funding Act be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill ordered 
to be referred to the Standing Committee on Non-controversial 
Bills. 
 

Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend The Animal Protection Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Animal Protection Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill ordered 
to be referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial 
Bills. 
 

Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Forest Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill, 
recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. And I move 
that a Bill, An Act to amend The Forest Act, be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill ordered 
to be referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial 
Bills. 
 
Bill No. 61 — An Act to amend The Department of Parks and 

Renewable Resources Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the 
Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, having been 
informed of the subject matter of the Bill, recommends it to the 
consideration of the Assembly. And I move that a Bill, An Act to 
amend The Department of Parks and Renewable Resources Act, 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill ordered 
to be referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial 
Bills. 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the Assembly 
that His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, having been informed 
of the subject matter of the Bill, recommends it to the 
consideration of the Assembly. 
 
And I move that a Bill, An Act respecting the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation be now introduced and read 
for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 51 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Regina North 
West member is standing up and asking questions in estimates on 
the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 
 
I want to inform members that I'm going to try and get through the 
estimates in the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in fairly quick 
time this morning. We're, as you probably are aware, celebrating 
the nomination of the New Democratic Party candidate in 
Saskatoon Eastview. Last night . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — On behalf of my colleagues, I want to 
congratulate Bob Pringle, our candidate, who was nominated at a 
convention last night at Walter Murray Collegiate. And there were 
about 600 people there, and think what the message was from that 
nominating convention was that we want to see, and the people of 
Eastview want to see, a by-election called as soon as possible. 
They are sick and tired of waiting for the Premier to call a 
by-election because of reasons that are unknown to the people of 
this province. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister a question  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3636 
 
 

with regard to housing in Regina. The city of Regina has 
expressed interest and concern in being involved in the planning 
and delivery of public housing programs in Regina. And I'm 
referring to a letter which I believe the president of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation received a copy of, dated July 
10, '87, from the mayor, Mayor Schneider. And I quote from the 
letter: 
 

We have recently been advised by several sources that the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation may be preparing to 
privatize several public housing units at a time when the 
demand is high for such units. We would ask that the city of 
Regina be an integral part of any discussions prior to such a 
move proceeding. 

 
I ask the minister if he can confirm the receipt of this letter and 
provide a response with respect to SHC's involvement with the 
city of Regina in providing some additional public housing units? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I guess I should 
refer to that, as he did, his little preamble. And you know, 
typically, he expects us to believe his numbers again, and he 
mentioned that there were 600 people at that glorious nominating 
convention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — And I understand that the full NDP caucus 
was there, so they were part of the 600, because according to the 
media report this morning, there were less than 200 votes — less 
than 200 votes, and they're making a big deal out of it. Well less 
than 200 is kind of a joke. If that's the best that they can get to vote 
then, you know, maybe the Premier will call that by-election 
quickly. But in any event . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I'm really not sure what the 
member just asked. I will say this: this department is one of the 
few in government that is scrutinized very thoroughly. It's 
discussed in Crown Corporations, it's then discussed in Public 
Accounts, and we then take it through estimates, as we're doing 
now. 
 
Clearly, if the member is referring to questions that were 
responded to in Crown Corporations . . . I don't have the transcript 
with me. I'm not sure of his question, and I would suggest that we 
would leave that there and he move on to another question. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Was Marion Hodgins employed with your 
corporation in 1987 or 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, she was employed in the property 
management division of the corporation. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What was her responsibilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — She was a senior manager of housing 
authority operations. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Did she have any involvement with Mandala 
Systems or the purchase or operation of the new  

computer system that Sask Housing corporation purchased? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, she would not have had any 
involvement at all in the purchase of the system. But because of 
her work, she certainly had involvement with connecting the local 
housing authorities into the system and the like . . . that her 
jurisdiction was. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So you're saying that Marion Hodgins had no 
involvement with the computer system and therefore no 
involvement with Mandala Systems Limited. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, that's right. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The reason I ask is because I have a letter 
addressed to Mr. Ron Sotski, the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, Regina, December 17, '86. And in this letter — it's a 
four page letter — it indicates that the Mandala Systems Limited, 
which is stationed in Dartmouth, Nova Scotia, was the corporation 
that provided you with the programming and the software and 
some of the other hardware, I'm led to believe. It was a corporation 
purchased or at least operating out of Nova Scotia, setting up an 
operation in Saskatchewan as a result of their contract with Sask 
Housing Corporation. 
 
And in the letter it identifies a Mr. Guy Hodgins, who has been 
hired as a full-time representative to serve the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation contract. I'm also informed that Mr. Guy 
Hodgins was married to Marion Hodgins, who worked at the 
Saskatchewan Housing corporation. 
 
I'm wondering if the minister could explain this relationship and 
give his opinion as to whether this is a relationship that is healthy 
for the corporation; whether Marion Hodgins had any influence on 
the people that made the decision with respect to the computer; 
and whether or not she is involved with this operation, with the 
Mandala Systems Limited? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I can't explain the relationship 
between man and wife — that's up to them. If in fact that's true, I 
don't know about it. All I can tell you is this Marion Hodgins had 
absolutely nothing to do with the purchase of the system. It was a 
federal-provincial public tender. It used all the rules and 
regulations that apply to tenders, provincially-federally. And the 
lowest price got it. 
 
So if there's hint of something going on there, two things: nothing 
did, number one; and number two, she wasn't even in a position to 
be able to sway an opinion, even it were a fact. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Don't you think it's an unusual happenstance 
that the corporation purchasing a large system like this would have 
a principal employee involved in the corporation who had a 
spouse that was involved with the successful corporation that got 
the tender. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose if Marion Hodgins 
was in some senior position at the corporation, vice-president's 
level or something like that, the  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3637 
 
 

allegations that the member is trying to get at might have some 
foundation. But this lady was not in any position at all to: number 
one, sway the opinion of the officials; number two, if in fact she 
was married to this gentleman that had anything to do with that 
corporation. I don't know; and number three, it followed public 
tender procedures that have been established by the 
federal-provincial government. It was a public tender. They were 
the lowest price and allegations along this line are simply 
absolutely misleading. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well you're saying they're misleading. I'm 
trying to determine whether there's any relationship between the 
two individuals and the fact that the corporation purchased this 
computer. Can you tell us whether Marion Hodgins is still 
employed with the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I can't . . . I can tell you that 
Marion Hodgins does no longer work for the corporation, that's 
number one. And number two, I'm not about to defend this lady, 
who I don't know, who had nothing to do with the purchase. And 
clearly when it's done along a tender line the way this was, there's 
just absolutely no foundation to what you're trying to hint at. And 
if there were, I'd be delighted to get into an argument with you, but 
I don't have to defend this person because it was just . . . it's really 
unfortunate she's being dragged into this. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well it's not a matter of dragging anybody into 
it, Mr. Minister. The position I'm taking is I'm trying to obtain 
information with respect to this operation, and I'd appreciate some 
co-operation. Why was Marion Hodgins terminated, and when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, her position was abolished, is 
what it amounts to. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Her position was abolished; and for what 
reason? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the people of Saskatchewan 
look towards this government to provide the most efficient and the 
best management possible. The corporation over this last year has 
undergone dramatic changes. I'm pleased to work with these 
gentlemen. I enjoy working with them, as a matter of fact. They 
are my top officials at the corporation. The corporation has been 
streamlined. I think that my constituents in Regina South expect 
their member to operate this corporation the same way he would 
have operated any business that he would have been out in in past. 
And with the help of these talented men we're doing that. 
 
So as we move to modernize our operation at Sask Housing, as we 
eliminate a duplication, as we transferred programs to the federal 
government and the like, all in the manner of efficiency and good 
management — none of the programs have been cut, simply been 
a transfer back to CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing 
Corporation) who is capable to deliver these programs — there 
were several positions at Sask Housing corporation that became 
redundant, and she happened to be in one of them. 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Well at Crown Corporations, Minister, you'll 
recall that you confirmed the employment of one Nancy Consaul, 
who was hired from Dome Advertising, who happens to be the 
agency of record with the corporation and almost every other 
corporation and department of the government. 
 
You confirmed as well that Sheila Hammond, who was employed 
by the corporation, or is employed by the corporation, was the 
president of the women's PC party. 
 
You confirmed that Sid Dutchak was paid almost $7,000 a month 
for providing advice, as your little helper, to do a report. And what 
I'd like to ask the minister is whether that report from Mr. Dutchak 
is available and, if it is, could you please table it for us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, this was brought up in Crown 
Corporations. Again I was questioned in the Assembly, and I 
indicated at that time that there was no report required by Mr. 
Dutchak for the job that he has done for us. 
 
With regard to Dome Advertising, yes it is the agency of record 
for this government. We're very proud of that firm. They do an 
excellent job. They're well respected, not only in Saskatchewan 
but throughout Canada, indeed all of North America. 
 
Sheila Hammond, yes, she was the president of the PC Women's 
Association — a very talented lady that brought an awful lot of 
expertise to her position at Sask Housing Corporation. If we want 
to get into patronage, if that's what we're talking about, I again 
refer, as I have before, to one Alex Taylor, a defeated NDP MLA, 
former NDP cabinet minister, who, unlike Mr. Dutchak, who I 
appointed for a term of 90 days to help us through a period of time 
when the corporation was involved in a very successful program 
and needed some direction, we were without a president until Mr. 
Little's appointment. 
 
But in any event, Mr. Taylor, who was elected in 1971 in 
Kerrobert-Kindersley, defeated in 1975 in Kindersley, was 
appointed several times. And one: he was appointed to conduct a 
study for Sask Housing Corporation for the year 1981; he was 
paid $48,000 a year plus $4000 expenses — over $52,000 to an 
ex-cabinet minister. What can I tell you. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I'd like to have the expenses for Sid Dutchak, 
and I'd also like to have a copy of the report. You indicated that 
you run your operation, your corporation, in an efficient manner. 
We start looking at some of the names of the people, the basis for 
efficiency is whether they carry a Conservative Party card. And I 
have a whole list of other names here. 
 
I'd like to ask you if Ken Cheveldayoff is employed with the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, and if so, what are his 
qualifications, what are his duties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — As I mentioned several times before, Mr. 
Dutchak's employment was such that we did not require a written 
report from him. Regarding his expenses, we have nothing to hide. 
His expenses during that period, that included transportation,  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3638 
 
 

accommodation, and meals, Mr. Chairman, amounted of $1,943 
— a far cry from the 4,200 that was paid to the NDP appointment. 
Mr. Cheveldayoff does not work for the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well the rates of pay of Mr. Dutchak is about 
$84,000 a year, for someone who is your little helper, as you 
described him in the newspapers. You indicated in Crown 
corporations that he performed some duties and he put together a 
report, but you failed to say that you would go so far as to table the 
report. 
 
I'm wondering if the minister could let us know whether he could 
table some report that Mr. Dutchak did for this $7,000 a month. 
And can you confirm whether Mr. Ken Cheveldayoff worked for 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in the past 18 months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, no, Mr. Cheveldayoff has not 
been in the employ of Sask Housing Corporation in the last 18 
months. 
 
As I explained several times before — and this is really, in my 
mind, unnecessary questioning — I did not require a written report 
from Mr. Dutchak. He was employed to help me operate the 
corporation when it was without a president. I mean, everybody 
has to understand that you need a leader. He was aware of the 
programs; he was aware of all the management at the corporation. 
 
And as far as referring him to my little helper is concerned, I don't 
have to tell the members opposite and the people at large, I take a 
lot of ribbing for the size of myself, so when I'm in a position to 
finally dish it back and say I've got a little helper, I hope that 
people understand exactly what I'm saying. 
 
(1030) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — We don't know what you're saying, that's the 
problem. I don't think that has anything to do with your size. 
 
Mr. Chairman, can the minister confirm whether Ken 
Cheveldayoff had a contract, any financial arrangement with the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in the last 24 months, if he 
wasn't employed directly? 
 
But I want to also make a comment while you're looking up that 
information, Mr. Minister. You indicated that Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation was without a president and required 
leadership. But in Crown corporations you said that he was never 
acting president, he was never in any official status with the 
corporation, other than he was on contract as your little helper. 
 
And I was wondering what a former defeated cabinet minister, the 
minister that was defeated as a result of his poor track record in his 
constituency, would be paid off at $7,000 a month to be your little 
helper and not provide you with any advice. I'm wondering 
whether you could explain that for us, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I can tell you this. When Mr. 
Dutchak lost the election, the people of Prince Albert lost an 
excellent member. I can tell you that he had  

a lot more than 200 people at his nomination as well. And yes, my 
little helper and I did run the Sask Housing Corporation, and I 
think that we've done a heck of a job with it. 
 
And you're right, when I said that he provided leadership, he did. 
But I never did say that he was the president; I never did say that 
he was the acting president. I said he provided the leadership, and 
he did, so don't mix up the two. Clearly he was there to assist the 
minister in operating the corporation to provide the leadership to 
these talented people that are around me that were looking for 
leadership, and that took the corporation through a tenuous period 
of time when they did not have a president. 
 
Mr. Little worked his way up through the ranks of the corporation, 
so you can't accuse that of being a political appointment. He is a 
professional civil servant that worked his way up through the 
ranks of the corporation to become appointed president of that 
corporation. 
 
And as far as Mr. Dutchak's advice is concerned, we met regularly 
and we met daily. We didn't require massive amounts of paper and 
written report, because if you want to call it, and I'll use the phrase 
again, in our own little heads we were able to keep all this 
information together. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I was wondering if the minister has somebody 
else on staff defined as his little helper that's making $7,000 a 
month, either being paid through Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation or other facilities. Could you confirm that or deny 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well you see, here's my little helper too, 
because the president is Mr. Larry Little, so I can call Little my 
little helper. And no, he's not getting $7,000 a month, because 
through shrewd manipulation, and because he appreciated the fact 
of his promotion, he came cheap. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I'm wondering if you've been able to get the 
information regarding Ken Cheveldayoff. Can you confirm that, 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, I'll . . . again, I don't mind telling you the 
truth about Mr. Cheveldayoff. Sure he worked for the government. 
And at the time that Mr. Dutchak was the minister, Mr. 
Cheveldayoff was his ministerial assistant. And he was employed 
from June of '85 to December of '85. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So we here we have finally somebody who will 
admit that Mr. Cheveldayoff was employed. And could you tell 
me, you indicated that he was a ministerial assistant, could you 
indicate what his duties were with the corporation, and what his 
salary was, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, I suppose as far as his duties were 
concerned, I mean, you know, he would do the ordinary thing that 
a ministerial assistant would be required to do. For instance, when 
various people that use existing programs that the government 
have run into a problem, the ministerial . . . and come to the 
minister, the ministerial assistant will then take it through the  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3639 
 
 

corporation and determine the problems and the like. And yes, 
during that employ, Mr. Cheveldayoff, his annual salary was 
$28,236. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — This is the same Ken Cheveldayoff, I'm 
informed, who was the president of the young PC party. I'm 
wondering if that is something the minister would acknowledge, 
or not. But before he does that, I'd like to ask him as well . . . I'd 
like to confirm actually whether JoAnn Emery is employed with 
the corporation, whether she was hired through a public 
competition, or whether she was appointed, and in what capacity 
and how much her salary is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, certainly Mr. Cheveldayoff 
had a connection with the PC youth party. And why should I be 
afraid to admit that. A minister, and an MLA, and you people, are 
elected representatives. You're supposed to be political. Surely you 
of all people understand that your ministerial assistants are hired, 
and a lot of times have political backgrounds. Why wouldn't they? 
And if they wouldn't, then I would challenge you, God help us if 
you ever got back into power 40 or 50 years, to retain the 
ministerial assistants that are on staff. I mean, you're asking 
nonsensical questions that even the people in the public 
understand, so we have nothing to fear by saying that. 
 
But the other attack that you take on career civil servants such as 
JoAnn Emery, who is not in the employ of the corporation, who 
held a union job. And it's unfair that you attack a professional civil 
servant. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I apologize if the minister has received the 
wrong perception. I'm not attacking any civil servants. 
 
I'm trying to make the point that some key positions in the housing 
corporation are appointed as a result of, not public competitions or 
not as a result of long lists of qualifications but in fact because 
they're members of the PC party. They're either president of 
women's association in the PC party, they're either president of the 
young PC operation, or in the case of JoAnn Emery, I'm informed 
she is related to an Emery that's employed by the Executive 
Council, who is the Premier's operation. 
 
So jobs are obtained in your corporation, in some instances — not 
all — but in some instances, at an alarming rate, through their 
political connections and not through their qualifications, and I 
think the minister is aware of that. 
 
And I'd like to know whether you can confirm whether Frank 
Loffler is employed in the corporation and in what capacity, and 
what are his qualifications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the member is speaking about 
two or three or four people out of an employment factor of about 
225 or 230 people. And I disagree that he's not attacking the civil 
service. He mentioned JoAnn Emery, who held a union job — 
unfair attack. We now have a new president who worked his way 
up through the system — obviously not a political appointment. 
 

His colleagues, that I enjoy working with, that have been with the 
corporation for years, the top officials at the corporation — all true 
professional civil servants. Why do you continually take a run at 
these people? You're not being fair. 
 
And then when you ask me to defend somebody that can't be here, 
that have absolutely . . . you've attacked two now that have had no 
connection with the innuendoes that you've been accusing them of 
unfairly. And they shouldn't be dragged about into this House, and 
I don't like talking about personnel. 
 
Mr. Loffler, yes, he is employed by the Sask Housing Corporation, 
and he's a special assistant to the president. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And his qualifications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Loffler is well qualified for the position 
that he takes. He was in the private sector for 25 years, managing 
in a management position of a large national, perhaps 
international, corporation, and was involved directly with an 
internal budget in the millions and millions of dollars, as is the 
corporation. So when you get a gentleman like this that comes 
from the private sector with that kind of experience, I think that 
that stands well for itself. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Is this the same Frank Loffler that was 
employed on the staff on one Graham Taylor, who's a member of 
the Conservative Party and member of this legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — And a minister as well, so let's do it all. Yes 
he is, and he provided a wealth of information to that minister. 
And with that background, when we needed him at the corporation 
with the wealth of experience and background and knowledge that 
he has, it only made eminent sense that he move over to this 
corporation to help fill in the holes that were over there and make 
that corporation work effectively. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I refer to information which was provided, Mr. 
Chairman, to us in the Crown Corporations Committee regarding 
the advertising of the home program. And for the record, the 
information that's been provided by Sask Housing Corporation 
indicates that in 1985 the total advertising budget of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, through Dome and other 
areas, was about $45,500. In 1986, which was the launching of the 
home program just three short weeks prior to the call of the 
general election in this province, there was an expenditure of not 
45,000 in that fiscal year, or that calendar year, but $275,000. 
 
On the home program alone there is an expenditure of $221,000, 
and that expenditure took place as a result of a three-week media 
campaign by this government, authorized by this cabinet minister, 
or at least this Premier that we have in this Assembly. And I want 
to know whether the minister believes it's a fair expenditure of 
taxpayers' dollars when you spend $221,000 in a three-week 
period leading up to an election campaign, promoting the 
Conservative Party across this province. I wonder if you think it's 
a fair expenditure, and I wonder if you have any comments with 
regard to whether the  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3640 
 
 

Conservative Party should be making up this amount of taxpayers' 
dollars that's been spent to get this government re-elected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I don't have a calculator with 
me, so that I can't calculate it into terms of percentage, but the 
home program has now created in the area of 6 or $700 million 
worth of economic activity in this province. So certainly the 
expenditure of advertising is a necessary part of that. 
 
And I would dare say that anybody in the private sector, if they 
could spend $200,000 in advertising to do 5 or 6 or $700 million 
worth of activity, would just be delighted to do that. And when 
you're entering a new program, you know, you've got to tell the 
people what it's all about and what it does. 
 
I've got a list in front of me, that I can't make public at this time, 
that indicates names of people in this Assembly that have taken 
advantage of that program. Now this will be Public Accounts 
knowledge in a year or so, and it'll be interesting to see the 
hypocrites that we have on that side opposite. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So the Minister does not deny that this almost 
quarter of a million dollars was spent as a result of a political 
decision, not as a result of providing a well-organized, efficient 
program, — as he always refers to his mannerisms in government 
as efficient. 
 
Now I think the home program that's been undertaken is not an 
efficient program. The claims that you make with regard to 
economic activity are questionable, at best. You indicate there are 
all kinds of jobs that are being created as a result of the home 
program, yet there are individuals that I'm aware of, at least some 
companies that are from outside this province, actually located 
outside this province, that are involved with some of the work in 
the home program. 
 
(1045) 
 
The government of . . . the Premier that we have here continues to 
talk about efficiency and what a great job-creation program that 
the home program is, yet when you look at the job statistics, we 
see that there are 2,000 fewer people working in this province 
from August '86 to '87; we see that the province is last or second 
last or third last in housing starts, when in previous years, in the 
late '70s and early '80s, we were always in the top five or six in 
percentage increases. 
 
Can the Minister explain the discrepancies in these statistics, and 
can he also explain why the program allows out-of-province 
companies to participate in this program which is costing the 
taxpayers a lot of millions of dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, let's get something straight 
here. We agreed on these figures yesterday. Since July of '86 
there's been an increase of over 7,000 jobs in the service sector, 
with another 2,000 in construction — even the member agreed to 
that — manufacturing was up over 1,000. Clearly it's doing its job. 
 
This program is a program of partnership between a  

government, between its people, and between its businesses. 
When you own a home, you must maintain it. Clearly that is what 
this program does. This government is committed to protecting 
families, to protecting our seniors. The home is the largest single 
investment that a family will ever make, Mr. Chairman, and this 
program is designed to help them maintain that big investment. 
 
I have letter after letter that I received from the home repair 
industry. The home renovation industry is the most 
labour-intensive industry in North America, and the connection 
therefore between jobs, well-being, quality of life, is extremely 
obvious. 
 
And I don't know why the members opposite keep blindly flailing 
away at the home program. All they have to do is go out on the 
streets and see what's happening. Over 190,000 people have taken 
advantage of this program, Mr. Chairman, 190,000 families are 
protecting and maintaining their homes as a result of this program, 
and yet they, the members opposite, knock it. 
 
Why don't you go and tell the people that you disagree with it? 
Why don't you go and tell the people that have taken advantage of 
this program. Why don't you go and talk to some of your 
colleagues that have taken advantage of this program and ask them 
what they think about it and how they have used their money? 
This list will be public in a couple of years. It will be interesting to 
see the members that have taken advantage of this program. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I'm sure the people who have taken advantage 
of the program according to the regulations and rules and 
guide-lines set out are people that are not taking advantage of the 
program. They're exercising their right in this province to be 
involved with the program. 
 
I'm sure we could go over the list of people in this Assembly who 
lived here during the course of the property improvement grant 
and find out who took advantage of that program. And I'll tell you 
there are . . . almost everybody in this Assembly who had any kind 
of property had the property improvement grant. And now what's 
happening is that this government has taken away the property 
improvement grant, which was an automatic annual grant to home 
owners which they used for the purpose of their house, for tax 
abatement, or for improvements. 
 
And in my view this is no big bonus program. This is a program 
that is provided to the home owners of this province because their 
other programs were slashed and cut and eliminated and gutted. 
And I would ask the minister to compare the list of those who took 
advantage of the property improvement grant prior to its 
cancellation, and I can tell you, Mr. Minister, that the percentages 
would not match up at all. 
 
But that's not the point. The point is the program is there. The 
program is attempting to create some sort of need or fill some need 
and create some jobs, but the problem we've got with it, Minister, 
is that it is an inefficient program that is wide open to abuse. It's 
wide open to abuse, and I quote. Here's one application that I have 
here, it's a copy of one, and it's from a swimming pool company in 
Medicine Hat, the estimate, and this is for  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3641 
 
 

somebody in Swift Current. So what kind of a job does that create 
in this province? I have another one here for the supplying and 
installation of Colorado blue spruce. How does that improve the 
permanent nature of one's home? 
 
Why should taxpayers have to pay for Jacuzzis and pools to those 
people that have a lot of resources and assets when you have the 
gall to gut the prescription drug plan which affects those that are ill 
and affects those that can't afford the program. 
 
And you know, as well as every other member in this House, that 
when an individual becomes ill in your family, and you know this 
personally, Mr. Minister, that the most important thing to you is 
the better health of that individual in your family. You don't worry 
about Colorado blue spruce. You don't worry about a Jacuzzi. You 
worry about providing the best medical care for that family 
member. 
 
And what you have done with this program has spent 50, 60, $100 
million a year — who knows; you don't even know — on a 
program to provide Colorado blue spruce to certain people, 
Jacuzzis and swimming pools and aprons for swimming pools 
when we have people in this province that are suffering because 
they can't afford drugs which are prescribed by doctors for the 
maintaining of their health. Can you explain that? Can you justify 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, that's just a ridiculous 
accusation. What a goofy argument. If you're trying to tell me that 
the people of this province can't afford their health over 
maintaining the cost of their homes, that's a ridiculous argument. 
They're going to do both. Surely we recognize that. 
 
And then what about the people that have to spend their money on 
health care, regardless of what is in place at the time, and they 
have to do home repairs? Don't you think for a moment that they 
appreciate the fact that they can improve and beautify their homes 
and take advantage of a program that's in effect? And the big 
difference, I guess, between us . the big difference between us is 
that the property improvement grant did nothing for the economy. 
And the NDP say, here's the money and do with it what you want. 
We don't know what they did with it. 
 
The beauty of this program versus that one is, we're saying, here, 
this isn't a grant, it's a partnership — the government, the people, 
the business community. 
 
Now let's create some economic activity. Has it been created? yes, 
it has. And it shows up in the unemployment records. This 
government's unemployment record has continually been the best 
in Canada for the last five years. So we're not ashamed of the fact 
that his program . . . we're very proud of the fact that this program 
sparks the economic activity in this province. 
 
And as I mentioned earlier, go out into the communities, talk to 
the business people, talk to the folks that have taken advantage of 
the program. The economic benefits are astronomical. Health is 
one thing; the home program  

is another. Because you can take any of that argument to the 
extreme and it's ridiculous. 
 
You can say, let's not build any more highways and put it into 
health; let's not do anything, and let's put it into health. One-third 
of the budget goes into health. How much more do you want? all 
the revenue that comes from the sales tax, all the revenue that 
comes from the income tax, all the revenues that comes from the 
resource industry, still doesn't cover the health care budget. We 
have spent more on health care. We have increased our health 
carte expenditures by 63 per cent. So your argument is totally 
frivolous. 
 
The Colorado blue spruce that you mention all the time — go tell 
that to the landscape people throughout this province that happen 
to sell Colorado blue spruce and many other plants for a living. 
Are you denying them, are you denying all those people in the 
landscape business a job? Yes, you are, with that attitude. 
 
Jacuzzis and pools, swimming pools — very labour intensive. Are 
you denying all those people that work in the swimming pool 
industry, jobs? Yes, you are. And I'll tell you what, Mr. Chairman, 
if a $1,500 grant sparks somebody into spending $30,000 on a 
swimming pool, what's wrong with that. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, if I could ask leave of the 
Assembly to introduce some guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce to 
the Assembly, and to you, Mr. Chairman, some guests we have in 
the west gallery. We have some members of the executive of the 
Yellowhead Highway Association who are in Regina this morning 
visiting with some of the ministers. 
 
These executive people on the executive of the Yellowhead 
Highway Association have worked long and hard. We have had a 
very good year with respect to the Yellowhead association 
because of some additional funding from the federal government. 
And it's just my pleased to introduce to the Assembly, Alderman 
Donna Birkmaier from Saskatoon; Cecil MacKay, alderman from 
Lloydminster; and Jack Smith — all three executive of the 
Yellowhead Highway Association. And we welcome you here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 51 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The minister  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3642 
 
 

makes accusations that he doesn't know what happened with the 
money that was spent under the property improvement grant 
debates. 
 
Well if you knew anything about economics, and maybe you 
should consult with your officials, that the disposable income that 
was generated with that grant was disposable income; the money 
went into businesses such as those that you were involved with in 
the past; people spent that money — in almost every case they 
used that money. And for every dollar that the government spends 
or generates in this province and this country, through the 
economic multiplier and the multiplier effect, that generates $3 
more. So on an annual basis there was money going to everybody, 
whether they be renters or home owners, to use with respect to 
their homes and their apartments, whether it was to purchase some 
capital good or renovate or to spend on something which they felt 
was important to them and the economy. 
 
And what you have done, Minister, is you have now forced people 
working at low wages, minimum wage, 4.50 an hour, 4.75 an 
hour, $5 an hour, to contribute to this government's operation so 
they can spend money for people like yourself and others to buy a 
Jacuzzi — who you don't really need a subsidy from these 
low-income people — so after a game of golf you can come home 
and relax in your Jacuzzi while these people are out there trying to 
make a living so they can pay for their darned drugs that you have 
jacked up in terms of prices . . .(inaudible interjection). . . jacked 
up is right. 
 
Now I say to the minister, whether or not he feels that this 
program is an efficient program — you've indicated you run your 
operation in an efficient manner — but what are you doing in 
terms of efficiency with respect to gouging of senior citizens? 
What are you doing with respect to inspections after the 
completion of this grant? We'd like to know what kind of efficient 
system that you have in place to do this. Can you tell us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I too would like to welcome 
my friends from the Yellowhead Highway Association. In my past 
portfolio I had occasion to work with them, and it's nice to see 
them again in the gallery. 
 
I can tell you that of the millions of dollars that were spent by the 
NDP on their give-away of the property improvement grant, in the 
millions of dollars in business that I did while I was in the private 
sector, I didn't have the opportunity to cash one cheque from . . . 
that anybody came in. And I can tell you that of the cheques that 
are going out to the business community now, those involved in 
the renovation industry, those that sell carpeting, those that indeed 
sell landscaping, as those cheques keep rolling through and they 
see the beautiful partnership that exists between government, 
government and its people, government, its people, and its 
business community, I mean, what could be better? 
 
And it's not a give-away because of the fact of this partnership, 
Mr. Chairman. The people get matching dollars from the 
government, so they're frugal with it, and they spend it on the best 
way to improve their home. Everybody in this partnership is a 
taxpayer. And if there are the families out there that want Jacuzzis 
for whatever  

reason . . . and indeed in some instances, Mr. Chairman, Jacuzzis 
are really appreciated by the elderly for reasons of therapeutic 
value. 
 
Oh, the members opposite holler that. Now I suppose that if he's 
saying that Jacuzzis and seniors don't go together, then I say, why 
are they included then in the housing programs that come along, of 
the non-profit corporations that put Jacuzzis in place that are part 
of the enriched housing program? Because they, even they . . . Is it 
the Alliance Church that has the Jacuzzis in there? Even they 
recognize the value of therapeutic Jacuzzis and put them in there. 
So what's wrong with that? 
 
And as far as the numbers are concerned, I can tell you that they're 
staggering. They are just absolutely staggering — 24 swimming 
pools. Twenty-four, Mr. Chairman. Out of 85,000 various jobs, 24 
pools. Now are they going to deny those people that wanted to 
trigger that kind of activity, and then the ongoing expense that's 
good for the power corporation because of the electrical bill and 
the gas required to heat that. I mean, if they choose to spend their 
money that way and they're taxpayers, obviously they're entitled to 
that. 
 
And as far as gouging the seniors are concerned, let me tell you, 
Mr. Chairman, of how we gouged them in one way — last year 
and again this year, the senior citizens' heritage program, which 
we provided over #0 million, some 30, $35 million to the seniors. 
That's how our government gouges them, by giving them help 
through the senior citizens' heritage program to the tune now of 
some $70 million. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, people are laughing at you 
and this program and this government's program, on the home 
program. They're literally laughing at the way that you're running 
it. 
 
Low income people, people that are unemployed — what benefit 
have they had from the program? Can the minister tell us that? 
And I'd like to know how many people in the upper income 
bracket that you've been supporting all along — and they've been 
supporting your party — are prepared to forego this grant in lieu 
of those that cannot afford it. 
 
Where are your priorities? Why do you as a government 
consistently and continually introduce programs which are wide 
open to abuse, which are full of red tape, which are inefficient and 
seem to punish those at the low income scale? Why do you do 
this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the people are laughing at the 
stupidity of your questions and the stupidity of your innuendoes. 
 
Are you telling me that — and I don't care if you want to use a 
$250,000 home or a $25,000 home — the people that enjoy their 
homes, the largest single investment that they're going to make, 
and want to improve it . . . The program of this is absolutely there 
for them to use. 
 
They can use the maximum of $1,500, as a lot of the  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3643 
 
 

members opposite have used, or if they're not in the position to do 
that, they can apply for $100. In any event, as their homes must be 
maintained, that program is there and so, effectively, they can 
maintain their homes for half the price. 
 
Now what's wrong with that? Are you telling me that the low 
wage earners with modest incomes, with modest homes, are not 
entitled to improve their homes? Is that what you're telling me? 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I wish you would answer some of my questions. 
But I'll tell the minister that I find it really incredible and 
unbelievable when you start talking about these grants being great 
for those that don't have the money to come up with the $3,000 to 
spend to get the matching amount. 
 
But I just want to sum up, and maybe finish here. I notice in the 
budget that you have cut the senior citizens' heritage program, that 
that is no longer out there helping senior citizens. The senior 
citizens' home repair program is gone. 
 
You have, as the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, you have been the helmsman of the ship which is 
providing the lowest number, in a percentage terms increase, of 
housing starts in the country. You have eliminated programs for 
seniors. You have eliminated the renters' rebate program. People 
who are renting — and there are 30 per cent of our population live 
in apartments — they do not have any assistance from this 
government. 
 
You've failed to provide adequate low income housing units; we 
have a waiting list of 2,000 in this city alone. You have transferred 
responsibility and a significant amount of funding to CMHC 
(Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation) in the rural native 
and urban native housing program. 
 
You have continued to use patronage to award advertising 
contracts to Dome Advertising to help you and your government 
get elected to the tune of a quarter of a million dollars. 
 
You have, in many instances, hired in your corporation, 
individuals who have qualifications of being a member of the PC 
party, and we went through those names: Sid Dutchak and the 
Hammonds and the Consauls and Cheveldayoffs and the Emerys 
and the Lofflers, and who knows how many else. I'm just picking 
these out and asking questions, and you're confirming that that's 
the case. 
 
And you have a home program which is wide open for abuse. You 
can't confirm some of the inspections that are going on, people 
who are using that grant for Jacuzzis and putting 8-foot and 
23-foot Colorado blue spruce in their yards. 
 
Minister, I contend that Saskatchewan Housing Corporation under 
your government is nothing but "patronage central," that's all it is. 
You're using that corporation to gain political ground by using the 
money of this province to advertise your political problems and  

your political programs prior to the election. 
 
And, Minister, I think that it's a very sad legacy that this 
government is leaving for the people of Saskatchewan because 
there are many people in that corporation, including these that are 
sitting here today, that are sincere civil servants, that want to do a 
job. They want to provide housing according to their mandate and 
their mission. And all you want to do is sell off the assets and pay 
off all of your friends through patronage and try to get re-elected 
on that basis. I think it's disgusting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it appears as though the 
member wants to wind up, and I could go into a big, long 
argument, but I won't. It really . . . it's really too late for the 
member to opt out of the vicious attack that he took on the civil 
service, and I'm just utterly amazed. 
 
We've mentioned names of people that were employed in the 
union at Sask Housing. It's really unfortunate that he would choose 
to take an attack on these civil servants. But I am proud to tell you 
that I am the helmsman of a ship that is probably providing more 
economic activity than any program of any government in the 
history of this province. 
 
It is creating employment by the . . . for thousands and thousands 
of people It is providing economic activity throughout this 
province — through all of our constituencies, whether they are 
PC, whether they are NDP, or whether they are, indeed, Liberal. 
And I'm just amazed at the attack that you people blindly take 
when we have 190,000 families, so far, that have just been 
delighted with that program. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, I would like to ask a couple of questions to 
the minister. Mr. Minister, what are your plans for the public 
housing, you know, particularly in La Ronge? What are your plans 
for the public housing, both the apartments and the single 
dwellings; well, the housing dwellings that you have in La Ronge? 
What are your plans for them in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to tell the 
member from the North that we are concerned with housing in the 
North, and I am having ongoing discussions with the mayors of 
the municipalities in the North. We're trying to address the 
situation. As the member knows, most of the programs have been 
transferred back to Canada Mortgage and Housing. That was done 
to avoid a duplication in process and to also eliminate the 
necessity of going through two governmental agencies and just go 
with the one. 
 
We will be maintaining the houses in the North to the best of our 
ability. We're trying to work with the various mayors and 
aldermen to determine how we can best and most effectively do 
that. We're discussing with them all kinds of options. Some have 
asked us to consider if the municipalities would indeed be able to 
look after the portfolio. We're looking into that. 
 
Clearly we want to do as good a job as possible up in the North. 
As soon as this Assembly is finished, I will be taking another tour 
to the northern communities in discussions, and certainly housing 
will be one of the  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3644 
 
 

major items of discussion with them. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — On the particular case in regards to the apartments 
in La Ronge which are utilized by NORTEP students, northern 
teacher education program students, there was concern raised on 
two levels: one, that those may be sold and therefore leave the 
students, you know, out of that public housing which has been 
very well used by a tremendous number of communities from the 
North, you know, sending their students there. I mean, there's 
about 80 students that stay in those buildings, and they're well 
utilized. I mean, one of the goals is for trading and development in 
the North. 
 
The Minister of Education himself has mentioned that this is one 
of the outstanding programs in northern Saskatchewan. The 
students were highly concerned, and we want to know whether or 
not you're working with the Minister of Education to try and 
resolve this particular issue. 
 
And also, not only is there one of the threat to the loss of a 
residence, but also in regards to the aspect of the $100,000, you 
know, being charged as a new assessment this year which had not 
been previously budgeted in, into the North budget. I was 
wondering, are you also negotiating that item along with the 
Minister of Education. Could you update me on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the member is right, and 
I appreciate your bringing up that concern. I can tell you that it is a 
concern of ours, and I can tell you that we are considering those 
problems, and it will be no threat to those students. We are 
working with the Minister of Education on that; we do recognize 
that. And that whole apartment complex was originally designed, 
as you know, for staff housing, and it hasn't been used for that for 
quite some time. 
 
So we believe that that is a particular part of the portfolio that the 
government should not have. But having said that, in the event that 
we are able to move that into the private sector, we will be making 
provision to protect those students that you talk about. We are 
concerned with that, and we will not do anything that will threaten 
that existence for them. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — In that regard, I've been working in the adult 
education field in northern Saskatchewan for many, many years. 
We always recognize the need for residences for students, much as 
we see in the university, you know, with a certain amount of 
public funding that went into the development of residences in 
Saskatoon. 
 
We well recognize that it was a greater problem for the North; that 
in fact when we brought in, when we got this concept of a 
Northlands Career College coming in, that there is a need for the 
funding. And people are worried that although you may be able to 
get a short-term deal in regards to the private sector, that indeed 
they want a more longer term commitment. 
 
The degree of educational requirements in the North is not a one- 
or two-year problem, a one- or two-year issue; it's a long-term 
aspect and the issue of getting the government to provide support 
systems at that level is  

indeed an important issue. So I would like to make that point. 
 
The other thing that you haven't answered in regards to the 
$100,000. Have you negotiated that . . . like in terms of budgeting, 
that was not in the budget for northern teacher education program, 
from their education grant. Now this new assessment has been 
brought in. What is being done in regards to that $100,000? Is 
there going to be an increase in the grant from the minister? Has 
that been talked about in your discussions with the minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned in my first 
response, we're discussing this with the Minister of Education. I 
don't believe that you have a concern. We're addressing those 
concerns. Certainly we have to follow the rules and regulations 
that exist and apply, and the terms of the Rentalsman, but you 
know, we're talking to a lot of people, members of the native 
community included, about the disposition of this building. 
 
And they're all aware of what we're trying to do, what we're trying 
to protect, what we have to do. We just don't believe that the 
government should be in the private market-place in the town of 
La Ronge, which is what it is right now. And if we can move it out 
into the private sector, keeping in mind all of those things that you 
have brought up, we would like to do that, and we believe that we 
can. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, you well know that the 
unemployment rate is upwards to 80 per cent in certain 
communities; that the basis for the students being able to pay a lot 
of the residential requirements which are subsidized at the present 
moment by the government, you know, is just not possible. How 
can you move from one clear system of a public subsidy program 
into a private sector program? How is that possible? Where are the 
students going to get their money? Is money simply being 
transferred? 
 
(1115) 
 
Is another capital facility being transferred to a private person in 
the town of La Ronge, and the same amount of money is going to 
be shifted through? I mean, the private sector person will be 
having the same maintenance costs, will be charging you rent on 
top of it. You're still going to have to help the students. It's going 
to cost you more money in the long run to do that. How is that 
going to be helpful for the student? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to tell the member: 
don't be afraid of change. We recognize . . . Don't laugh, this is 
serious, and I'm having a serious discussion; he's asking intelligent 
questions. 
 
But don't be afraid of change. We recognize the concerns that you 
have for the native community, and we do as well. We don't have 
any impending sale or anything that should make you fear that 
these people will be moved out, because we have their concern in 
mind as well. 
 
Having said that, yes, there will be some way, hopefully — and 
maybe with the native themselves, because they are part of the 
discussions, and they could very well end  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3645 
 
 

up owning this building. And if they can, and if the deal goes 
together, I just think that this would be a good way to do it, and it 
would be good for everybody. And if it can't be worked out, then 
certainly we won't work one out. But we are in consultation with 
the Department of Education, and we are in consultation with the 
leaders of the North, including the native people and the native 
leaders, and hopefully something can be worked out. They know 
our side of the coin. We understand theirs. We're not going to do 
anything that's going to hurt them. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Just one more point. I think it's extremely 
important, as you said, to meet with the leadership. My 
understanding is that the leadership did not know anything about 
the situation up to about . . . even as far back as three weeks ago; 
that in fact the NORTEP council, which would be in charge of 
that, has just learned about the issue and had picked it up in the 
past couple of weeks. 
 
So I am pointing out that it is extremely important that for the 
many years previous to this, the so-called private sector approach 
simply hadn't worked, that indeed it was only during the period of 
public moneys supporting adult education in northern 
Saskatchewan that tremendous advantages have taken place. 
 
You are asking me not to be afraid of a system that has already 
failed in the past. You are asking me to believe in something that 
did not indeed provide specific benefits in regards to adult 
education. 
 
I recognize the fact that indeed we have public facilities that are 
being helped in the South. It probably costs more to water the 
lawns, you know, of the universities in the South. I think it's very 
important to recognize that that's an important expenditure, but I 
think it should also be looked at in terms of the training of students 
in the North that we need to be able to provide that. Of any place 
in Saskatchewan that is the need. We have to put our money, we 
have to invest in our students. Those are the ones that will be 
taking care of the private sector and public sector jobs in northern 
development. 
 
We have to invest in our students and be able to provide that 
proper investment today. What you're talking about is only 
investing towards and providing our public funding to a private 
person in La Ronge. I'm talking not only about one person, I'm 
talking about 80 people. A building like that would be helpful for 
thousands of students into the future. But here you're only 
worrying about privatizing another adult education . . . another 
public facility for the benefit of only a few people. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a very 
few number of very short questions for the minister this morning, 
which I hope he will be able to respond to quickly. Mr. Minister, 
they relate to the home program and the $1,500 grant portion of 
that program. I wonder specifically if you could indicate for me 
the precise legal authority and the statute of Saskatchewan that 
authorizes that expenditure of funds for that purpose. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I can't recall whether we 
discussed this in Crown corporations or not, but clearly when the 
home program was put into place, according to the opinion of our 
in-house lawyers at the 

time, as well as an outside opinion, we had indeed every authority 
that we required to proceed with the program as far as the lawyers 
were concerned. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, in the Crown Corporations 
Committee you indicated at one point that you had in fact sought 
and obtained three legal opinions on this matter. At least one of 
those was in-house, and at least one of those was from the private 
bar. What the third one might have been I don't know, but you 
indicated that you had three legal opinions. I wonder if you could 
tell me, from those legal opinions, again precisely just the section 
in The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act which provides 
the authority for the program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, being that we discussed this 
pretty thoroughly in Crown Corporations at the time that we had 
all of the information available with us, I really wasn't expecting, 
and my officials are not prepared with the documentation, being 
that we've done all that before. I don't know why you'd want to go 
through it all again. And I suppose then that I would just have to 
simply . . . my responses would have to be the same all the time. 
 
We did have, in fact, as I mentioned, three legal opinions 
indicating that there was absolutely no question that we were 
within the powers granted to the corporation under the corporation 
Act. And if any citizen, yourself included, feel that there is a 
grievance, then you'll just have to challenge that through the courts 
of law, I guess. I don't have any other response for you. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Well, Mr. Minister, I asked the questions again 
because the answer that you have given me today is almost 
identical to the answer that you gave in the Crown Corporations 
Committee, and that is essentially that you didn't have the 
information with you, and you weren't prepared to discuss it. 
 
If we had had a thorough discussion of it in the Crown 
Corporations Committee, I might not have to re-ask the questions, 
but we never quite got to the substance of the matter in the Crown 
Corporations Committee, and that's why I raise it again. 
 
I take it from what you've said that the legal officers of the 
corporation are not present today to assist in this discussion, and 
that the necessary papers are not with you today to assist in the 
discussion, so could I ask you this question? You have indicated 
that you sought and obtained three separate legal opinions. If you 
were so absolutely confident of your legal position with respect to 
this program, why was it necessary to obtain not one, not two, but 
three separate legal opinions? 
 
Doesn't the fact that you pursued this issue on three different 
occasions raise some question in the minds of any impartial 
observers that you may just have harboured a little bit of doubt in 
the back of your mind as to the legal position of the government 
with respect to this program? Otherwise, why were three separate 
legal opinions required? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg . . . I mean, you amaze me to  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3646 
 
 

indicate that we didn't discuss this in Crown Corporations. You 
were there; you asked the question. Here is my response. I hope 
you get off of this waste of time by asking the identical questions. 
And I will quote from Hansard for you one more time: 
 

As far as the legal situation is concerned, certainly we got a 
legal opinion. We had two in-house and an external opinion 
that all indicated that we are well within the confines of the 
legal authority . . . 

 
And if the other lawyers opposite would quit chiding in for a 
minute . . . That wasn't in the quote, Mr. Chairman. I'll continue 
with the quote: 
 

. . . well within the confines of the legal authority of the Act. 
 
And I'll just quote one section, 13 (b), "to improve the quality of 
housing." And that in itself gives us the authority. So that we had 
three legal opinions that dictated we had absolutely no problem. 
 
Now surely I can't be any more clear than that. I can't be any more 
concise than that. If you are here as a member, please accept that 
and do your research and see if we're wrong. 
 
If you're asking that as a lawyer or as a private citizen, then, I 
suppose, sue us. But I can't . . . Unless, if you want to stand here 
from now until Christmas, I'll give you the same response. Now 
surely you can understand that. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if the minister who 
seems to get more and more agitated on this subject, which in 
itself is revealing, I wonder if the minister could comment on the 
impact of section 16 of The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Act, which I would suggest to the minister is highly relevant to 
this whole discussion. 
 
And section 16 would indicate that in order for the housing 
corporation to make loans and grants of this nature, the housing 
corporation would have to conscientiously form the opinion that 
every resident of the province of Saskatchewan, no matter how 
poor or how wealthy, that every resident of the province of 
Saskatchewan would require, as a matter of practical economics, 
this kind of public financial support in terms of the $1,500 grants 
to provide themselves with adequate housing. 
 
Could I have the minister's confirmation that the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation has conscientiously come to the conclusion 
that every resident of the province of Saskatchewan needs and 
requires grants of this nature to provide themselves with adequate 
housing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, if I show any degree of 
agitation, you're absolutely right. I am totally annoyed with this 
line of questioning. I'm not a lawyer; you are. You want to 
challenge us under section 16; go ahead, challenge us under 
section 16. I'm telling you again, for I don't know how many 
times, I'm telling the members opposite who don't question us, I'm 
telling the people of the province of Saskatchewan, that according 
to the legal  

opinions that we have, we are well within our jurisdiction. I'm not 
going to back off of that. I'll keep repeating that all the time. If you 
don't like it, then do something about it, but for heaven's sake, Mr. 
Chairman, don't allow this duplication of question, this 
unnecessary waste of taxpayers' dollar to continue with the same 
old rhetoric. Even the members opposite agree with that, surely. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the fact that the minister is 
so obviously disturbed about this subject simply confirms me in 
the view that there is, indeed, some weakness in the position 
which he attempts to advance. 
 
I would like to ask the minister just one final question. In the 
month of August or September of this year, 1987 — either late 
August or early September I believe it was — certain regulations 
were published by the Government of Saskatchewan with respect 
to this program. I wonder if the minister could indicate why it was 
that the publication of those regulations came almost one full year 
to the day after the program was announced and implemented and 
money was expended. How is it that it took 11 or 12 months to get 
the regulations together, and was that effort to put some 
regulations on the books, a year after the fact, some effort on the 
part of the government to try to establish some legal authority for a 
program that they had some doubt about for the last 11 or 12 
months? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well let's give him credit. I suppose I knew 
that he wanted those regulations in place, so as we found time to 
develop the regulations and the program was in place, to satisfy 
his continual harangue, Mr. Chairman, we put in the regulations. 
We will continue to put in the regulations as they're developed, 
particularly as time goes by. If we need them in advance, we will. 
If we don't need them in advance, we will. If we don't need them 
in advance, it's part of the normal process to put them in later. So 
it's no big deal and I hope you've had a chance to study those 
regulations and that you're satisfied with them. If not, let me know. 
We can have a look at them again. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — I think I just heard the minister say that the 
regulations were put into effect to satisfy my curiosity about the 
legality or the illegality of the manner of implementation of this 
program. That's an interesting and a novel legal principle, Mr. 
Minister, because of course regulations cannot create the law; they 
cannot change the law; they can only be the method by which the 
law is applied. The legal authority, the lawful authority cannot be 
found in the regulations; it must be found in the enabling statute 
which is the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. So the 
publication of regulations does not solve the legal defect if, in fact, 
there is a legal defect. 
 
One final specific question, Mr. Minister, about your legal 
opinions — the three of them that you've referred too. could you 
indicate to me, precisely, the dates upon which those opinions 
were sought and the dates upon which those opinions were 
received? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I can tell you that another part 
of the legal process and . . . you know, I have  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3647 
 
 

to admit to everybody, if they don't already know it, I'm not a 
lawyer, I'm a politician. He's changing this into a court room 
scenario, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But in any event, the legal opinion, to further cement the authority 
that we had, it was approved indeed by the Sask Housing 
Corporation board of directors, who again have the authority to do 
that. And it was during these discussions, at the board level, that it 
was decided that we should get some legal opinions just to ensure 
common-sense practicality, to ensure that it was within the 
authority of the corporation, and indeed it was. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Do I take it, Mr. Chairman, that the minister is 
then declining to give me the dates upon which the legal opinions 
were requested and the dates upon which they were received? I 
would like to ask for the tabling of those legal opinions, but I 
suspect the minister would decline to actually table the three 
opinions. 
 
That being the case, I am simply asking: when did he ask, or when 
did the Saskatchewan Housing corporation ask for legal opinions, 
and when were they actually received? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Obviously, Mr. Chairman, the internal ones 
were obtained from within-house immediately, and that would 
have been August of last year. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 51 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to remind 
the officials that are here with the minister that the comments that 
have been made on this side of the House have been aimed at the 
policy of the conservative cabinet; that none of the comments 
made were directed at you. And I want you to understand that, 
because as we all know that the buck stops with the minister. 
 
But I want to take this opportunity as well to thank the minister for 
his responses and to thank the officials for their advice and 
consultations. Thank you. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 51 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 51 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 51 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Are there any questions? 
 
That concludes the items of business on Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation. I would like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would certainly 
like to thank the member from Regina North West — pretty good 
questions. We had a good time doing it. The member from 
Cumberland, thank you for your questions. I hope that I gave you 
some degree of comfort. We are concerned with the people of the 
North. Even the member of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, as much as 
he gets under my skin with that repetitive questioning, I hope that, 
for once and for all, we resolved his issue. 
 
My officials, I agree, are top-notch civil servants. I couldn't do my 
job as well as I do without their help and assistance. I enjoy very 
much working with them, and I thank them for their loyalty and 
for the often long hours that they put in on all of our behalf to 
supply us with the information that they have to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
The Local Government Board 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 22 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have to my right 
Wanda Eifler, the vice-chairman of the Local Government Board. 
And behind Wanda is Jo-Anne Baker who is the assistant 
secretary to the Local Government Board. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
the Local Government Finance Commission made a number of 
recommendations with respect to the matter of municipal 
financing and in particular, recommendations with respect to the 
Local Government Board. 
 
Among those recommendations were that local governments 
should be permitted to issue debentures with semi-annual or 
annual payments of interest. It is their view that this would 
improve accessibility of Saskatchewan local government 
debentures in some markets. I wonder if you have any reaction to 
that recommendation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, debentures are issued 
semi-annually. The matter of the whole local government finance 
report is still being reviewed. It was, as everybody acknowledges, 
a massive report — a huge in-depth study that had all kinds of 
experts in the field contributing to it. We are still analysing the 
total impacts. None of that report, to my knowledge at least, has 
been thoroughly implemented in any section of government yet. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can the minister advise me then when that 
change was made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I've been informed that the 
change was implemented earlier in the year, and it doesn't apply 
universally, but rather the large cities had asked for this 
implementation to occur and to pay on a semi-annual basis, to 
which we agreed. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, the recommendation  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3648 
 
 

from the Local Government Finance Commission did not specify 
large cities. It was indicated this should be applied to all 
municipalities that were in a position of having to borrow. Would 
it be your intention to also provide for that adjustment for all 
municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, it appears to be kind of a 
concern to the larger centres, but the smaller municipalities, it's 
much more convenient for them to stay the way they are. I 
suppose it's fair to say that if they requested a change we would 
certainly accommodate that. We're not hung up on it. And it 
appears though that at the small local level, for a matter of 
convenience, they'd just like to leave it the way it is, on the annual 
basis. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, another recommendation 
was that local governments should be permitted to issue 
debentures of longer than 10 years, and in certain circumstances, 
as a means of spreading the capital cost of a project, over the 
lifetime of that project. 
 
Can the minister advise as to whether or not changes have been 
made, or will be made, to the Local Government Board's perusal 
of financial projects to in fact allow that to happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, for the information of the 
member, they are looked at on a project by project basis now, and 
if a municipality were to ask for a longer term, certainly they 
would have a look at it and analyse it and do it that way. There is 
no written law within the board to limit it to 10 years. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — This is clear then that municipalities can 
have longer than 10 years over which to amortize their debts. That 
is clear? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, it's clearly . . . I'd like to inform the 
member that if they ask for it, clearly it could be provided for. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — It was also recommended that local 
governments should be allowed to award contracts before 
debentures are actually sold. There's a feeling that it unnecessarily 
limits flexibility of local governments saying that you have to get 
your debentures out there before you can start the project or before 
you award contracts. What is your position on that? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, that doesn't appear to be an 
issue with the municipalities. And again, I suppose that certainly 
we'd be prepared to have a look at it if it surfaced. But right now, it 
just doesn't appear that anybody is looking for that kind of a 
situation. Probably they've got a great deal of comfort with the 
existing situation where, I suppose, particularly in the small towns 
or the smaller places, that they'd certainly like to have their money 
in place before they spent it in the off chance that something could 
go wrong. I really don't know what the thinking is. But again, if it 
became an issue, I believe that we would try to respond to the 
municipalities if we could. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I don't expect that there will be a  

ground swell of concern out there on this particular matter, but it is 
an issue which was studied and was reported on by the Local 
Government Finance Commission, and they recommend, as one 
means of enhancing the fiscal capabilities of local government, 
that you in fact adopt this recommendation. 
 
And I'm wondering, recognizing that there is no major ground 
swell on this matter, are you prepared to look at it, are you 
prepared to enable this additional flexibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, as I mentioned, Mr. Chairman, I think 
that we're prepared to look at anything. And what's the use of 
saying that you'd want to adopt it if in fact there would be nobody 
to use it because it was adopted? If it's there and we're willing to 
look at it anyhow, I suppose it's fair to say that it's already in 
existence. 
 
Relative to this line of questioning, I should inform the member 
that, as the budget indicates, we are proposing an amalgamation of 
these boards into the Saskatchewan municipal board. And I would 
suspect that after that amalgamation occurs that certainly all the 
recommendations of the Local Government Finance Commission 
report would be looked into in some depth by the new board. And 
in consultation with the municipalities, any changes that anybody 
would like to see organized or included or whatever, would 
probably be discussed with at some length with the players. 
 
I don't believe that the LGB is an area of contention. I don't think 
that there's too much of a problem with it, and as such, it can be 
pretty flexible, keeping in mind the basic concept of the work that 
they must do. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I appreciate what the minister is saying, 
but I just want to emphasize that the government and local 
government have gone through a very extensive consultative 
process through the Local government Finance Commission. That 
commission has seen fit to make a number of recommendations to 
the government, and if you're now saying that you're prepared to 
look at these types of things, my question would be: are you not 
prepared to implement these recommendations? 
 
What problems do you perceive with the recommendations, and 
why are you unprepared to implement them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't believe that we 
are unprepared to implement them. In a lot of instances there is no 
written law, and so effectively those changes are there. 
 
Having said that, at the outset I pointed out that the whole 
commission report is under review. It was put in place, as we all 
know, through the Minister of Finance. Certainly I think that the 
Minister of Finance, rather than implement piecemeal things, 
would probably like to accumulate several changes that they might 
be prepared to do with and do it in a systematic manner. 
 
I think that as time goes by and as this new board is formed, then 
certainly if they see need for change, which doesn't appear to exist 
right now but which have been suggested, that the new board in 
their wisdom will look at  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3649 
 
 

these various consultations and the process and the 
recommendations. And in consultation with the people involved, if 
there would be some need to make and effect some of these 
changes, hopefully they would put these proposals forth to the 
Minister of Finance and be proceeded with. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Just with respect to the new municipal 
board which is proposed to consolidate the Local Government 
Board, the Provincial Planning appeals Board, and Saskatchewan 
Assessment Appeal Board — you announced earlier this fall on a 
number of occasions that legislation establishing this new 
Saskatchewan municipal board is now being prepared and will be 
introduced in the legislature later this fall. We are now at what 
sitting day, Mr. Minister? Is it 105, or whereabouts? Might I ask 
you, might I ask you . . . might I ask you where this legislation is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the member brings up a very 
good point. It was a complicated piece of legislation to draw, and I 
suppose that I'm here to offer some excuses as to why we haven't 
been able to advance it yet. The member does know, through his 
background and experience, that this same type of board exists in a 
couple of other provinces. 
 
We took the opportunity of having a look at their legislation which 
has been in place for some time — certainly before human rights 
got to the area that it did. And as we were drawing up our 
proposed municipal board, it became fairly complicated in legal 
terms and the logistics of it, particularly as it relates to the code of 
human rights. And as a result it has delayed the proper drawing. 
 
It seems that every time we're ready to proceed with it, another 
legal opinion is obtained that gives us a problem. Hopefully, when 
those areas are addressed, we'll be able to introduce it. And I don't 
believe that it will be a controversial piece of legislation, but it is a 
very complicated piece of legislation to draft, in view of those 
remarks, Mr. Member. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — So am I to understand then, Mr. Minister, 
that your previous announcements about legislation this fall were 
wholly premature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I don't believe they were premature because 
we were already, at the time I made those announcements, we 
were already . . . the Bill was already in progress — we were 
already putting it together. And I think, as our justice officials 
started looking at this, as well as other pieces of legislation, it just 
got bogged down and it went back and forth. 
 
So I suppose that rather than a premature announcement, I think 
that it's fair to say that the announcement was there. The 
announcement anticipated that we wouldn't have any problem. We 
ran into those problems, and I offer that as an apology to the 
member and as an excuse to the member, I suppose. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 
realities of being involved in local government, and I suppose 
even to some extent as a member of the  

legislature, is that many people in Saskatchewan are affected by 
local improvement works, yet most people in Saskatchewan are 
remarkably unaware of the process of local improvements. 
 
This is not a small matter. Local improvements are costly items 
for participating property owners. It can mean many thousands of 
dollars that property owners must provide, either up front as a 
single payment, or they must be prepared to make that payment, 
with interest, over a number of years. 
 
Both in my time in local government and now, I find that there are 
people who are confused about that process. I'm just wondering 
has there been any increase in the number of disputes that the local 
government board has become involved in over the years. Is there 
any trend one way or another in this matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, it doesn't appear that . . . I 
agree with the member about, you know, unfortunately the system 
is such that the taxpayers, in a lot of instances, aren't really totally 
aware of some of the problems that exist at the local government 
level, and the avenues available to them in the event that a 
problem does occur. It's a . . . you know, it's a big job running any 
government, whether it's provincial or at the local level, regardless 
of the size. And to some degree what you say, with the taxpayer 
who bears the brunt of the burden, unfortunately is unfamiliar with 
a lot of the process. 
 
But it doesn't appear that in spite of that there's any massive 
problems that exist. And I can tell you that last year we approved 
162 projects, while three were turned down. And I've only had one 
matter brought to my attention in the last six or seven months, and 
that ended up being resolved. So it doesn't appear that in spite of 
the lack of recognition, I suppose, that's available to the taxpayer, 
that there's any major degree of problem out there. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, The Local Improvements 
Act is fairly succinct and specific as to the type of process that a 
local municipality must undergo in terms of advertising the project 
to property owners who stand to be affected by a local 
improvement — outlines the process that people have to petition 
against local improvements. 
 
Recognizing that limited prescribed procedure as outlined in the 
Act, some municipalities — and I know the city of Regina, for one 
— goes beyond that as a matter of courtesy to their taxpayers. 
They say that it's simply not enough to put an advertisement in the 
paper and hope that this will somehow alert all of the citizens. 
They go to a further extent of sending letters to people; they may 
well do additional types of advertising through local community 
groups and the like. The net effect of this is to increase the 
understanding that local people have of this process. 
 
One of the effects of this, too, is that local people are far more apt 
to examine the petition process and to see whether or not they 
really want to work. I think that's desirable, and I think that's 
legitimate. We should not be trying to put one over on people, as it 
were. 
 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3650 
 
 

I wonder if the Local Government Board has given any 
consideration to the specific procedures outlined in the Act as to 
whether or not there might be some need to improve on that 
procedure as a means of alerting citizens to the local improvement 
process; and in addition to that, whether outside of any legislative 
changes, whether the Local Government Board has developed any 
manual or any suggestions which local governments might pick up 
on, purely as a courtesy type of item, but generally intended to 
increase the amount of awareness that local property taxpayers 
have about the local improvement process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, again I suppose that if there 
was any ground swell of need we would do what the 
municipalities require. We're willing to work with them and do 
what we have to do. The provision for petitions do exist in the 
legislation, and it seems that that over the years has been 
satisfactory. 
 
I recognize what you say about the city of Regina going well 
above the prescribed thing, and I'm sure that others do as well, and 
I commend them for that, because it's good. 
 
Certainly in a smaller municipality, I think it's fair to say that as a 
local improvement goes through, by nature of the make-up of the 
community, everybody is aware of what that improvement is 
going to be, automatically. And as a result, you know, advertising 
wouldn't even be needed because they certainly know what's going 
on in their small towns. 
 
(1200) 
 
So having said that, I think that the existing provisions seem 
adequate. Certainly if there was any time that municipalities would 
have a problem with it and would make suggestions to that regard, 
we'd be willing to look at it and implement those. 
 
I think, Mr. Chairman, that because of the member's extensive 
knowledge of this and other Acts, because of your background, 
you bring up a lot of concerns that are legitimate that you have 
experienced in your background. And I commend you for that, but 
I also say that as a result of that experience sometimes, perhaps, 
we try to maybe become a little overprotective at working on one 
side. It might lead you to believe that you've got a problem area, 
and I don't believe that there are. But certainly if any develop we'd 
be willing to proceed with whatever way they wanted us to go. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 
 
 
 


