













































October 15, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 15, 1987 

 

 

3337 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure this morning to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and 

through you to the members of the Assembly, 47 grade 12 

students from Peacock High School in Moose Jaw who are 

seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Following the question period this morning, Mr. Speaker, 

they’ll be taking a tour of the Legislative Building on this day, 

one day prior to the celebration of the 75th anniversary of the 

building, and I will be meeting with the students at 11 o’clock 

for pictures and refreshments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the members of the Assembly will 

join me is wishing that the students from Peacock in Moose Jaw 

will find today’s visit both interesting and educational, and I ask 

all members to join me in extending a warm welcome to them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Public Consultations on Free Trade 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Premier . . . My question 

is directed to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Premier, 

yesterday you announced a series of consultations on the 

proposed free trade treaty with the United States. The so-called 

public consultations are by invitation only. Can you explain 

why you refuse to create an all-party committee of this 

legislature which would hold true public hearings open to all 

Saskatchewan people around the province? 

 

Will you agree to do that at this time, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the government announced 

that we would have meetings across the province, meeting both 

with the sectoral groups that are affected by trade, whether it’s 

in agriculture, in the resource sector, the manufacturing sector, 

and we will also have meetings open to the general public, for 

the general public to have their information, have their time to 

advance their pros and cons to the trade deal, just as we did in 

the . . . prior to the agreement, where we had hearings across the 

province and everybody had an opportunity to speak at those 

particular meetings. 

 

The direct question asked by the member from Regina North 

East, Mr. Speaker, about using an all-party committee — quite 

frankly at the beginning of this session this side of the House 

started out with all-party committees as it related to the rules, 

and quite frankly those committees absolutely broke down. 

They were totally partisan in their way. They were not prepared 

to co-operate in any meaningful way, and that’s . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary to the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Premier, maybe you placed them, but I don’t think 

I saw any ads advertising this so-called public meeting that you 

and some ministers had with some people in Regina yesterday. 

Can you inform the House when those ads were run and if they 

were run to inform the public about this public meeting? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday was simply a 

meeting with a number of people. It was not the beginning of 

the particular meetings to be held across the province by 

various cabinet ministers; that is to start next Wednesday. 

Those will be advertised in the paper. 

 

And I would hope that when they are advertised in the paper, 

and widely advertised in the paper, the member will not change 

his mind, number one, and say you shouldn’t be advertising; 

and number two, I would hope that he would attend some of 

those meetings and speak his piece beside . . . in front of a lot of 

other people that might question the seriousness of his . . . some 

of his concerns. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question to the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Premier, just how much of a sell-out this so-called 

free trade deal really is has been shown in recent days by 

statements that have been made by some Americans. President 

Reagan, in speaking to American business people about the 

deal, described it, and I quote to you: “a new economic 

constitution for North America.” 

 

An American industrialist by the name of William Randolph 

Hearst Jr. wrote an editorial in a number of major American 

newspapers over the weekend, and he was gloating about how 

this free trade deal will move Canada an important step closer 

to annexation by the United States. That’s what he said. 

 

Is this, Mr. Premier, why you’re afraid to hole public hearings 

in Saskatchewan, true public hearings? And are you afraid that 

the real extent of the sell-out of this deal, which this deal 

represents, will come out for all Saskatchewan people to see if 

you held true public hearings? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that Canadians are 

going to get a real education in political philosophy over the 

next few months, when every single item that’s raised by the 

NDP, or people who are afraid to trade, applies absolutely 

squarely and firmly on the views that are in place, Mr. Speaker, 

in Cuba — absolutely the same as Cuba. Don’t trade . . . I 

mean, this is the Castro culture, Mr. Speaker, the Castro culture 

that we see over there. 

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3338 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I mean, don’t trade with United States; 

don’t worry about your income; you can’t leave Cuba; you 

can’t go back; you’re afraid to lose your culture . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. I 

recognize the member . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me just say, the views 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

I will give the Premier the opportunity to wrap up his remarks 

in a few seconds. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me just say the socialist 

views that we hear apply readily to Cuba. Cuba is under a 

socialist government; their view of the United States and their 

view of Canada is exactly what the NDP are trying to perpetrate 

on the people of this country. Canadians are not going to act 

like Cubans. We are going to be fair traders and free traders 

world-wide whether you like it or not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to Howdy Doody 

. . . I’m sorry, to the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

The member for Saskatoon South is using terminology in this 

legislature, directed against another member, which I’m sure he 

realizes should not be used and I wish to bring that to his 

attention. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What’s your authority? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please! 

Please sit down. The member from Quill Lakes is directing 

remarks from his chair at the Chair. I remind the member for 

Quill Lakes that that is not acceptable and will not be permitted. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’m reminding 

the member for Quill Lakes the second time. The challenges 

directed at the Chair from his seat will not be accepted. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It wasn’t directed at the Chair. How do 

you know that? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I am reminding 

the member from Quill Lakes for the third time that he is not to 

direct challenges to the Chair from his seat. And this is the last 

time he will be given that warning. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, let me apologize to the 

House and to the Premier . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not to the Premier. 

Continental Energy Pact 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, I want to apologize to the Premier. 

 

My question is to the Premier and it deals with the continental 

energy pact that was signed or included in the free trade treaty. 

Mr. Premier, this portion of the treaty guarantees the Americans 

total access to all Canadian energy, including coal, gas, and 

hydro power, at less than market value prices and in times of 

energy shortages. 

 

Mr. Premier, you told this . . . this particular part of the free 

treaty energy . . . free treaty pact is a very important part for 

Saskatchewan, and you told this House, Mr. Premier, that those 

things were discussed fully with all the premiers, and yet 

Premier Ghiz, Premier Pawley, and Peckford denied this, said 

that it was not discussed; it was done in secret. 

 

Mr. Premier, can you tell this House why there is such a 

discrepancy between your view of what went on and the view 

of Premier Pawley, Premier Ghiz, and Premier Peckford? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say to the hon. 

member, on June 30 a complete briefing was provided officials 

with respect to energy and the possibilities of a separate energy 

chapter in a slide presentation, and on July 7 the same 

information was provided to the premiers. On September 13 

officials got another slide presentation and on energy, 

agriculture, alcoholic beverages — U.S. pressing for an energy 

chapter because we wanted access to energy and they wanted 

guarantee of supplies. September 14 the first ministers got the 

same slide show on energy, on the fact that they wanted a 

separate chapter in energy. 

 

We knew that we wanted to have access to the United States 

market, and access to the United States markets means the 

United States wants some security of supply. When you do 

business with any of your customers, you say, I would like to 

have your business, I will provide continuity of supply. 

 

So for anybody to say that we have not been briefed on energy 

when the province of Alberta and the province of Saskatchewan 

have almost a hundred per cent of the oil and gas in western 

Canada, if not all of Canada, is a little interesting. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, if I could say that P.E.I., P.E.I. wants it 

both ways. They don’t buy oil from Canada; they buy it from 

Venezuela and Mexico and other people. And when it’s very 

expensive, they want it cheap from western Canada. Now if 

they want national security and they want oil from the west then 

they can . . . pardon me, they can invest in western Canada 

energy, Mr. Speaker, like anybody else should. They can’t have 

it both ways, and Ontario can’t have it both ways. It’s about 

time they realized that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3339 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Supplementary question to the Premier? It’s 

rather strange that three other premiers, Premier Ghiz, Premier 

Pawley, and Premier Peckford, let me remind the Premier, have 

a different version of what went on, and it’s our Premier that 

has his own version of how this whole thing was discussed in 

full. 

 

Mr. Premier, the problem is . . . the point still is that we have 

given the Americans complete control over our energy — 

complete control over our energy. Even in time of shortages we 

have no right, we have no right to charge fair market price for 

our energy. Mr. Premier, you’ve sold out the Canadians, you’ve 

sold out Saskatchewan, and you’ve given away our energy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I ask you, Mr. Premier, how do you consider 

that standing up for Saskatchewan rights and for our energy in 

the future here in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that all 

Saskatchewan people would be very surprised to see the energy 

critic for the NDP defending Ontario against western Canada so 

that they can have cheap energy. He knows as well as I do, the 

former leader and the former premier of the province, the late 

Tommy Douglas, would not stand in his place there and defend 

Ontario against western Canada. But he’s doing it — he’s doing 

it. You want to fall into the arms of Ontario. You want to give 

them cheap gas and cheap energy when it’s . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . That’s Bob White’s view. And he’s defending 

Bob White against Westerners, against Saskatchewan people, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will say we have signed an agreement that said that we can 

have access to the United States market, and we will not 

discriminate. We have full sovereign control over our energy. 

We can turn the tap. We have the constitutional ability, Mr. 

Speaker, to turn the tap on potash or turn the tap on oil or 

energy, and we can and we will, Mr. Speaker. All we’ve said is 

that we’re going to have fair market access to our neighbour to 

the South because they’re big customers, but he’d rather defend 

Ontario. 

 

And I’ll campaign with you or against you any place in this 

province, Bob White versus Saskatchewan and the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to tell the Premier of this province that I’d 

much rather stand up for Canadians than Americans, and give 

the Americans . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — . . . and give the Americans full access and full 

control over our energy, particularly, Mr. Speaker, in times of 

shortages. And I say to the Premier again: you have not 

safeguarded the interests of Saskatchewan people. All you have 

done is said, me too, to Brian Mulroney. And it’s about time, 

Mr. Premier, that you  

stand up for the rights of Saskatchewan people and our energy 

problems here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, he’s run out of questions. 

He didn’t ask one; he just made a statement. I will just say, Mr. 

Speaker, finally, I will go with you, my friend, I’ll go with you 

any . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

The member has asked his question and the Premier is 

attempting to respond. Let us allow that to go forward. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member can join 

me in any community that produces oil in this province, any 

community that is in the energy business, and you and I can talk 

to them whether they want access to the United States market 

for their oil. You can ask them that, and do you know what 

they’ll say? They’ll say, we will market into the United States; 

the biggest customer we have is the coke refinery in 

Minneapolis. And you have put the binders on and the clamps 

on the oil industry for decades, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP are not trusted by the oil patch; they’re not trusted by 

people in energy; they’re not trusted by people in agriculture, 

because number one, they don’t understand it, and number two, 

they’d sooner be in the pocket of Ontario than they would stand 

and defend Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan energy 

interests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Investors’ Representation in Alberta 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Consumer Affairs, and it concerns the Alberta 

lawyer whom the Government of Saskatchewan hired to keep 

track of the Alberta public inquiry into the collapse of First 

Investors and Associated Investors. My question: has the 

Government of Saskatchewan instructed this lawyer to assist 

Saskatchewan investors who come before the inquiry, and will 

the government’s lawyer provide any advice or assistance to 

Saskatchewan investors who travel to Edmonton to be heard by 

the inquiry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same question that 

was asked several months . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. It seems that hon. 

members ask ministers questions but immediately interrupt 

them. I don’t think we can have an orderly question period if we 

follow that method, so I would once more ask for the 

co-operation of members to ask the minister to reply. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Unfortunately 

the member for Regina North East is once  

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3340 

 

again interrupting, and I ask for his co-operation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This hon. member 

has asked this question several months back and obviously 

forgot the answer. The lawyer represents the government of the 

province of Saskatchewan; we made that abundantly clear. 

 

If the hon. member understood anything about the legal 

profession, she may know that many of the investors already 

have their own lawyer, and for another lawyer to begin giving 

advice would be contrary to the code of ethics. And I’m 

surprised that the hon. member doesn’t know that. 

 

We’ve set out on numerous occasions, Mr. Speaker — I know 

it’s been a long session and costing some $90,000 a day, but it’s 

not a justification for repetitious questions, Mr. Speaker, that 

the hon. members had answers several months ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. This 

Government of Saskatchewan is paying for that lawyer to be in 

Alberta to go to the public inquiry. That lawyer is being paid 

out of public funds. The lawyer that the people have hired, the 

investors have hired, is only being paid by the few people. And 

so if this government’s lawyer is not going to be available to 

Saskatchewan investors to advise them before they testify at the 

Alberta inquiry, I want to ask you this: has the Saskatchewan 

government’s lawyer been in contact with these investors who 

lost money in this affair to get their input; and has he asked 

them what questions they want answered by the Alberta 

inquiry, and what issues are vital to them, to the investors 

who’ve lost their life savings in this collapse of these 

companies? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — It’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. 

member persists in showing ignorance of the legal position of 

the various investors. Some will be making allegations of 

misrepresentation. Others will in fact simply be asking for 

compensation. The reasons for the investors’ investment in the 

Principal Group of companies will vary, and there are several 

different reasons, some of them contradictory, one to the other. 

So to have the government representative try and give advice to 

the conflicting interest, I think, frankly, would be both improper 

and unwise. 

 

As I’ve indicated on several occasions, repeating over and over 

and over again, Mr. Speaker, the lawyer is representing the 

interest and advising the government and the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I know that the hon. members are 

asking for a bail-out. They were opposed to a bail-out in 

Pioneer, but . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — Another supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, this inquiry in Alberta is being held on behalf of all 

the investors because you wouldn’t hold a public  

inquiry here in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan investors deserve 

to get to Alberta, and they deserve to get support. And they 

deserve funding from this government to make sure that their 

concerns are heard at that public inquiry. So if the lawyer is not 

available to the Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. Order! The hon. member is submitting a 

preamble to a supplementary and I am sure that she realizes 

she’s getting a little too long. 

 

Ms. Smart: — New question. Whose interests is this 

government lawyer representing then, and who is he there to 

protect, the investors of the Government of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — One, he is not a government lawyer, he is a 

lawyer retained by the province of Saskatchewan to represent 

the interests of the Government of Saskatchewan at the 

hearings. Secondly, as we’ve debated several months now, Mr. 

Speaker, we indicated that to hold a public inquiry at this time 

is simply duplicating what is going on in the province of 

Alberta and, I believe, a serious waste of taxpayers’ money. 

 

Thirdly, the Government of Saskatchewan has indicated on 

several occasions there will not be a bail-out. Fourthly, we do 

not intend to use taxpayers’ money to send people to appear in 

the province of Alberta, and I’ve made that clear on numerous 

occasions. I don’t know why the hon. member is not listening. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — I have a new question to the minister. Obviously 

the people . . . Saskatchewan investors are being muzzled. But 

my question involves Premier Getty saying recently that his 

government would cover the cost of investors in these two 

companies if the Albert inquiry reveals government negligence. 

 

My question: has the Government of Saskatchewan written to 

Premier Getty demanding that any such payments be made to 

Saskatchewan residents as well as Alberta residents, using the 

Pioneer Trust example as a precedent? And do you have a 

commitment in writing from Premier Getty that any payments 

to investors will be made to Saskatchewan investors and not 

just Alberta residents? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s the third time, Mr. Speaker, that that 

question has been asked by the hon. member, and I just can’t 

understand why she is not listening to the answer. I indicated 

back in August that I had written to the provincial treasurer of 

the province of Alberta, one, setting out what the province of 

Saskatchewan had done with regard to out-of-province 

investors in Pioneer and expecting that we were asking for the 

same consideration to be applied to Saskatchewan investors as a 

result of the Principal. I’ve indicated that on several occasions. 

We have not received a response, Mr. Speaker, but we have 

stated the position that we believe that the same  

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3341 

 

consideration should apply to out-of-province investors in the 

Principal case, as Saskatchewan honoured in the Pioneer Trust 

matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Effects of Free Trade on Steel Industry 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Premier, and again on the matter of free trade. I would like 

to know the government’s intentions for dealing with the 

serious problem in the draft Canada-U.S. free trade deal that 

was identified by Mr. Roger Phillips, the chief executive officer 

at Ipsco Steel. He points out in his concern that U.S. law defines 

“dumping” to include both unfair predatory pricing of export 

products and simple depressed market pricing caused by 

cyclical market swings. And surely, Mr. Premier, you must 

agree with Mr. Phillips that there is a difference between those 

two, and they ought to be treated differently. 

 

Will you concede that Mr. Phillips does have a valid concern 

with respect to this point, and would you indicate precisely 

what steps you would be pursuing in terms of the final legal text 

of this agreement to have that very serious problem rectified, 

which if unrectified could be a critical failure in this deal as far 

as Ipsco Steel is concerned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the dumping laws in 

the United States and Canada are virtually identical. We have 

the same law as Americans and we apply them against each 

other. The particular problem that applies to Ipsco and to potash 

in many cases is the constructed costs that have to be designed 

and produced when you have a unique situation that you don’t 

sell an awful lot of your product in your domestic country. That 

raises a problem when we run into a cyclical variations in 

prices. It happens in steel, and it happens in potash, and it is not 

fair. 

 

Mr. Phillips has made the point that we should reconstruct that 

to either average it over some time or get national treatment so a 

firm in Canada is given the same treatment as a firm in the 

United States. And we would like to see that happen. 

 

Now we have three choices. We can leave it as it is, which is 

unfair. I don’t think we should do that. Secondly we could get it 

changed immediately, but that’s impossible. I mean Americans 

and Canadians will not change their laws overnight. I mean it’s 

difficult enough, you know, to modify constitutions and have a 

trade package in general, let alone change all specific laws at 

once. So the third option is to change it over time and accept a 

mechanism today that would allow us to harmonize our laws, 

our dumping laws and our countervail laws, over the next three 

years, five years, seven years, to make sure that in fact they are 

fair and they do meet the requirements of the industry. Mr. 

Phillips would like it changed immediately. So would I. I don’t 

think we can, so it will take some time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, 

yesterday afternoon just before 5 o’clock, I asked you a 

question about Sherbrooke nursing home, and you indicated 

that the . . . my question had to do with the number of level 4 

patients in the home, 38 per cent of them being level 4 — 125 

individuals classified as level 4. And you told me that in ’86-87 

there were an additional full-time equivalent staff added to 

Sherbrooke home, of 4.2. 

 

Now I find that rather remarkable. Perhaps that is the case, and I 

don’t doubt that that’s true. I simply hold up for your 

consideration, information from Sherbrooke home itself that 

says in the last five years the shortage of full-time equivalent 

staff has never been higher; that in fact, for ’86-87 the number 

of full-time equivalent staff short is 11.6 — 11.6 staff short — 

in spite of the 4.2 that you say were added. 

 

Something isn’t adding up here, and I think that the staff and 

the administration of Sherbrooke home know what it is. What 

isn’t adding up is government support for heavy duty care. 

Level 4 care places a heavy load on staff time and laundry staff, 

nursing staff, the whole works. We have a situation in which 

Sherbrooke home has 38 per cent of its residents at level 4, and 

they need to be funded to take care of those people, and they’re 

receiving nothing for it. 

 

What solution can you offer to homes like Sherbrooke, which 

places it essentially at the largest level 4 home in the province, 

and yet it isn’t getting funded for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, as we completed yesterday’s 

estimates we were discussing this issue and there’s no question 

you’ve . . . what you have identified in the case of Sherbrooke 

is what we all must identify and what has been identified across 

the province. And just let me give you a little bit of a number to 

show the trend. In ’81 about 50 per cent of the system were in 

what we’ll call light care or in level 1 or 2 — about 50 per cent 

of the people. And presently it’s about 20 per cent of people are 

in level 1 or 2 which would mean, you know, the 80 per cent 

level or somewhere in that order at higher level or heavier care. 

 

With the recognition of that sort of trend, and it’s obviously a 

marked trend, you know, we’ve been identifying that over a 

period of time. And Sherbrooke has shared in that, maybe not to 

the extent that they would like or that other individual homes, 

whether they be in Meadow Lake or in Sherbrooke in 

Saskatoon, may not have received that kind of recognition that 

they would like to. But I would commend them, frankly, for the 

way in which they’re able to cope with heavier care and the way 

they’re . . . and it is coping to some extent. 

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3342 

 

Let me just give you some numbers to show that these numbers 

have not been static and that there has been increasing funding 

based on the trend that you identify. Total positions since 

’83-84 have been 422 more full-time equivalent positions 

funded by continuing care branch for an annualized cost — and 

I emphasize annualized — an annualized cost of $9.7 million 

added. 

 

That’s a significant dollar amount and obviously it’s directed at 

a significant trend, the one that you identify. But we’re aware of 

the trend that you identify. Sherbrooke people are doing and 

continue to do an excellent job in the face of this trend which is 

really going; we know that. 

 

And obviously there are many ways to look at this and many 

factors to consider, and one of them being home care and all of 

the other kinds of things we must do. But you cannot diminish 

the fact that — no one can; I mean I can’t, you can’t — 

diminish the fact that heavier levels of care are required as we 

come into this population trend that I mentioned yesterday to 

several of your colleagues and to yourself, about the fact that 

we have the highest percentage of people in our province who 

are 75 and over. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well I certainly agree with you that we can’t 

diminish that fact, and I certainly won’t diminish it. I think 

we’re talking the same language in recognizing the problem. 

My concern is the solution. And that’s why I question you 

about it. 

 

Do you not agree that to have level 4 people in nursing homes is 

more cost efficient than to have them in hospitals, that there are 

any number of level 4 patients presently in hospitals who could 

and should be in nursing homes if level 4 funding was available 

for the nursing homes? 

 

I know for a fact that Sherbrooke has been very co-operative 

and supportive of the co-ordinated assessment unit in Saskatoon 

that admits patients to their home on the basis of priority need. 

This has meant, in fact, that Sherbrooke home, of all the homes 

in Saskatoon, has willingly accepted a far heavier work-load 

than they would have needed to accept had they not been part of 

this co-ordinated assessment unit. 

 

And so the problem becomes a problem of not only recognizing 

the increased demand for care but that the government itself has 

some responsibility, some obligation to provide for that care, 

particularly when it’s more cost efficient vis-à-vis hospital care. 

 

Can you give some assurance to homes that you will be 

regularly increasing funding for level 4 care that is presently 

being done in homes such as Sherbrooke, for which they aren’t 

being paid? Can you give some assurance that you’re gong to 

tackle this problem in consultation with them and come up with 

a solution in terms of more adequate funding? We don’t expect 

things to change overnight, but something’s got to be done. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I can give you the assurance that 

— yes, the assurance that I’ve given you just a few moments 

ago — that we recognize the need that you’ve identified as it 

relates to Sherbrooke home in Saskatoon,  

as I must identify it in the widest context, across the province in 

all of the homes that are there, both rural and urban. 

 

And I just say to you that, you know, your point that says, had 

Sherbrooke not accepted the heavier-care people through the 

district, you know, the co-ordinating committee and so on, they 

would have been better off. 

 

But obviously I don’t believe you, at least I certainly hope 

you’re not suggesting that that’s what they might have done. 

They don’t suggest that’s what they might have done because 

it’s, you know, it’s not a . . . that wouldn’t be the responsible 

position to take, and they certainly do take responsible positions 

in this. I gave you the numbers in terms of the number of more 

staff, the number of dollars added over a period of some time. 

 

There will always be debate, I suppose, as the nature of this 

forum sometimes. The debate will be, you say we’re not 

spending enough, and we say we’re spending as much as we 

can, and that will go on and on. 

 

But the key point here is, and I think you’ve rightly identified it, 

is that we have to identify that there is heavier care. We have, 

and we have responded, and I’ll give you the assurance that 

through the formula system that’s set up which is based to a 

large extent, or to some extent certainly, on the level of care that 

needed to provide, that there will be increasing funding as the 

years go on because the trend line that we’ve identified that’s 

happened over a period of some years, is also projected to 

increase in the same way. So we recognize it, and yes, there will 

be increasing funding as the years go on now to identify that. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I would just, to add to that, that I hope that 

that funding would be done in consultation with the homes and 

their boards and administrators, and not just unilaterally. 

 

On a slightly different matter, I raise the question of funding for 

operating staff for the therapeutic pool at Sherbrooke home. 

This pool was completed and ready for operation on May 11 of 

this year — May 11. The home has been told a year ago, in 

June of 1986, that the provincial government would provide 

funding for operating costs at the pool, and this spring they 

were notified that that simply was not the case — that operating 

costs for ’87-88 were being reviewed and that funding would 

not be available. 

 

Meanwhile, Sherbrooke has commenced use of the pool. It’s 

only reasonable since it’s there, to begin using it. It’s meant that 

they’ve had to pay for a half-time physiotherapist and a 

full-time activity attendant. My question is: are you aware of 

this problem at Sherbrooke home with respect to the therapeutic 

pool? And secondly, what are you prepared to do about 

honouring the commitment that was made to the home to fund 

the operation and the staffing for this pool? As a matter of fact, 

what it has come down to in Sherbrooke home is that they are 

going to the local school and asking for grade school children to 

come and help out with the elderly using this pool. 

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3343 

 

(1045) 

 

Now there may be a place for that in the larger scheme of 

things, but I think it signifies the kind of problem that they’re 

up against when they have to employ grade school children to 

come in and bail the provincial government out for lack of 

funding for a therapy pool that was built by the home — not by 

government money; by the home — and was promised 

government operating funds and now doesn’t have it. What can 

you say to Sherbrooke about this situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, just a couple of points to your 

comments. First of all, the initial comment about whether the 

funding levels on an annual basis would be done in 

consultation. The answer to that is yes, because that’s how it’s 

done every year and there certainly won’t be a change to that. 

We have ongoing consultation in various homes who have put 

in their requests, and their requests are looked at based on the 

criteria that are set forward by the Department of Health in the 

continuing care branch. 

 

And I just want to come back now to the therapy pool, and just 

so we put this into perspective. I commend the people at 

Sherbrooke who say that, look, therapy pools are important to 

the operation out there, in terms of the kinds of therapy that 

would be available, in terms of keeping the people more 

mobile, in terms of all of the kinds of things which no one can 

dispute. 

 

What we must do in the difficult task we have of allocating the 

dollars is to keep a provincial perspective on all of this to say, 

just how can we set up our funding formula, and will the 

funding formula for Sherbrooke be different than it is for other 

homes across the province who give care to people who are 

classified at the same level, level 4 let’s say, or level 3. So we 

have to keep that provincial perspective. 

 

I want to tell you now that when Sherbrooke made the decision 

and came to the department for saying that they wanted to 

include the therapy pool in, we said, fine. But we also said there 

will be no assurances and there never were assurances given 

that they would have funding at the total level for the operation 

of that. So they needed to know that because of that provincial 

perspective I just gave you. 

 

Some portion of the therapy staff that deals with that pool are 

funded because that was put into the system when we talked 

about the overall therapy positions or therapy staff at the 

Sherbrooke home. And I just say that . . . All I can really say is 

that while I commend them for going that route, which is on the 

leading edge, frankly, of the way in which people in heavier 

care should be dealt with, it’s an area that we can’t just fund on 

the basis of someone having built it and still maintain any 

credibility of keeping a provincial perspective on how people in 

all parts of the province who are in need of this kind of care are 

treated. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, I say, and I think there’s 

no doubt about it, that the Sherbrooke people say you reneged 

on your commitment to funding the operating costs of that pool. 

And I’ll simply leave it at that. 

It simply isn’t true to say that there never were assurances for 

funding at the total level. There were promises made by your 

department to Sherbrooke to funding of the pool. I will leave it 

at that. 

 

I want to move on to another promise that was made for 

funding at Sherbrooke home, and this promise was made a year 

ago, a year and a week ago on October 8, 1986, when it was 

announced during the provincial election that there would be a 

regeneration project funded at Sherbrooke home. Construction 

is now in limbo, now that you’ve won the election. And my 

question to you is: when will you honour your commitment to 

Sherbrooke home, your election commitment that you’ve 

reneged on, and give them an idea of when they can commence 

construction on their regeneration project? 

 

It’s one of the few homes in the province to have four-bed 

wards. And I think that’s almost an obsolete concept in terms of 

home care these days. There’s obviously a crying need for 

regeneration there. They’re being asked to cope with less staff 

in terms of their level 4 care as we’ve talked about. You’ve got 

the sick and the elderly with no privacy, further demands on 

staff. What kind of assurances can you give to Sherbrooke 

home that they’re going to see you honouring your commitment 

to them? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, yesterday when I 

was talking to the member’s colleague from Moose Jaw, and we 

talked about, in that case, St. Anthony’s Home in Moose Jaw 

and the recognition of the need. The answer is very similar here, 

although I want to point out that the need at St. Anthony’s and 

the reason it was up on the list from Sherbrooke is because, 

frankly, the need is greater at St. Anthony’s because of the age 

of the place and so on. So that is just a fact. That’s not to 

diminish the fact that there is a need of some upgrading at 

Sherbrooke. 

 

In terms of today’s standards and so on, and the kinds of 

standards that we have in Saskatchewan that we’ve adopted and 

that are standards that we’re proud of for setting certain stands, 

and asking people to aspire to them and move up to them so that 

there is the best care for these people . . . I should also point out, 

just in a comparative sense, they’re the highest standards that 

exist in this country anywhere. And in Sherbrooke, obviously, 

although it was, you know, it’s not that old, is certainly in need 

of some upgrading to meet those standards. But the point that I 

made — the points that I made yesterday regarding St. 

Anthony’s and some other deferrals were just the very facts that 

some deferrals had to take place. 

 

The home that you now speak of was on the list for 1988-89 for 

replacement, 120 replacement beds or upgrading of 120 beds. 

Those are not easy decisions to make. These deferrals . . . And 

the reason that the ’88-89 list of projects received a letter which 

said, you know, you are deferred — and you will notice again, 

and I emphasize once again, there was nothing that . . . They 

were not cancelled. They were deferred because those which 

were ahead of them on the list, like St. Anthony’s, which was 

. . . and Montmartre and Cabri and some others that were 

mentioned were seen to be of greater need, and they will be 

built before Sherbrooke. But that  

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3344 

 

does not diminish the fact that there’s some need there, and you 

and I are in agreement on that. It’s just a matter of timing, and 

it’s a matter of the fiscal circumstance of the province, and 

that’s what it’s based on. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — All I can say, Mr. Minister, is that I urge you 

not to sacrifice the people who have built this province, the 

pioneers and the elderly, on the altar of the deficit, and I urge 

you to argue powerfully with your cabinet colleagues for 

increased spending in this particular arena. We owe a debt of 

immense gratitude to these people, and I think that as 

representatives responsible for public resources we can hardly 

go wrong in funding adequate care for the elderly in spite of a 

deficit budget. We owe them a debt, and we have to pay that 

debt before we look at the deficit itself. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I wish you hadn’t chosen words like 

“sacrifice the elderly,” and in your words, “the people who built 

the province,” and so on. It’s not an appropriate suggestion to 

make, no. It isn’t, and it is for this reason. 

 

I went through this yesterday, and I won’t go through it in all 

detail unless you would like me to read the whole list. But the 

kind of commitment that we have had and that we continue to 

have for the building of more than adequate but certainly 

excellent care homes for our elderly in this province is a 

commitment that, as your colleague said, he congratulates us for 

every bed that we built. Thank you. 

 

And all I can say is it’s not a matter of, and I don’t want to get 

into that, of who is to be congratulated and all that sort of stuff. 

You and I should at least be able to agree on this — and I think 

frankly we can — is that there has been a tremendous 

commitment over the last few years for the building of homes, a 

tremendous commitment in terms of the numbers — 156 beds 

in ’82-83; 115 in ’83-84; 328 in ’84-85; 412 in ’85-86; 162 in 

’86-87. 

 

Those are tremendous numbers when you start to think of what 

the costs are, but they still don’t address the chronic need that’s 

there, and we recognize that. And we’re trying to do that. And 

we’re doing everything that’s humanly possible with the funds 

available to us to continue that commitment. And you know, I 

give you the assurance that we will continue that commitment. 

It’s one that we take very seriously, and we will continue that 

commitment to our seniors, whether they be in Saskatoon, or, as 

I’ve said before, in all of these communities. 

 

And there’s two pages of all the communities where the seniors, 

to use your terms, who have built our communities in our 

province and who have contributed so much, are so very, very 

well looked after by excellent staffs in all of those places, 

including Sherbrooke, the one that you mentioned. 

 

So sure, the commitment is still there. I hear what you’re 

saying. You’re disappointed in the deferral; I’m disappointed in 

having to announce the deferral. Don’t think that’s an easy 

thing to do, to send a letter of deferral. It is not. And all I’m 

saying is that we will continue that commitment. 

I am pleased to say to the hon. member that we have been able 

to maintain and more than maintain the funding for health care 

that was there last year. That’s tremendous accomplishment in 

the face of some very difficult fiscal circumstances for our total 

province. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I would like to continue in this 

same vein of questioning. My colleague from Saskatoon has 

just raised the issue with you of the commitment made to 

Sherbrooke, and you’ve been discussing that. Yesterday in our 

conversations we talked about the number of special care 

institutions that have been delayed or deferred or put on hold, 

however we describe it. The number yesterday I think was 

seven. Today we’re talking about Sherbrooke. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, in our conversation yesterday we did 

not mention the town of Liberty. Was a commitment made in 

the community of . . . I’m sorry, Imperial . . . the community of 

Imperial. Was a commitment made to the community of 

Imperial, and has that commitment been deferred or delayed or 

put on hold? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Imperial is on the list for 1989-90, a 

10-bed integrated facility, which means some nursing home 

beds built onto their hospital — ’89-90. And they’ve received 

the deferral letter which we talked about yesterday which means 

that it’s deferred to a date that I can’t be definitive about, but 

certainly we recognize the need there as well. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So the list continues to grow, and there may 

yet be other projects which have been deferred that we haven’t 

raised here in the House. Mr. Minister, your reasoning in this 

House for deferring these projects, to quote you, has something 

to do with the fiscal circumstance of the province, which I again 

find interesting that the argument does not apply to other 

projects being undertaken by your government, and other 

spending announcements by your government. Apparently this 

fiscal circumstance of the province does not apply to the home 

improvements grants; it does not apply to that long list that 

we’ve so often gone through in this House — patronage and 

grants to out-of-province interests. Apparently it doesn’t apply 

to a highway going through Melfort, and yet it does apply to the 

deferment of nursing home construction. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m going to leave it to MLAs who represent their 

own constituency to be lobbying you in terms of the nursing 

homes and the continuing care centres in their own 

constituency, just as my colleague from Saskatoon just has 

done. I do not want to leave this subject without lobbying you 

further in terms of St. Anthony’s Home in Moose Jaw. 

 

We have agreed, you’ve agreed, everybody agrees that the need 

exists in Moose Jaw for a new St. Anthony’s Home. There’s no 

debate about that. The current building is falling down, as you 

know. As you also well know there is a substantial waiting list 

in Moose Jaw. There’s a keen demand for the beds that would 

be provided in a new St. Anthony’s Home, so the need is not 

debated. 

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3345 

 

You’ve also said in this House during these estimates that you 

remain committed to the project, that the project is going ahead. 

You’ve assured us of that on several occasions. You have not 

given us a time line. You have not said whether it will go ahead 

next year or the next year or the next year. Mr. Minister, I want 

to again today lobby you to have this project go ahead 

immediately, to go ahead in this budget year. 

 

And if we can just set the partisan politic aside and look at this 

as reasonable individuals, by my calculation, Mr. Minister, if 

you defer this project — and I understand it’s a project valued 

somewhere between 11.5 and $12 million — if the project is 

deferred one year and we use an inflation rate of about 3 per 

cent, to be conservative and use an inflation rate of about 3 per 

cent, then in a year’s time that same project is going to cost 

another $345,000. If the project is deferred two years, then we 

can look at a $700,000 increase. 

 

And so it seems to me, Mr. Minister, it makes some good 

financial and economic sense to go ahead with the project now 

and save that extra cost in terms of inflation. It makes some 

good sense, Mr. Minister, to go ahead with the project now 

because much of the funding that’s committed locally, that has 

been raised in the community of Moose Jaw and around Moose 

Jaw, that tremendous response we saw to the St. Anthony’s 

funding raising drive — we know that much of that is not 

money in the bank collecting interest. We know that much of it 

is committed money. And there is some concern — and you 

will understand the concern — that some of that committed 

money may be lost if the project continues to be deferred year 

after year after year. 

 

Mr. Minister, you know and I know that initiation of that kind 

of a project, a massive project for the community of Moose 

Jaw, would serve to create a fair bit of economic spin-off. It 

would create job creation. You know those benefits. 

 

So with those arguments in mind, Mr. Minister, will you 

reconsider your decision regarding St. Anthony’s Home in 

Moose Jaw, that that project may go ahead in this fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of comments. First of all, to 

your general comments prior to the St. Anthony’s specifics 

which we’ll get to. 

 

You mentioned Imperial, and I replied that it was on the ’89-90 

list, and then you made some comment that the list continues to 

grow, and so on, from yesterday. Now I want you to be very 

clear; your questions yesterday related to the deferrals of 

’87-88, and I responded to them fully. So there are other 

projects which have been on the list and who have received 

letters which have said that they’re set back in ’88-89, ’89-90. 

 

I would say, you’ve said that you will leave it to the MLAs to 

lobby on behalf of their own projects, and that’s fair and they 

do that. In the case of Imperial, which you mentioned as well, 

the member from Arm River has been talking to me on many 

occasions. The particular one you mention I’m very aware of 

because it happens to be the home town of my wife and she has 

relatives there, and so  

on, some of whom even work at that hospital, and so on. So I 

can assure the member from Moose Jaw, and I can assure all the 

members of the House, I hear about the Imperial project on 

various occasions, most of which are happy occasions when 

families meet, but sometimes this subject does come into the 

conversation, just by the nature of what I now do. 

 

But anyway, there are many projects that are the same, and it’s 

because of that kind of contract, whether it’s in my own riding 

or there, that I do have a good understanding of what goes on in 

the communities in terms of the raising of funds and the 

committing of funds and the pledges and all of the kinds of 

things that must go on at the community level. 

 

And now let’s go to the specifics of St. Anthony’s. The answers 

will be the same as the answer was yesterday. I understand what 

you’re saying and what you’re doing in terms of, you know, 

please change your mind and I’m pleading with you on behalf 

of my people, and all of that. And I recognize that for what it is. 

But I want to point out to you that I cannot do that. The decision 

was made, and it was a difficult one but a responsible one at the 

time. As I’ve said yesterday, the commitment is still there and 

the recognition of need is still there. 

 

You know, and I want to point out another thing, and this is one 

that is important to because you say, please change your mind 

and please do this now. But I want to point out that the reason 

that we’re even talking about St. Anthony’s and that they do 

have an expectation that there will be a home and so on is 

because of the very commitment that I spoke of earlier, of this 

government and my colleagues. That commitment is what put 

St. Anthony’s on the agenda in terms of having a new home. 

 

I mean, this home that is dilapidated, and it is in severe . . . in a 

situation of ill repair and so on, was not built in 1982. I mean, it 

was built a good long number of years ago, and was not given a 

regeneration project or discussed . . . a regeneration project was 

not discussed with them prior to the commitment of this group 

— our government which I have talked about before. 

 

So just to put that into perspective and then to say that we still 

have the commitment, we very much recognize the need for 

people there in Moose Jaw. And we recognize as well the 

population ratio in Moose Jaw, and there’s a significant ageing 

population ratio in Moose Jaw. We say across the province that 

it’s high, but it’s certainly above the provincial average in 

Moose Jaw, and we recognize that as well. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I don’t accept it when you say to 

this House that you can’t do it. You can do it, Mr. Minister, you 

can do it. 

 

This very week we’ve seen you respond, in a fashion, to the 

hospital waiting list in Saskatoon. To a crisis situation you have 

responded in a fashion. You said to this House the other day 

that there will be an extra million dollars put into this response. 

So you can do it, Mr. Minister, when there is a crisis; when 

there is a need, you can respond. I submit to you that you could 

respond to this request. 

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3346 

 

Let me warn you, Mr. Minister, that the Moose Jaw city council 

in a meeting this week passed a unanimous motion to again 

come to the Premier and to yourself requesting a 

reconsideration of St. Anthony’s Home. Mr. Minister, what will 

you be saying to those people when you meet them? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I refer . . . once again, I cannot change 

it, and because I must . . . while it’s legitimate for you to have 

very much a Moose Jaw South perspective, and I like very 

much to have a Meadow Lake perspective on the world at 

times, I’m not given that luxury. I have to have the provincial, 

the Saskatchewan perspective from border to border on all four 

of our borders. And we have that perspective very much when it 

relates to the building and the construction and the funding and 

the staffing of special care homes across this province. 

 

I have said to you and acknowledged along with you — we’ve 

come to an agreement, and we do agree — that there is a need 

and there will be . . . the commitment will be honoured. You 

say that we’re meeting with the board — I’m not sure of the 

date that you’re referring to or the paper or whatever. But 

whenever I meet with city council or board or whoever in 

Moose Jaw, I can assure you, what I’ll be saying to them is the 

same as what I’ve been saying to you here in the House. You’re 

the representative of people in Moose Jaw. They are 

representatives of people in Moose Jaw. They will not have a 

different story from me than what you have. It’s a very clear 

message that I have for you and that I will have for them, and it 

is recognition of need. The commitment continues. 

 

We continue to be committed to the seniors of all of 

Saskatchewan, including those in Moose Jaw. And there’s little 

more that I can add, except to just ask you to recognize that 

when we deal with these things, you know, as a cabinet, and I 

as a minister of this department, have to have that provincial 

perspective. And we do very much take that seriously. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, it seems to me we’re not going 

to make much progress on this, so then let’s just maybe look at 

it in a little different perspective. Mr. Minister, you will know 

that some years ago St. Anthony’s offered something in excess 

of 180 beds before the closure of the third floor. You will know 

that your commitment to St. Anthony’s is to replace the current 

160 beds. 

 

If you are not willing then to go ahead with the project this 

year, would you be willing to broaden the commitment a little 

bit? Now that the project has been deferred, would you look at 

restoring, let’s say, at least 180 beds at St. Anthony’s Home, 

rather than the 160 you are now committed to? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the questions that the 

members asks are questions that have been asked by the board 

of St. Anthony’s when I met with the representatives of their 

board, and so on, the administrator. 

 

What I will say to the member is that I understand their 

disappointment. I understand yours, which you express on their 

behalf, and so on. But the position will be the  

same. The commitment is there for the project as it was 

developed in its final analysis to this unfortunate deferral. 

 

I understand the disappointment, if that’s what you want me to 

say. Yes, I do understand disappointment. I feel 

disappointment, as you feel disappointment, but there’s nothing 

more that we can do. I mean, you’re . . . It won’t serve the 

committee well, it won’t serve any of us well if you . . . you 

know, for you to beat on this any longer, because the fact is the 

commitment is there and it will carry on. 

 

But that’s all we can . . . That’s all I can say. And there’s 

nothing really more that I could add as it relates to the specifics 

of St. Anthony’s. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I moved our conversation in a 

new direction there, and I’m not sure you’ve addressed my 

question. 

 

You’ve recognized that the city of Moose Jaw has the highest 

percentage of seniors anywhere . . . of any community in this 

province, and therefore of perhaps any community in this 

nation. You’ve recognized the desperate need in Moose Jaw 

and the surrounding area for nursing home beds. You are 

replacing a facility. You’re commitment is to replace a facility 

that once offered 180 beds. You’re replacing that facility with 

one that will offer 160 beds. I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, to 

review that commitment and again provide to the citizens of 

Moose Jaw and district a facility that offers the 180 beds we 

formerly had. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The decision as it relates to 160, 180, 

that was a decision that was come to certainly with the board. 

The board agreed with that and very much are in agreement as 

far as I’ve been informed by everybody, and certainly didn’t 

indicate to me that they were changing their view as it relates to 

how the new project would be constituted. That’s not the issue. 

The issue is when can we start, and I understand that. But that’s 

the issue and, you know, the answer is as it was. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’m raising a new issue. The 

issue is the number of beds needed in the city of Moose Jaw. 

How can you justify then rebuilding with fewer beds than used 

to exist? How do you explain that? How do you explain to the 

people of Moose Jaw that we need 20 fewer beds than we did in 

the early 1980s? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, St. Anthony’s is now 

157 beds. I’m told the number of beds in Moose Jaw in the 

special care facilities are: 39 at the Grafton Gage lodge; 103 at 

Pioneer Housing; 157 now at St. Anthony’s; and Extendicare 

127, for a total of 426 beds in that city. So you know it’s a 

substantial number, there’s no question about that. So the issue 

that we’ve been discussing as it relates to St. Anthony’s is the 

state of repair of that St. Anthony’s Home and the need for 

replacement, which we both recognize, and it’s just a matter of 

when, now. Okay. 

 

Once again, I must take the responsibility of looking at  

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3347 

 

this in a provincial perspective, which we are. And certainly 

you are doing your duty in terms of looking at it in the terms of 

Moose Jaw, and we will continue to be sensitive to the needs of 

citizens of Moose Jaw, as we are elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, then just one further question in 

regard to St. Anthony’s Home. And I do want to point out, in 

your listing of the beds available in the city of Moose Jaw, you 

will well know that Pioneer Lodge and the Grafton are not 

available to level 3 and 4. And the need in Moose Jaw currently 

is particularly for level 3 care, and you know that, Mr. Minister. 

 

May I also point out that the 157 beds that currently exist at St. 

Anthony’s are fewer beds than existed in the early 1980s. You 

know that. You know that 180-some beds existed there before 

we had to close the third floor because of the condition of the 

building. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you will not reconsider your decision for this 

budget year, will you then assure the House, assure myself, and 

assure the community and district of Moose Jaw, that the St. 

Anthony’s project will go ahead in the next fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of points, the latter part first, 

if you will. I can’t give you the date at which this will start. I’m 

just not in a position to be able to do that. I’m hopeful, and 

that’s all I could say, and that’s exactly what I’ve said to the 

board. 

 

I want you to know, though, and I think you should know as a 

representative of Moose Jaw, that you mention Ina Grafton, 

which is light care, and that’s true, but Pioneer Housing, which 

is . . . Pioneer Lodge, which is predominantly light care, has 

been asked in the past and has been told by the Department of 

Health and continuing care that if they were to convert to heavy 

care, which we would encourage them to do, frankly, because 

they have facilities which are legitimate for, I’m informed, are 

legitimate — could legitimately be used for heavier care, and 

they have chosen not to do that. 

 

That makes it difficult in the big numbers that are there. And 

they have a letter from the former minister of Health saying, 

convert to heavier care, and they have not done that. And you 

know, I understand it’s a bit of a local issue, and so on, but once 

again, in a provincial perspective, with the trends that I was 

talking to your colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland about, in 

terms of the district co-ordinating committees and how they will 

co-ordinate and how they will try to make sure that the care 

that’s available is to those most in need of care, and that is 

obviously the level 3 and 4 people, that the decisions that are 

made should be along that line. 

 

So you know, and that commitment still stands that was there 

before, that if you convert to more, you know, if you would 

have more level 3 and 4 people, you will have the staffing, 

funding, and so on to accommodate that. The choice has been 

to, well it’s, you know, I don’t know what the basis of the 

choice is, but the choice has been not to do that. But the 

numbers are there, and the potential for more heavy care beds is 

there now, without any other projects. 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’m fully aware of the efforts of 

your government to pressure the Pioneer Housing people. I am 

fully aware of the very valuable service they are providing in 

the care that they are now offering to levels 1 and 2 in their 

home. So it’s not just that easy to say that Pioneer Lodge should 

become a level 3, 4 institution. It’s not just that easy. 

 

Mr. Minister, if we might move then back into a more 

provincial concern. I had opportunity to ask that day the Acting 

Minister of Health in this House if he would confirm for me 

that on November 1 of this year the fee for residents of special 

care homes in the province will jump to $596. He did not do 

that for me. He said he would get back with that information, 

and I haven’t yet received it. Will you confirm that the fee as of 

November 1 in Saskatchewan will be $596? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, I will confirm that, that the rates as 

of November 1 will be $596 and that the minimum disposable 

income of someone who’s on maximum OAS (old age 

security), GIS (guaranteed income supplement), and 

Saskatchewan income plan will be $103.47. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, if I can, let us just review the fee 

increases that have happened within this calendar year — and 

we’re not even through a full calendar year. In May the fees you 

levied on residents of special care homes were raised by $73 in 

one jump — $73. That was a 15 per cent increase in one jump. 

We came then to August 1, and some small increase in pension 

incomes. What happened? The fees in special care homes went 

up another $6. So we went from May to August, from $509 up 

to $588, and now we’re jumping them again come November 1. 

Mr. Minister, by my calculation that’s roughly an 18 per cent 

increase. 

 

I ask you: how do you justify an 18 per cent increase in the fees 

paid by the residents of special care homes and nursing homes 

in this province? How do you justify that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The points have been made on many 

occasions, and I’ll just go through them again with the member. 

When a standard resident charge was instituted in 1981 the 

resident charge was 85.7 per cent — 85.7 per cent — of what 

was then the maximum of the OAS, GIS, and SIP 

(Saskatchewan income plan), okay, which is the amount 

available to those most in need. 

 

In November of 1987 when the fee will be $596 the resident 

charge will be 85.6 per cent of maximum OAS, GIS, and 

Saskatchewan income plan. You know, the . . . (inaudible) . . . 

And that’s a very legitimate comparison to make and a very 

legitimate sort of ratio to develop because the pension plans, as 

you will know, will roll along and change with rates of 

inflation, etc. 

 

The resident charge, in other words, in 1981, in July of ’81, the 

minimum disposable income was 14.2 per cent of what the 

people received from the there levels of pension, and in 

November it will be 14.7 per cent of what the residents will 

receive on these three pensions, benefits. 

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3348 

 

So we are keeping very much with that sort of trend. And we 

believe it’s appropriate to do that, and it is. I mean, I want to 

remind the member of the following thing, and it is this: we 

talked a bit a while ago about the standards that are available in 

this province and that are there and which we are, frankly, 

proud of. And all of us as citizens of Saskatchewan should be 

proud of the fact that we care enough to have very high 

standards for these people who live in heavy care. 

 

We have those high standards, but those high standards bring 

with them a cost, and we don’t begrudge that. We say, that’s 

fair ball. But the costs of a heavy care bed in Saskatchewan will 

vary, but it’s between 2 and $3,000 a month for each bed, the 

cost, 2 to $3,000 a month, which means that the residents will 

pay approximately 20 per cent of the cost of their housing and 

their care, and that the government, which is obviously the 

people of Saskatchewan, will pay 80 per cent. 

 

Now by anyone’s stretch of anyone’s imagination, that is a very 

legitimate and a very reasoned approach to take in setting these 

fees. That’s the approach that we’ve been taking for a number 

of years, and while there is some consternation among 

administrators and out in some of the homes who say, well you 

know, I wish they wouldn’t go up quarterly because it’s a 

concern, and so on, the fact is that’s how the pensions change, 

and these fees are tied. And I can’t think of a more legitimate 

thing to tie them to than to the maximum available to a single 

person on OAS, GIS, and SIP. 

 

So we’ve been through it before. That’s the rationale behind it, 

a very reasoned and rational one. And there is little more I can 

add, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, you’re saying that these 

increases are somehow tied to pension income. This year, by 

my calculation, the fee increase has gone up 18 per cent. You 

jumped at 15 per cent in one jump in the month of May. That 

wasn’t tied to anything except your desire to take more money 

from these individuals. 

 

Mr. Minister, let’s go back to that May decision. How did you 

arrive at that $73 figure in the month of May? How did you 

arrive at that figure, that raise, at that time? 

 

(1130) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, he asked a specific 

question as it relates to — when was it May you were referring 

back to? The principle here is as I outlined it in terms of 

percentage of OAS, GIS, that sort of thing. The disposable 

income had, well I’ll say crept up and so on that we set the 

principle that it should be about $100 a month. Looking at it 

very carefully, and then frankly in some discussion with people 

who run these homes and who know the circumstances of the 

people, who say that there is a . . . you know, if disposable 

income goes to a — you know, quite a high level, I mean, these 

people have certain needs, and I recognize them, in terms of the 

costs that they will incur. 

 

And they are the costs that people will incur — they’ll want to 

buy a little present for their grandchildren, or  

they’ll get their hair cut or their hair done. In most of these 

homes that’s done right there at a very subsidized rate. They 

have drug plan protection, as you know, so they have very . . . 

And it’s just a matter of equity in terms of their relationship 

with the rest of the community, frankly. They’re at less 

financial risk, if you could use that term. They’re very well 

looked after. Remember, we’re talking now of heavy care 

people. And a hundred dollars or thereabouts is a very fair and 

reasonable amount for them to have as disposable income. 

 

It’s not a matter of the government saying, look, we want to go 

in and grab people’s personal money., That’s not the case at all. 

We’re talking about here, as I’ve said, we’re talking here about 

total care for people who are receiving that total care for about 

20 per cent of the cost of what it costs to deliver that total care. 

And that total care includes very excellent housing, and so on. 

 

So those are the numbers, those are the ratios that I outlined, 

and I believe that it’s an equitable system, and it’s one that we 

will continue to operate under. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well here’s where we disagree, Mr. Minister. 

You suggest that it’s quite equitable and quite fine and quite fair 

that seniors and the disabled in our province who are now 

housed in special care homes should have at their disposal $100 

a month. Prior to May they had significantly more than that, but 

you’ve scooped it all up and left them now with, your figure is, 

I think, $103 disposable income. 

 

Mr. Minister, let’s talk about that just for a few minutes. I think 

it was in 1983 you initiated this quarterly increase plan. And if 

my understanding is correct, in 1982, four years ago, the 

disposable income for residents of special care homes was 

about $100. Is that so, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I would say to the . . . in July of ’81 

when your former government brought this program into place, 

it was $65 disposable income — $65, not 103.47 as it is now. 

 

So just let’s be sure that we . . . And I want you to think as well, 

we talked a bit about the standards that are available and we 

have them and I mention them again. Let’s just do some 

comparisons of what is the case in the rest of this country, who 

are . . . where people are eligible for similar benefits in the 

federal government because the pensions are similar. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I didn’t ask that. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, but . . . I know you didn’t ask the 

question, but in order to give a very complete and full answer, 

I’m going to give you this information because it’s important 

that you have it. 

 

In Manitoba the fees are $579 for a 30-day month — if you 

want to talk about confusion now — and for a 31-day month, 

they’re $598. Okay, so very similar to our costs. That’s at 

present, not November 1, but at present, which ours are lower. 

 

In Alberta the charges are 426 and up to 616, based on the type 

of accommodation and whether it’s in single  

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3349 

 

accommodation and so on. And you will know we have by far 

the highest ratio of people who are in single accommodation, 

and that’s part of the standards which I referred to earlier. 

 

In Ontario the fees range from $645 a month to $1,107 a month. 

 

I mean our fees are very legitimate and our fees are fair and are 

compassionate and they’re understanding of just what the needs 

of people are. And they’re 100, a little over the $100 mark in 

terms of disposable income. And people who run these homes 

will tell us time and time again that at $100 a month many, if 

not most, of the residents of those homes will have money in 

the bank, so to speak, from the funds which they are receiving 

from government sources, either provincial or federal. But 

they’re very, very highly subsidized; fair ball. WE recognize 

that they will need to be. But it’s 20 per cent is what the 

individuals are required to pay. We think it’s very fair and 

equitable, and we’ll continue with that system. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, in terms of your comparisons, let 

me just say this. I have grown up in this province believing that 

we were the pioneers in health care, not the followers, not those 

that would just be in the pack, but that we would be the 

pioneers and the leaders. 

 

Mr. Minister, you indicate . . . You didn’t answer my question: 

how many dollars people had disposable in 1983? But it was in 

the neighbourhood of $100. Mr. Minister, we’re four years 

away from that now and you’re still saying it ought to be $100. 

 

I think the people of this province ought to know precisely what 

happens to that $100 disposable income for residents of special 

care homes in this province. As you indicated, those residents 

understandably will want to buy a Christmas present for their 

grandchild — understandably. They understandably will want 

to have their hair cut. Mr. Minister, that has to be paid out of 

their disposable income. Mr. Minister, you know that while 

your new drug plan does not apply, the dispensing fees do, and 

there are many, many in special care homes who may require 

eight, nine, 10 prescriptions a month, and so they’re looking at 

the better part of $50 right there to pay for their dispensing fees. 

Mr. Minister, you know that in some special care homes in this 

province the cost of incontinent pads are not provided by the 

home, and that must come out of the $100 disposable income. 

You know, Mr. Minister, that if a resident of a special care 

home wants a new pair or pants or a new dress, that must come 

out of that disposable income. 

 

In May of this month you took from the seniors and the 

disabled in special care homes in Saskatchewan, you took from 

their disposable income a substantial amount of money, Mr. 

Minister. And I think that’s a shame. I think that’s a real shame. 

 

Mr. Minister, you are trying to address your fiscal problems by 

attacking those who are most vulnerable to attack and who 

cannot really defend themselves. Residents of special care 

homes have no choice but to pay. They simply can’t move out. 

What the landlord says  

you must pay, you must pay. I say that you’re trying to solve 

your financial problems in the wrong places, and this is one of 

them. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to move then to another area of your 

responsibility, another area that’s very important to the care of 

seniors and disabled in this province, and that’s the area of the 

personal care home or the private care home. Mr. Minister, 

many of us in this province were assured that in this calendar 

year we would see legislation in this House dealing with the 

personal or private care homes. Mr. Minister, my question is 

simple: will be see that legislation in this session? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Still at the last point and you . . . You 

know, I have to take exception to your use of the word 

“attacking those most vulnerable.” I mean it’s an unfortunate 

choice of words that you use. And I mean it becomes part of the 

. . . I know you have in your arsenal — all of you — all of you 

come in with an arsenal of various words. So one of your 

colleagues says “phoney,” and you say “attack,” and others, I 

mean, none of those things are appropriate. None of them. They 

aren’t. They aren’t appropriate at all. 

 

All I’m saying to you in a sincere way is that that program as it 

relates to the fees is a responsible way to deal with it. It’s 

responsible and it puts us right out there, as you say, and keeps 

us right out there in front of this country. But the comparative 

figures are reasonable to give you just so that you can see that 

we remain and continue to be out there in front. And certainly 

as it relates to the standards that we have, we’re out in front. 

And I talked about that to your colleague and to you a few 

moments ago. All of those things are important, and it’s 

important that people who have the kind of standards and the 

single rooms and so on are really important. 

 

Another thing that should be mentioned — and it is important to 

mention — assets of the individuals are not at risk when they go 

to a special care home in this province as they are in many 

others. People who have accumulated some assets over a period 

of time and find themselves in need of care and so on, their 

assets are not put at risk by the government coming in and 

saying, here, we’ve got this, and we’ll take the farm and so on. 

That’s not the case. And I just want you to know that because 

it’s an important point to many seniors who have worked hard 

for what they have and what they’re been able to accumulate 

over a period of some difficult years in many cases, and some 

good years, we should say. 

 

As it relates to the legislation, I would say that, yes, we are 

contemplating the legislation as it relates to regulating of 

private care homes or personal care homes or whatever the term 

is. That legislation will not be in this session, but we are in a 

consultative process as it relates to that. But it will not come 

forward in this session. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, this issue of the personal and 

private care home legislation does concern a fair number of 

people in our province. You’ve just said it’s not going to come 

forward in this session. Can we expect it then in the next 

session of this legislature? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, there’s a possibility of that in  

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3350 

 

the next session following this one. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. 

Minister, over the last several days we have taken you through 

your health care spending priorities for the Department of 

Health, and it’s become really clear, Mr. Minister, that your 

priorities for Health in this province are misdirected, misguided, 

unfounded, and heartless. 

 

We have spent a good deal of time talking about how you have 

betrayed the people of this province when it comes to health 

care spending. We have pointed out to you that you cut our 

health care budget by $18.6 million this year alone. We have 

pointed out to you that fee increases for recipients of home care 

in this province — most of those recipients are senior citizens 

and disabled persons — those fees have increased by some 66 

per cent. 

 

We have pointed out to you, Mr. Minister, how your heartless 

and cruel policies have impacted upon those people who have 

to rely upon nursing home care in this province — fee increases 

of 18 per cent, leaving those individuals with very little money 

to look after their day to day physical and personal needs. 

 

We’ve pointed out to you, Mr. Minister, how your prescription 

drug plan, your new prescription drug plan has hurt 

Saskatchewan people — people who are sick, disabled, and the 

elderly. We’ve pointed out to you over and over again in this 

legislature how your health hospital policies are impacting upon 

people who need to get into hospital. We have waiting lists in 

this province, particularly in the city of Saskatoon, that match 

none in this country. In fact, I note yesterday morning, Peter 

Gzowski, when discussing what’s happening here in 

Saskatchewan, couldn’t believe that there would be over 11,000 

people waiting to get into hospitals in Saskatoon. 

 

We have pointed out to you that any kind of limitations on 

chiropractic care or physiotherapy care in this province would 

be detrimental to the overall health of people who have chronic 

back and muscle problems, and you gave us some assurance 

that there would not be limitations on visits to those two 

professions. And we have pointed out to you time and time 

again how your overall health direction is hurting Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

But, Mr. Chairperson, we have not yet discussed, we have not 

yet discussed your decision to eliminate the school-based 

children’s dental plan. On June 11 of this year you undertook, 

Mr. Minister, to fire 411 dental workers in this province. You 

undertook them . . . You undertook to fire them in such a way, 

Mr. Minister, that the people of this province could not believe 

what they were witnessing on television. 

 

We had understood that human resource professionals in the 

civil service had been specially trained on how to dismiss the 

more than 2,000 civil servants that your government fired this 

past year, but it’s pretty obvious by the way you fired those 

dental workers that there was no training involved. We had 

dental workers in this province herded into hotel rooms and 

other town halls across this province and fired by people who 

were sent there to do a dirty job. 

There were people in the Health department who were sent out 

that had no idea what they were doing, Mr. Minister, and they 

weren’t very happy about having to do your dirty work, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The Premier’s dirty work. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And the Premier’s dirty work. We had those 

dental workers come to this legislature on June 26, and they sat 

all around us in their uniforms, and we presented name after 

name after name in this legislature of persons across this 

province that were opposed to your changes to the children’s 

dental plan — over 16,000 names, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We introduced those dental workers in this legislature. And 

when they stood, they began to cry. And what did your 

members over there do? They hung their heads in shame. And 

you, Mr. Minister, you and your Premier didn’t even have the 

courage to come here and face the music. And they will not 

forget that, Mr. Minister. They will not forget that you didn’t 

have the courage to come here and answer their questions and 

answer the questions of the official opposition. 

 

Mr. Minister, with your decision to change the children’s 

school-based dental program, we have seen the elimination of 

578 school-based dental clinics in our province. Mr. Minister, 

that is 392 school-based clinics in rural Saskatchewan in 330 

communities. Rural Saskatchewan how has to look forward to 

93 dentists in 71 communities. And you said, Mr. Minister, and 

your Premier said, that you were doing this because parents 

wanted their children to go to dentists. And that, Mr. Minister, 

is simply not true. 

 

There have been studies after studies after studies done in this 

province showing your Department of Health and your people 

at the dental plan that the children’s dental plan in this province 

was the very, very best of quality, and that there was a 

significant number of parents, I believe 90 per cent of parents 

surveyed in the most recent survey, that supported that dental 

plan — that supported that dental plan, Mr. Minister. So when 

the Premier of this province gets on television and says, parents 

wanted a change, that’s simply not true, and the people of this 

province don’t believe it. 

 

That program, Mr. Minister, came around for a very, very good 

reason. It came about for a good reason. In 1968 there was a 

survey done in this province that indicated that children, 

Saskatchewan children, had the worst dental health in this 

country — the worst dental health in this country. And a 

decision was made by our government, an NDP government, in 

1974 that we were going to do something about that. 

 

As a result, Mr. Minister, the school-based children’s dental 

plan was implemented in a most responsible fashion. Mr. 

Minister, that program became the envy of people around the 

world. People from all over the world came to Saskatchewan to 

see how we were able to have a program of that quality and that 

significance, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, it was a preventive 

program. And in this day and age when you’re worried about 

escalating health costs, how in the name of sanity could you  

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3351 

 

possibly decide to do in a program that was preventing people 

from going to the dentist, because they had healthy teeth? How 

could you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Mr. Minister, there are people all over this province, and I know 

you will disagree with this, particularly people in rural 

Saskatchewan that are opposed to your changes in the 

children’s dental program. They are opposed to your 

privatization of the children’s dental program and the firing of 

411 workers. Many of those workers, Mr. Minister, lived in 

rural Saskatchewan, and many of those workers, Mr. Minister, 

were women. And many of those women went into dental 

therapy because it was a good program, and it provided them 

with the opportunity to work in rural Saskatchewan. And you, 

Mr. Minister, have taken away that opportunity. At a time when 

the farm crisis is at its worst — and I say it’s going to get a lot 

worse by next spring — at a time when the farm crisis is at it’s 

worst, those women were able to provide off-farm income in 

the support of that family farm, and you, Mr. Minister, have 

taken that away, and you have taken it away because of 

economic reasons, I guess. You say that it was economically 

driven, that parents wanted their children to go to dentists, and 

that’s simply not true. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, I ask you to 

explain to the people of this province, in these estimates, why 

you decided to change the children’s dental program and fire 

411 women in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’ve been 

through this on several occasions. I just want to reiterate for the 

member again the changes to the dental plan — even with the 

changes to the dental plan there will be dental services provided 

to children five to 13 years old, which is roughly from 

kindergarten through grade 8. Those services will be provided 

to those children by dentists in dentists’ offices. That’s the case. 

 

That will be an excellent program, and the member will stand 

here and for, I believe, the first time in . . . throughout these 

estimates has said something about rural Saskatchewan, or very 

much about rural Saskatchewan. The member says, at a time 

when the farm crisis is at its worst — and when I say, farm 

crisis — when she says, the farm crisis is at its worst, there’s no 

question that that’s a very large indicator of the kind of 

circumstance that the province finds itself in, obviously because 

a good deal of it, a very major portion, is driven by agriculture. 

 

So we have decisions to make as it relates to all of the 

departments of government, and we looked at this Department 

of Health and said, we have some supplementary programs, one 

of them being the dental program. How can this program be 

offered where we can, one, save some money? But it wasn’t 

totally fiscally driven, and I’ve said that before and I want to 

say that again. This program will now be provided by 

professional dentists in professional dentists’ offices. 

 

And the one other point that needs to be made once again, and 

very clearly: the member says these services were available to 

people in all of the small communities around the province, and 

always leaving the impression, Mr. Chairman, that places that 

you’re very familiar with — in Shellbrook and other 

communities and smaller  

communities in your riding and in others around that we all 

represent — is that these dental therapists were there, is that 

these dental therapists were there in the community for ever, 

and every day, and it was service to the community every day. 

Those dental therapists, as far as the visits to one child to a 

dentist would be, or to a dental therapist for that matter, would 

have been for the most part one day of a year — one day out of 

a year is when most children would have their check-up and so 

on. And then some with other circumstances may have one or 

two other visits. That’s the case, and that’s the way it will be 

now. 

 

And so the member raises these issues about, well it’s not 

convenient to take the child to the dentist. I submit to you — 

and as I have this faith in Saskatchewan people, who say, as 

long as I’m not burdened by the cost for my children 5- to 

13-years old, I can certainly on one day of the year, being a 

caring parent, take my child to the dentist. And caring parents in 

rural and urban Saskatchewan will take their children to the 

dentist. And there’s increasing evidence all the time that that 

will be the case, that that is the case, and that will continue to be 

the case in this province. 

 

The other point, and the one that should not be lost on the 

member or on anyone else who represents rural Saskatchewan, 

is that we now have, and we will continue to have, an 

increasing number of communities that will have dental 

services available to those communities where there has not 

been dental service for, in some cases, a good number of years 

and, in many cases, ever — ever. 

 

And those dental services that will be available on Main Street 

of the community of Cut Knife and of Big River and Blaine 

Lake and a whole series of others which I will agree to give to 

you in a few moments — read to you — are services which 

were not available before, and are services which are available 

not only to the children who are registered under the dental plan 

but to the community at large, including adolescent young 

people, and including the adult population of those communities 

who have not had dental services in their communities 

heretofore and will now have them. 

 

Let me just give you a run-down on some of those — an 

updated list because this list continues to change: Big River, a 

satellite location. These are now dental services in communities 

where they were not: Big River, Blaine Lake, Cupar, Cut Knife, 

Debden, Delisle, Dysart, Earl Grey, Edam, Ituna, Kelliher, 

Lestock, Lipton, Maidstone, Paradise Hill, Porcupine Plain, 

Radville, Raymore, Southey, St. Walburg, Turtleford, 

Waldheim, Wolseley. All of those have now got satellite 

locations of dentist who are there to serve the people on a basis 

that was not there before. 

 

So that’s a success story, Mr. Chairman, and what I’m saying to 

the member is that that list will continue to grow as 

communities and as people register with the various dentists of 

the province. And there’s little more that need be said about this 

except to say that that was the decision that was taken. 

 

Any time there’s a change, any time there’s a change, I’ll  

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3352 

 

say to the hon. member, she either resists change at all 

occasions, as all of her colleagues have throughout these 

estimates of all my colleagues’ departments and including this 

one. They resist change. It’s the nature of the old democratic 

party to resist change, Mr. Chairman. They do resist change. 

They don’t want to see change. They love the status quo. Hang 

on to the past, look forward to the past, is what they say to 

themselves. 

 

(1200) 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, we must look forward. We must deal with 

the here and now — the facts of the here and now. We are 

doing that. We have made some difficult decisions. We have 

the courage to make them. We have the courage to carry them 

out, and they are decisions which are for the benefit of our 

people across the province, regardless of how remote the 

community is that they may live. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I appreciate your lame 

response to my opening remarks on this issue, and I say lame 

response, Mr. Minister, because you can’t justify it. Mr. 

Minister, in your remarks you neglected to tell the people of 

this province that 14- to 17-year-olds have been eliminated 

from the program. They will not have access to your dental 

services as you define them. At a time when parents are already 

hard pressed to put out greater and greater amounts on their 

children, you, Mr. Minister, have decided to change the 

children’s dental program to such an extent that 14- to 

17-year-olds are no longer included in the program. 

 

And I think you recognize, Mr. Minister, as a parent, that this is 

the age group where children are growing. It’s expensive to 

feed and clothe children in those age categories. Parents are 

hard pressed financially these days, particularly parents in rural 

Saskatchewan. And those teenagers, Mr. Minister, are no longer 

covered by your changes to the children’s dental program. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, the people in rural Saskatchewan and 

working people in cities, when they have a decision to make — 

do I take my child to the dentist for preventive care, which will 

cost between 75 and $100, just for preventive care, Mr. Minister 

— when they a decision to make, Mr. Minister, they are going 

to put food on their table, and they are going to clothe their 

children. And, Mr. Minister, they will go to the dentist when 

there is a problem — when there is a problem. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, by changing the children’s dental program 

and eliminating 14- to 17-year-olds, can you advise us how 

much money you expect to save the taxpayers of this province 

by changing that aspect of the program? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, in looking at the . . . 

Let’s go back to the process that has to be done and that had to 

be done in terms of dealing with this year’s budget. And with 

whatever department, but certainly here in the Department of 

Health, we had to say where . . . And you know we went 

through this, and the member and I have had discussions before 

about, you know, how long it was to bring the budget in and all 

of those kinds of things, and we went through a long and 

arduous process. One of  

the things that we had to look at when you ask, program by 

program, line by line in a budget, what is the circumstance 

now? What was the circumstance at the time that this program, 

whatever it is? Now we’re talking the dental program; let’s just 

zero in on that. 

 

The fact is, the member has said that there was a time in our 

province’s history not many years ago when we had poorer 

dental health than the rest of the country. But frankly, the rest of 

the country, all of Canada, there was . . . at that time had poor 

dental health as well. And there’s been a trend across the 

country everywhere of that happening, of being an increase in 

the dental health of children. 

 

So what would the member suggest that we do then? We look at 

the program in the here and now and in terms of projecting into 

the future, and we say — to use what they have said and what 

she has said on several occasions — is, we’ll maintain the status 

quo then. There were an average of five decayed or missing or 

filled teeth per child back in 1976, let’s say, and it’s down to 

less than one decayed, missing, or filled tooth now. Now you 

say, keep the status quo, maintain all of the people that are 

there, even though the need isn’t as great. That’s what you say. 

Just maintain that because there’s been a good job done so 

everybody stays and we just mark time there and carry on. 

 

Or do you say, what is the need that this program was set out to 

do, and what was the circumstance when it was put into place? 

How many dentists were there in Saskatchewan at the time, for 

example? Very few, very low number. Have new dentists been 

graduating from our own college of dentistry at Saskatoon at 

the University of Saskatchewan? The answer is yes, new 

dentists are. There’s an availability of dentists, more 

professional dentists, to deal with the public of Saskatchewan. 

There’s no question that that’s true. That’s a changed 

circumstance. 

 

So we said, we will look at all of these changed circumstances. 

And if we were to start now, which is what you must do, and 

look at this and say, what would be the best plan that could be 

in place to serve the needs of the here and now and on into the 

future? And those needs are: the foundation must continue to be 

laid in those younger people between . . . through eight years of 

their life from five to 13. Those foundations will continue. And 

there’s a dental hygiene program in the schools where we 

continue to emphasize the need for good habits and all of the 

kinds of things that must happen in personal care where persons 

of whatever age will take responsibility for how they look after 

themselves, and obviously when they’re very young parents 

have a major role to play in this. 

 

So we said, what is the need as it relates to adolescents in our 

province? And we have some choices to make. You talk about 

choices that families will make. I suggest to you that families 

who have children who have excellent dental . . . or structures 

are there and excellent dental habits, and so on, over a period of 

five years, will have far reduced needs for adolescent care. And 

that’s statistically shown. 

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3353 

 

So we say, what are the needs of our adolescents? You’ve heard 

the Premier say this on many occasions, and I’ve said this on 

several occasions. 

 

We have major dollars going into something which is extreme 

concern to parents of adolescents, and that is the abuse of 

substances and drugs and alcohol and all of that sort of thing. 

And we’ve said that. Now the member will sigh and say, well 

I’m talking about the dental plan; I’m not talking about drugs 

and alcohol. I’m talking about the dollars that are available to 

spend, the people that are there to serve, regardless of their age 

— and there’s an age group that we are now discussing, the 

adolescent group. 

 

And that adolescent group has significant needs in terms of 

education, in terms of knowledge about some of the new things 

in the here and now. And they are alcohol and drug abuse; they 

are a knowledge and awareness of this deadly disease, AIDS. 

They are these kinds of things which we all better be, must be, 

very aware of. Those are the concerns that we have to have. 

 

And we say, so where’s the appropriate place to put the money 

if there is this pot of money for adolescent people? And it is 

drug and alcohol abuse, and it is in some of their education 

programs, and it is in some of those other things. 

 

So that’s the decision that we took. We believe it’s a 

responsible one. Children will have an excellent care from 

dentists across this province, most of whom, or many of whom, 

have been trained at our own university and dental college. And 

we will have, without question, the best dental plan and 

continue to have the best dental plan for children, so those 

foundations can be laid that there is in this country — without 

question. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, the primary general 

objective of Saskatchewan children’s dental program was to 

improve dental health amongst Saskatchewan children by 

making preventive and operative dental services readily 

accessible so as to encourage high utilization by eligible 

children. That was the primary objective. 

 

Now you didn’t answer my question in terms of how much 

you’re going to save. You didn’t answer that question. I know 

you don’t like to answer questions when it comes to money 

matters, because I don’t think you have a handle on it — don’t 

think you have a handle on it. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you advise this House . . . I note that in May 

of 1983 you made a decision to change three high schools — I 

believe it was four high schools in Saskatoon — over from 

dental clinics to private dentists. They were moved over to the 

private sector, and some adolescents were removed from the 

school-based children’s dental plan. Can you advise me what 

the utilization rate was when you made that charge? 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I just . . . The member referred to, and 

I’m just trying to clarify this: you said four schools in 

Saskatoon, specifically? Because the answer that I have for that 

is that I don’t — there are no statistics as it relates to those four 

schools or the individual school or anything  

like that. So could you clarify your question in terms of what 

you’re trying to get at. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Maybe I’ll put it in the broader perspective. 

Adolescents in this province for some time now have been 

enrolled in the dental program, but the service is provided by 

private dentists. I’d like you to tell me what the utilization rate 

is, or was, for those adolescents who got — whose service — 

dental service was delivered to them by private dentists. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — If I could refer you to the — and it 

probably is the . . . Is it the annual report of ‘85-86 you’re 

referring to? 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s the latest one we have. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. The ’85-86 annual report, page 

11, the adolescents — and that is the ones that are referred to 

under private practice, is the utilization rate, 77.56 per cent. 

And just to anticipate your next question, the dental plan, 90.08 

per cent. Okay. 

 

But I want to point this out. It’s clear that even when 

adolescents and children and all of them were in the plan where 

they were in the school and so on, the utilization rate in terms of 

the need for care beyond the one look in the mouth in a year 

was lower, and significantly lower, than it was for the younger 

children, especially after they’d been into it for a number of 

years and much of their restorative care and those kinds of 

things had been done in the first years in the children’s side of 

the program. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, there was a report done 

in 1981 by our province, before your people took over as 

government, and that report looked at utilization rates across 

this country. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, where dentists across this country provided 

the services to children, there was a 20 per cent lower utilization 

rate. Saskatchewan had the highest utilization rate in the 

country because of the way we deliver the program. Other 

provinces, and I’m thinking of three in particular, had a 20 per 

cent lower rate. Their utilization rate was only about 70 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Minister, I anticipate with your changes to the private 

sector that the utilization rate of children — or, pardon me, of 

children and adolescents, I guess, because 13-year-olds are 

included — the utilization rate is going to go down. And isn’t 

that the real reason why you decided to do in the prescription 

drug plan — because you thought you were going to save some 

money? And how does that help Saskatchewan children have 

good teeth, and how is that a preventative service? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — You know, we will be into highly 

speculative things here now, but I want to . . . You know, the 

member predicts that there will be a lower utilization rate. I 

want to say very clearly that the thinking behind the change has 

nothing to do with us thinking that there will be less children 

going to the dentist. That is not the case. 

 

Let me just quote something to you from the Ministry of Health 

in British Columbia: 

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3354 

 

Ministry of Health in the province of British Columbia 

estimates that 90 per cent of 208,800 of the school-age 

children are seen by a dentist in that province. 

 

And they have a system whereby children . . . any services that 

are provided are provided by dentists in dentists’ offices, as our 

program is now constituted. 

 

So you know, that’s a number that’s there for . . . now whether 

B.C. people, you’re suggesting, are different than Saskatchewan 

people or whatever. I don’t know that. But I will say to you that 

I am very confident that when Saskatchewan people know — of 

all income levels — know that they will not be encumbered in 

any way by any cost by having to take their child to the dentist, 

that they will in fact take their children to the dentists in the best 

interests of their children. 

 

We have to have the confidence that parents will do that. I 

believe parents will do that. I’m sorry I can’t take them by the 

hand and say, here mom and dad, bring Johnny and let’s go to 

the dentist, but I will encourage them to do that. And I believe 

very sincerely that caring Saskatchewan parents will take their 

children to the dentist when they know very well that they’re 

covered. 

 

The number that I’ve read to you from B.C. would indicate that 

people there do go to the dentist when they don’t have to pay 

the cost, and I believe that our people will do the similar thing. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, when you decided to 

close four high school, school-based dental programs in May of 

1983, there was an indication that the use of private dentists 

would lower the utilization rate by 15 per cent. 

 

The executive director at that time, Michael Lewis, indicated 

that dentists would make every effort to ensure that there was 

follow up, and that young people were provided with 

notification of their need to go to the dentist. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, based on the evidence that we have, and we 

can only look at the evidence that was done in D.W. Lewis’s 

report in 1981, there is a lower utilization rate in those 

provinces that have a similar system to ours, and that lowering 

of the utilization rate is by some 20 per cent. The dental 

therapists advise, on the date that they were fired by your 

government, that only about 30 or 40 per cent of those enrolled 

in the plan got the service. They advised that dental workers 

saw about 90 per cent of the younger children enrolled in the 

program. But nevertheless you have just done in an excellent 

program — a program that was recognized by people across 

this country and, in fact, around the world. A program that did 

have . . . it was a good quality service. 

 

There was a study done in 1976, I believe, that showed that 

dental therapists had, in many instances, a superior service to 

those in terms of the services provided by dentists on some 

categories of dental work. Now, Mr. Minister, how much 

money do you expect to save by changing the school-based 

children’s dental program to a private dental program? 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll get to the number this time. I have it 

here. The number if 5.5 million in terms of a saving, an 

annualized saving, with the dental plan as it’s not constituted 

compared to as it was. The point that I want to make, and that I 

want to clarify for you, because you are, I believe, suggesting 

— and, you know, that’s fair I suppose — but that the transition 

to private practice dentists of the adolescents was something 

that we began in ’83 or whatever. That was not. That started in 

1981. I mean that began under the jurisdiction of your 

government, frankly, so . . . and it started year by year, moving 

one in, one age group at a time over to private practice dentists, 

in the adolescent group. And that was done. 

 

So you’ve mentioned four Saskatoon schools who perhaps 

moved in one particular year. But that was a transition across 

the province for adolescents, with the exception, I believe, of 

the North — with the exception of the North where there are 

very unique problems in terms of the location of professionals 

in those communities. 

 

But the number is 5.5 million that the member has been asking 

for, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I think that there’ll be a 

number of groups of people affected by your changes to the 

children’s dental program, and that there’ll be a number of 

groups that will be affected to such an extent that there will be a 

lower utilization rate. What impact do you think your changes 

to the children’s dental plan will have on rural Saskatchewan? 

 

I note under your privatized adolescent program that rural 

children were asked to travel no more than 50 kilometres. I’m 

wondering now with your new program, with your new 

program, how you justify the distances from Pierceland to 

Meadow Lake, 143 kilometres; Pierceland to Paradise Hill, 102 

kilometres; Neilburg to Unity, 71 kilometres; Leader to 

Kindersley, 85 kilometres; Consul to Maple Creek, 87 

kilometres. How do you anticipate this extra distance that has 

come about as a result of your changes? What sorts of problems 

do you anticipate in terms of utilization now, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I went through the lists of various 

places, and there are others that will be added to this list as time 

goes on, in terms of dental services being available to people. 

It’s interesting to me, and I want to put this on the record so that 

I can speak to my people in Pierceland to show what you . . . 

The people of Pierceland will not go to Meadow Lake for 

services, as they never have. They go to Grant Centre in 

Alberta. They’re very close to the border, and they go to Grande 

Centre. 

 

Paradise Hill people who will now have dental services in their 

community, because I’ve read them out on the list, but Paradise 

Hill people will go to Lloydminster, in any case. 

 

Pierceland people do not travel, at a normal rule, to Paradise 

Hill; it’s not a trading pattern that’s there and never has been. 

But, you know, to stand and read that from a glance at the map 

shows that it’s not how the relationship between these 

communities that are there.  

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3355 

 

And it’s important to make that point because it’s important for 

all of us as legislators of Saskatchewan to understand 

Saskatchewan in a total sense. 

 

Neilburg, you mentioned, going to Unity. I would suggest the 

people of Neilburg would go to Lloydminster as well. I would 

say it’s not very long from now that people of Neilburg will 

probably have some dental services in their community. I would 

hope that that’s the case, and I believe it may be. 

 

So I go back again, Mr. Chairman, to the fact that all of those 

communities which I listed earlier, a few moments ago, will 

now have dental services not only for the children five to 13 

years old but for the adolescent and for the adult population in 

those communities. And if one on one hand can argue it’s 

important to maintain the viability to whatever extent possible 

of small rural communities, which is something we’re 

committed to and which you talk about often, but people out 

there have spoken to you in a couple of elections in a row in 

terms of your commitment or feeling or understanding of rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

If it’s important to have the viability of rural Saskatchewan 

maintained, it’s important to have as many services as possible 

in rural Saskatchewan — as many services as possible on the 

main streets of our communities. And I submit to you that a 

dental office, whether it be a satellite office or whether it be an 

actual dental office with full-time service, is an excellent 

addition to Main Street, Small Town, Saskatchewan. There’s no 

question about that. We’ll continue in our efforts and in 

conjunction with the college of dental surgeons of the province 

to be sure that there is an increasing number of communities 

that have those dental services which are important to the 

people of all ages, not only the children. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well I just note, Mr. Minister, that 

Pierceland used to have a dental clinic in their community. 

They no longer do. Neilburg used to have a dental clinic in their 

community. They no longer do . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

I’m talking about a dental clinic, a children’s dental clinic in 

Neilburg, Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 

please. Let the member please ask your questions, and then 

we’ll give ample opportunity to reply. We’d like to get 

everything recorded, as much as possible. 

 

(1230) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. I 

notice that the members get a little touchy. I’m just pointing out 

that the people in these communities used to have access to 

clinics in their communities, and the Minister may say, one day 

a year, but at least it was one day a year. Now they don’t have 

anything in their communities — absolutely nothing. And the 

Minister can stand here and talk about how all these dentists are 

going to go out into rural Saskatchewan and provide services to 

communities, and there have been people in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, that have been trying to get 

doctors in their communities, and they can’t attract them. They 

can’t attract them. 

So I’m going to wait and see how many doctors permanently — 

or dentists, permanently locate in those communities that you so 

proudly talk about. Every solitary new dentist that you’ve 

talked about is a satellite clinic, a one-day-a-week operation, 

and those of us that come from rural Saskatchewan know all 

about satellite clinics and satellite law offices and all of those 

kinds of things. And I note that the member from Wascana gets 

a little touchy, and he should, because I know the member in 

Wascana’s not very popular, not very popular with his 

constituents these days, not popular at all. In fact, he doesn’t 

even walk down the street, because no one will talk to him, Mr. 

Chairperson. 

 

Now you talk about all these satellite clinics, and the people in 

rural Saskatchewan knows what happens when these satellite 

clinics come in. People start going to the dentist or the doctor, 

and shortly after they’ve had some time to get used to going to 

that particular professional, in some cases, Mr. Minister, they 

move on. They move to Saskatoon or North Battleford or to a 

larger centre. So we will wait and see, Mr. Minister, how many 

of those dentists that you so proudly talk about will locate 

permanently in rural Saskatchewan because rural people know 

what the history has been when it comes to attracting doctors. 

 

Now 411 people were fired. They were fired by your changes to 

the children’s school-based dental program, and you, Mr. 

Minister, said in the press that about 150 of them would be 

picked up by private dentists. I’d like you to advise the people 

in this province how many of those workers, most of whom are 

women, how many of those people have been hired by the 

private dentists? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Let’s go back a little bit, Mr. Chairman, 

because the member says, and she uses the communities — and 

I did, on the previous answer, point out to her about where 

Neilburg is and where Paradise Hill is and where Pierceland is. 

And in relationship to trading centres and so on, it’s important 

that a member of the legislature, even though she be from 

Saskatoon, does know something outside the boundaries of 

Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Chairman, she uses an example, and I believe it was 

Neilburg or whatever, but it doesn’t matter whether it’s Big 

River or Blaine Lake or Cupar or Cut Knife or Debden or 

Delisle or Dysart — and if I’m going too quickly, if you’re 

trying to follow the old map with your finger there to know 

where these communities are — but it is important that you get 

to know where these communities are. Most of these 

communities are communities that are represented by these 

members on this side of the House who know rural 

Saskatchewan well, and it’s because they know rural 

Saskatchewan well — it’s because they know rural 

Saskatchewan well that they’re here representing those rural 

people. And people have some trust in them because they know 

that when they stand in the House and talk about . . . 

 

When the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster says Neilburg, 

he knows about where Neilburg is and where they trade and 

where they go. He knows that they don’t . . . And I happen to be 

the member for Pierceland and Paradise Hill and those 

communities, and I know that  

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3356 

 

they don’t, neither of those communities will go to Meadow 

Lake to trade. 

 

And you say, in Neilburg they had a dental service. And I said 

to you, let’s be . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — She said they had a dental clinic. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — You said they had a dental clinic, that’s 

right, a dental clinic in the school. For all of the people, I ask 

you? No, for the children. What about the adults of Neilburg? 

Did they have dental services there before? No. What about the 

adults of Big River? Did they have dental services before? No. 

Do they now? Yes, they do. They will have dental services for 

people in those communities of all ages. That’s a significant 

improvement. 

 

You say, the member says, oh, they had this dental clinic in the 

school. The dental nurses — I want all members to know this, 

and everybody in this committee should know this, even though 

there’s a misleading suggestion that this dental clinic that was 

there in the school in Big River prior, was there on a daily basis 

year around. That’s the suggestion when they say, they had 

dental clinic service. 

 

They had dental clinic service when the therapists visited, and 

children in those communities that came from their homes 

surround Big River and in Big River saw that dental therapist 

on the average one day a year — one day. Okay. And she 

makes fun of the fact, she makes fun of the fact that Big River 

people will now have access to a dentist on a one-day-a-week 

basis. And I say, one day a week is 51 times more than one day 

a year. 

 

And that’s the sort of thing and just sort of little bit of simple 

math, and that’s an important thing for you to know. And on 

those day . . . one day a week, on the Thursday or the Tuesday 

or whatever day it is, or if it’s one day every two weeks or three 

weeks, it’s a marked improvement over what was there before. 

 

And for that person who lives in that area on the farm or 

wherever, or in the saw mill at Big River, which is now 

operated by Weyerhaeuser Canada — very successfully, I might 

add — when that person needs some dental work done, he can 

now, or she can now get it done in Big River and not have to 

drive to Prince Albert. That’s the case — will not have to drive 

to Prince Albert. And I say that because from Big River it’s 

very likely they would go to Prince Albert; that would be the 

normal trading pattern in that area. And that’s something that 

you should know as well. 

 

So the points that you make, while you will say them many 

times . . . and you begin, I believe, to believe your own rhetoric, 

which is always dangerous. You are beginning to believe your 

own rhetoric. That’s a very dangerous thing for you to do. You 

repeat it enough times to yourself that you will walk out into the 

real world from under this dome and start to believe that what 

you say here is actually the fact out there in that world. Well it 

is not. 

 

And I would ask you and I would urge you and some of your 

other colleagues who will smile, who are from  

Saskatoon, within the boundaries of your city — go out into 

Saskatchewan. Go out into rural Saskatchewan, into the 

communities represented by these members, where the people 

trust these members, who understand them and know them and 

know their aspirations and know their rural . . . know about 

Main Street and the kind of services we want on our main 

streets of our communities. 

 

And the people will say, we would like to have these dental 

services on our Main Street as we like to have other services on 

our Main Street, and we’ll try the best we can to maintain 

viability, and thank you for helping us to maintain that viability 

in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well the minister once again has his little 

cheer-leaders behind him. He has his little cheer-leaders. But I 

just want you to know, Mr. Minister, that the people of this 

province aren’t cheering you. They’re not cheering you at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, they’re waiting in great 

anticipation for the next provincial election so they can boot 

you all out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now I notice that the minister gets a little 

defensive and the minister gets a little emotional, and he waves 

his arms and he gets very disturbed by what I have to say. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I’d like you to table all of your thank you 

letters from rural Saskatchewan, all of your thank you letters, 

thanking you and your colleagues for doing in the children’s 

dental program. I would ask you now, Mr. Minister, to table 

your thank you letters so that we can all see how popular you 

are in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well I notice that the minister hasn’t tabled 

any thank you letters, and I suspect that he hasn’t tabled any 

thank you letters because he doesn’t have many. If he was so 

proud of his changes to the children’s dental program he would 

have no problem tabling those letters. 

 

But the minister, in his irrational discussion a few minutes ago 

and his flailing and his defensiveness, forgot to answer the 

question. And the question was: how many of the 411 dental 

workers that you fired, Mr. Minister, in such an inept and cruel 

way, have been hired by the private dentists? 

 

You indicated to the press approximately 150 would be hired, 

and I’d like you to table today and advise the people of this 

province how many of those workers, those women, have been 

hired by your private dentists. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The number that we have hired . . . I 

want to say to the member that I’m very confident that that 

number will be achieved, that 150. I believe that that  

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3357 

 

number will be achieved. To date it’s nowhere near that. We 

have 35 therapists who are now hired. The enrolment process 

has been going on since September 1, the enrolment process in 

the new plan, and two-thirds of eligible children have now been 

enrolled. And the reminder letters are going out to the 

remaining third, which means that to now there are more than 

90,000 children in the province who are now enrolled in the 

plan through the private dentists of their choice. 

 

So we have 35 of the therapists who have now been hired, and 

as the expanding offices, and these offices that I have pointed 

out to you are the ones that have been committed to and so on, 

and those offices will be there. And as those offices open some 

of them at least will be staffed by people who were former 

therapists, who are not in the number that I’ve given you but 

who will be in the increasing number. And I’m very confident, 

and the College of Physicians and Surgeons have assured me 

that they are very confident that that 150 number will be 

achieved. And I might add as well there are 30 people who are 

in training as hygienists which means an upgrading of their 

training from therapists to hygienists. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, when you announced the 

changes to the children’s dental program in June, you assured 

the people of Saskatchewan and you assured those women that 

150 of them would be taken up by private dentists. And that, 

Mr. Minister, hasn’t happened. We’ve had regular contact with 

dental therapists. Very, very few of them have been hired by 

private dentists. 

 

And you talk about 30 in the dental hygienist course, Mr. 

Minister. My colleague from P.A. wants to ask you a few 

questions later in this discussion about what in fact has 

happened at the course at Wascana, because we’re getting word 

from dental therapists all around this province that they can’t 

get into the program, they can’t get into the program. I know, 

Mr. Minister, that there isn’t the need for all of these dental 

hygienists that have been talked about. The minister of 

advanced education advised us of that earlier in these estimates 

this past summer. 

 

Mr. Minister, what arrangements have you made with the dental 

therapists to retrain them in other fields, in fields other than 

dentistry? As you will know, these people are trained for a 

particular specialty. They took a two-year course at Wascana 

and they were trained specifically to work in the children’s 

dental plan, Mr. Minister. Can you advise us what arrangements 

you’ve made with those women for retraining in other fields 

and whether or not, Mr. Minister, you’re prepared and your 

government’s prepared to help and assist in the retraining 

financially of those women? 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, I just want to reiterate the 

numbers — and I gave you the number that have now been 

hired. I want you to be very, very clear on this. The registrations 

are obviously still going on. Two-thirds of the people have now 

registered in terms of their children registered with the dentist 

of their choice. It’s obvious, at least it’s obvious to me and I 

believe it should be to you,  

that the dentist, whoever it is in the individual office out there, 

will see the number of registrations that he has, or she has, in 

their office before they determine the staff requirements that 

will have. And obviously many of them will have increasing 

staff requirements. 

 

They’ve assured us of that and as this thing breaks out in terms 

of who has the children registered with them, that’s how the 

determination of the people hired and where they will be hired 

will be made. So that’s the case; up to this date, 35 have. I know 

that there’s a good number to go. We’re very confident. Both 

the college of dental surgeons and ourselves are confident that 

we will achieve that other number. 

 

As it relates to the retraining program, the only one available 

and the one that I had said before that would be available 

through help from us, would be the upgrading to hygienist 

level, and there is there, and will continue to be there. Whatever 

number is in there for this year, and the number for next year, 

and whatever, those hygienists will be trained and the costs of 

the program are borne by us for the people who were in our 

program before and who are affected by the down-sizing which 

took place. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, I think the minister has 

confirmed some of our worst fears. And the minister earlier said 

that only 66 per cent of parents have enrolled their children in 

the school-based — or in the new children’s dental program. 

We will wait with some anticipation to see how much higher 

those figures go. 

 

As I said earlier, when you compare our former children’s 

school-based dental program to three provinces across this 

country that have a private dentists’ program and that’s the way 

they provide the service, the utilization rate is 20 per cent lower 

than the utilization rate under the old children’s dental plan, and 

under the old children’s dental plan there’s about a 90 per cent 

utilization rate. In three provinces that I refer to, the utilization 

rate is 70 per cent. 

 

So I will wait with some anticipation to see whether or not the 

minister’s new children’s dental plan will live up to the 

expectation of the earlier plan where we would provide a good 

preventive service to children in this province where they would 

have access, easy accessibility to that service in order to prevent 

future dental problems down the road. So we will wait with 

some anticipation. I now would like to turn it over to the 

member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I would like to just for a moment 

respond briefly. When I said that as of now, and from the 1st of 

September to now we have two-thirds of the children, the 

eligible children, are registered. That’s a significant number 

when you’re given the time frame that we’ve talked about here, 

from September to now, mid-October. 

 

You will know, I believe you will know and other members will 

know that the children will be eligible to be registered at the 

time that their parents will go into the dentist. Some parents will 

say, well, we will be to the dentists and we’ll take the four kids 

to the dentist in the month of December and make their 

appointments, and at  

  



 

October 15, 1987 

3358 

 

that time they will register them. 

 

I mean, some of that will go on, but certainly the two-thirds . . . 

and that number is increasing all the time as people register. 

And there will be a reminder letter going out to say, register if 

you have not done so, you know, to those who have not done 

so. So I anticipate a very, very much higher number than that. 

And while the member will say, oh, only two-thirds are there, I 

would say, don’t hold your breath for the number to stay at that 

low a number. It will be much higher, significantly higher. So I 

can only say to the member, we’ll agree to disagree on this one. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a number of 

questions for the minister this afternoon relating to chiropractic 

services in the province of Saskatchewan, which I hope you will 

be able to respond to. The minister will know from the blue 

book, it is difficult to determine precise information about the 

government’s exact allocation of funding for chiropractic 

services in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I wonder if the minister could tell me specifically, from the 

figures in the blue book, what is the specific amount that has 

been committed by the Government of Saskatchewan for 

chiropractic services in the province of Saskatchewan for the 

1987-88 fiscal year? And how does that number for the current 

fiscal year compare to the actual spending on chiropractic 

services in 1986-87? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I don’t have the — I’m not going to 

have the exact numbers, as you know, and from looking at the 

last annual available to you, the number that we don’t break 

down by specialty area and so on. 

 

But I will say to you as I said to our colleague from the official 

opposition, there certainly was a good deal of discussion about, 

and there was some discussion about, a capping of the number 

of visits. There is continuing discussion with the chiropractors 

and with the profession in the province in terms of how we can 

deal with an escalating sort of cost of chiropractic services. 

 

And what is the most appropriate way to do that? And I think 

that we’ve come to this agreement — I think it’s fair to say 

we’ve come to this agreement between the profession and 

ourselves and the department, that the capping at a certain 

number, even though that’s done in every province in the 

country, may not be the most appropriate way to go, and that 

we would go to some other way to deal with this. And we 

haven’t come to a determination on that. They haven’t, nor have 

we. There will not be agreement within that profession in terms 

of the direction to go, but I’m trying to deal with their executive 

and some other member of . . . their long-standing members of 

their profession. 

 

So I, in anticipation of the sort of the direction your questions 

will go . . . and I may be taking some liberty to do that. I don’t 

want to do that and I know we’re short of time. But the answer, 

the specific answer is that. I don’t have the exact dollar that’s 

been allocated, but I can tell you that there is likely to be some 

change in terms of the way chiropractic services are paid for. 

But to give you a definitive answer on that kind of change, I 

can’t give now  

because there’s been no determination. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:59 p.m. 

 


