













































September 16, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 16, 1987 

 

 

2595 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Hospital Waiting Lists 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Westmount. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Saskatoon Nutana, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I corrected myself, but my mike wasn't on. 

I'm sorry. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Acting 

Minister of Health. On July 9 in this legislature your 

government promised the people of Saskatchewan that you 

were working on a number of different ways to get the hospital 

waiting lists in Saskatoon under control. At that time the 

waiting list was 10,000 people. Mr. Minister, on September 1 

the waiting list for Saskatoon's three major hospitals is now 

11,403 people. Over the summer months, Mr. Minister, that 

waiting list has increased by almost 1,500 people, and because 

of your government's cuts to hospitals, 308 beds had to be 

closed this summer. Where are the changes and improvements 

you promised at the beginning of the summer? Words are no 

longer enough, Mr. Minister, people now want action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can indicate to the 

member opposite that I know, in discussions with the Minister 

of Health and people in the Health department, that certainly 

new and innovative methods of trying to address waiting lists 

are being pursued by the Health department in conjunction with 

the hospitals, particularly the hospitals in Saskatoon where the 

greater waiting list exists, which is approximately three times 

that of the city of Regina. Which brings to question what some 

of the reasons for that may be. 

 

But as I pointed to you . . . I will point out to you, Mr. Speaker, 

that such things as new technologies in day surgery, which will 

allow the throughput of people needing especially eye surgery 

and things of this nature for cataracts, are being investigated, 

and I think you will see some of these new initiatives have 

developed which should alleviate this waiting list problem. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Words, words, 

words; talk, talk, talk. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And it all means that people are waiting 

lengthy periods of time for hospital care in this province. Now, 

Mr. Minister, I want you to understand the exact nature of the 

problem. St. Paul's Hospital in Saskatoon has 4,428 people on 

its waiting list; City Hospital has 4,433 people on its waiting 

list; and University Hospital has another 2,542 people on its 

waiting list. Mr. Minister,  

that's 11,403 people who can't get into hospitals; that's up nearly 

4 per cent since July of this year, and many of these people 

require urgent surgery and are waiting weeks and even months 

for surgery. 

 

What is the health Minister’s job, if it's not to provide access to 

health care in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the waiting list in 

Saskatoon . . . the most definitive analysis of the waiting list in 

Saskatoon is based on the following thing. The member 

opposite continues to come with the same rhetoric that she's 

been spreading, and that the member from Saskatoon South has 

said on various occasions in the House, about the waiting list as 

it relates to surgery for emergency surgery — people don't have 

access. I hear in her rhetoric here today that, what's a minister's 

job if it's not to ensure access to the health care system for 

people who have emergency surgery, that sort of thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people who have that type of surgery, and who are 

waiting for that, are waiting no longer than they have for a 

number of years — no longer than they have for a number of 

years. So they are waiting not very long for that kind of surgery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the waiting list in Saskatoon is based on basically 

two specialties: ophthalmology and orthopaedics. Hip 

replacements and so on, we do not deny at all that those are 

painful processes for people who are waiting for hip 

replacements. But the waiting lists, the greatest percentage of 

those waiting lists on the basis of those two specialties, two 

doctors, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon, two specialties, very highly 

qualified specialists in ophthalmology, account for more . . . or 

near 1,000 each on the waiting list for those two specialists. 

Now that is the choice that's being made by general 

practitioners in this province, to refer their patients to those two 

specialists. There are other specialists in the area who could do 

the work in this province if they would be referred to some 

others. That's one of the problems of the waiting list. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister 

of Health, and my question has to do with the waiting lists in 

hospitals in Regina. And of course the statistics the minister 

gave were in reference to hospitals outside of Regina, and one 

specific hospital in particular. In the past, Minister, you and the 

Premier have often ignored and tried to belittle the waiting list 

problem, claiming that it was unique to Saskatoon only. That's 

just not true, and you know that. 

 

Is the minister aware that as of August 31, Regina's three 

hospitals — the Plains, the Pasqua, and the General — had a 

waiting list of 2,649 people? And that was a 23 per cent 

increase from the month of July — a 23 per cent increase, 

Minister. 

 

The hospital waiting list problem is not unique to Saskatoon. It's 

a general problem caused by your government's failure to 

provide adequate staff and resources to Saskatchewan hospitals 

and your failure to  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2596 

 

support alternate health care services. What specific action, 

Minister, do you plan to take to assist Regina's hospitals from 

easing this unacceptable, growing waiting list? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I have said in the past, and 

I will repeat again today, the waiting list problem that there is in 

this province is unique in Saskatoon. Saskatoon is the place, 

and I outlined the reasons for that, specific reasons for that. The 

member asks about Regina in particular. And I will say to the 

member that the waiting list in Regina is not — is not — a 

problem. It's not a serious problem in the city of Regina — the 

waiting lists are not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key thing to remember always in dealing with 

waiting lists is the following: how long does the individual 

patient wait for access to the hospital for the surgery? It's the 

length of time, Mr. Speaker, it's the length of time, not the 

number of people that are waiting. The length of time is the key 

thing that we all must be aware of. 

 

That's not what the member talks about. And the member very 

deliberately, I submit, chooses not to talk about the length of 

time which is acceptable in Regina, but he chooses to talk about 

the numbers because he believes that these large numbers will 

scare people, frankly. And, Mr. Speaker, they are doing that, 

but it's not legitimate to do that. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the same 

minister. The doctors in this city say differently. The waiting 

lists are growing at an alarming rate — a 23 per cent increase, 

Mr. Minister. The Acting Minister of Health, prior to you 

arriving this afternoon, Mr. Minister, indicated there are new 

and innovative ways of dealing with these waiting lists. I'm 

wondering if one of the new ideas and innovative ways that you 

are using is to perhaps be shutting down on holidays and 

shutting down on weekends, so that you can make up for some 

of the lost revenues that you've spent in a careless fashion. Can 

you tell us that? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, once again, the length of 

the wait in Regina, and therefore for southern Saskatchewan 

residents, is not increasing — is not increasing. The member is 

trying to raise the issue of major waiting list problems in 

Regina. They do not exist, Mr. Speaker — they do not exist. 

The Regina hospitals, to serve southern Saskatchewan, are able 

to serve southern Saskatchewan as it relates to the specialty 

services they provide. 

 

There is a problem in Saskatoon which we are trying to address, 

and it's related to basically the two specialties that I outlined — 

ophthalmology and orthopaedic, those two — and a couple of 

others to a smaller degree. So, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Regina, while he will try to raise the problem of Regina and say 

that it's up on the same level as Saskatoon, it's not the case, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the minister gives us more 

words. He gave us words about the so-called solution to the 

prescription drug program, and there is no solution. He gives us 

today words about the difficulties  

that people are facing about getting into hospitals, and says to 

this House and to the public of Saskatchewan that over a 

one-month period an increase in the waiting lists in Regina of 

23 per cent is not a serious problem. 

 

I ask the minister opposite, Mr. Speaker, how can you, Mr. 

Minister, justify in this House, and to those people who are 

waiting to get some rather serious operations, an increase of 23 

per cent in one month? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, the member 

refers to the number of people waiting, rather than the length of 

time the individual waits for the individual procedures. Mr. 

Speaker, they are not, in Regina, waiting longer. They are not, 

in Regina, waiting longer than they have for a good number of 

years. That's the best information I have, and I believe it to be 

absolutely accurate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Waiting Lists at Technical Institutes 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier, in the absence of the Minister of 

Education, and it also deals with waiting lists, this time the long 

waiting lists at Saskatchewan's technical institutes, Mr. Premier. 

 

Those waiting lists come directly, in part, as a result of the cuts 

in instructors and programs that you implemented this summer, 

and I want to ask you, Mr. Premier: are you aware that 3,690 

young people who were qualified to enter the Kelsey technical 

institute in Saskatoon this fall were turned away? This fall it 

was your government's decision to abolish 600 student positions 

at Kelsey, and to wipe out 100 instructional positions. And I ask 

you, sir, in light of those figures, will you now admit that your 

government's cuts at the Kelsey institute have served to deny 

access to Saskatchewan young people to technical education in 

this province, and have forced many of those young people to 

leave Saskatchewan in search of an education? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, 

we have expanded spaces throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, and we find 

now that people in Meadow Lake can take courses, people in 

Lloydminster. And in fact, you don’t' hear the complaints that 

people in Regina had to go to Moose Jaw, or people in Moose 

Jaw had to go to Regina. And frankly, people in the Estevan 

area and others had to go some place anyway. So the 

combination of more spaces throughout rural Saskatchewan 

has, indeed, improved the situation for a great number of people 

across the province. 

 

Now you know as well as I do that our expenditures with 

respect to education over the last four or five years have been 

dramatically increased — dramatically increased. So with the 

combination of the changes in various places like Lloydminster, 

like Meadow Lake, and others that can accommodate people 

there, we naturally see the improvements. 

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2597 

 

Now at the same time you will find across Canada, I'm sure, 

that more and more young people want to get a better 

education, and we endorse that. In fact, many of the things 

we're doing with respect to welfare reform and others, 

encourage people to go into technical schools, universities, 

finish their grade 12, because that's the kind of thing that we 

should be doing. 

 

So you can't stand there and say that we have more people 

interested in education and say that that's wrong. No, you can't 

say that. You've got to say that it's right that they are interested 

and that we're expanding facilities throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 

claims falsely that he's increased technical school education in 

rural Saskatchewan. He knows the net effect of his policies has 

been to reduce at least 1,200 student positions in this province 

at the technical schools. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the Premier a 

specific question with respect to cuts in health care training 

positions at the technical institutes, and specifically at Kelsey. 

And I want to ask him: in light of the former comments that 

were made by the Minister of Health in this question period, 

will he now admit to the young people of Saskatchewan that the 

reason that his government cut back on diploma nursing 

training at Kelsey was because you were cutting funds to 

Saskatchewan hospitals and hiring less nurses? 

 

Will you admit that the reason that you cut back on the program 

for certified nursing assistants and abolished it at Kelsey was 

because you're cutting back on rehabilitation services in this 

province and you're underfeeding home care? 

 

And will you admit, Mr. Premier, again, that the reason that you 

cut the dental therapist program at Wascana and the dental 

assistant training program at Kelsey is because you were 

eliminating the school-based dental care plan; in other words, 

your cuts in health care training are directly related to your 

undermining of medicare in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps what I could offer 

to do is take the hon. member on a tour of the new facilities in 

the province of Saskatchewan. The hon. members knows, Mr. 

Speaker, that we built — we built — the brand-new technical 

institute in northern Saskatchewan in Prince Albert. We built 

that. And the people asked it. They wouldn't build it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. The Premier is attempting to answer the question. 

It was a fairly long supplementary, unfortunately, but we did 

allow it because the member seemed very, very interested in 

getting his points across. However, now I think it's only fair we 

allow the Premier to answer the supplementary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very 

much. I could just say to the hon. member: he knows, and he 

should at least be fair to the public, to identify the new 

educational institutions, the new rehab centre — I could take 

you across Regina and show you that; you won't admit that in 

fact it's being built; you didn't build it — the new technical 

school, the new spaces. 

 

And with respect to changes in education, you know, people 

like you, in all fairness, can say no, we'll never change the way 

we teach; we will never keep up with the rest of the world; we'll 

just stay in the status quo. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows, he knows in 

his own heart, that the education has to be adapted to the global 

village and the things that are going on. We know that; you 

know that. But you don't have the courage, the political 

courage, to stand up in front of your constituents and others 

here and say: no, we have to make some changes; we have to 

make sure that Canadians can compete with Americans; 

Canadians can compete with the Japanese. 

 

And you're afraid, politically, to stand up and say that we need 

that those kinds of changes. We built technical institutions; 

we've expanded the university; we've got a new College of 

Agriculture; we've built a brand new rehab centre here. And you 

even deny yourself the right, and your constituents', even, to 

acknowledge the improvements and changes that are necessary 

right across Canada and led by the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new question to 

the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Yes, Mr. Premier, we are committed 

to preparing for training for the year 2000, but in consultation 

with faculty in the technical institutes, not in the absence of that 

consultation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And if you're suggesting we don't need health 

care training for the year 2000, then you ought to go and try 

getting elected in some other province other than Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Now my new question to the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, relates to waiting lists at Wascana technical institute. 

Mr. Premier, are you aware that just over 1,500 qualified 

students were denied entry to Wascana institute for training this 

fall? And in addition, Mr. Premier, are you aware that another 

972 young people are on a waiting list for entry to 

competency-based education on continuous entry programs at 

Wascana Institute? 

 

You eliminated 300 student positions at Wascana this fall; you 

fired 39 instructors; you forced nine more to take early 

retirement. I ask you, Mr. Premier: how do you justify those 

cuts to nearly 2,500 young people who are on waiting lists at 

Wascana as a result of your policies? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2598 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, these . . . The member 

opposite would still be asking instructors to teach blacksmithing 

because he'd be afraid to change. We heard the very same 

arguments; we heard the very same arguments when they 

invented the sewing machine, Mr. Speaker. Women . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. Order. Order. Order. Order. I ask all members in the 

House to please allow the Premier to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, when I reminded the hon. 

member that we have built many new institutions and our 

budget for education is much larger than theirs, then he shifted 

to the question, well, we don't consult. Well where do you think 

the minister is today? Where was he? He was on the front page 

of the Ottawa Citizen last week, Mr. Speaker, consulting with 

people, faculties, people all across the country and all across the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So he can't . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I could ask the Minister of 

Education to give a report on the consultations and the meetings 

he's had, not only in Saskatchewan, not only with students, not 

only with institutions but right across Canada — right across 

the country. And that's what he's doing. So you can't get it on 

money spent on education; you can't get it on facilities; and you 

can't get it hiding behind the fact that you're afraid to change. 

Some instructors and some courses have to be adapted, but you 

won't admit that. You know that in your heart that it's true, but 

you stand there hypocritically and say, don't change this, don't 

change that. 

 

It's the same position you've got on potash, the same position 

you've got on trade, the same position you've got on industrial 

development and diversification. You don't want to build, you 

don't want to build, you don't have the courage to build. You'll 

go and nationalize, you'll buy, you'll take over the whole world. 

And you'll stand up there and say, but don't change anything. 

 

I'll tell you what you do. When you want to talk about education 

. . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member for 

Saskatoon Fairview is now attempting to ask a question but is 

having difficulty. 

 

Resignation of Chairman of Crown Management Board 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 

the Premier. On August 25 of this year an action was 

commenced in the Supreme Court of Alberta by the liquidation 

of the Canadian Commercial Bank, and the action was against a 

number of people for damages which approached $300 million. 

One of the defendants is a Graham Walker, who I understand 

until recently was the chairman of the Crown Management 

Board, and who was a member of the board of directors of the 

potash corporation and Saskoil, and who resigned from the 

service of this government three days after that action was  

commenced. 

 

My question, Mr. Premier, is: when did you become aware that 

Mr. Walker was going to be, or was, a defendant in this action, 

and did this fact have anything to do with his sudden 

resignation which, as I say, took place three days after the 

action was commenced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I was made aware of the 

event today, and I can say to the hon. member that Mr. Walker's 

move from the CMB (Crown Management Board of 

Saskatchewan) had nothing at all to do with this news that I had 

today. 

 

And I can say, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Walker resigned on the 

board of directors of the financial institution in 1983, and it was 

doing quite fine at that time. He was appointed chairman of the 

board in 1985, CMB, I mean, long after that. And as you know 

yourself, being a legal professional, that in a shotgun approach 

where they're going after everybody, they'll pick any single 

individual that they can that has been associated with the 

financial institution, has been associated with in the past. 

 

So Mr. Walker resigned as a board member a long time ago — 

1983. He was appointed CMB chairman in 1985, and it's not 

connected in any fashion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — A new question to the Premier on the same 

subject, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Walker was, I think, the prime 

architect of your government's privatization strategies and was 

also a chief financial adviser to the government. Now, Mr. 

Premier, the allegations made in this statement of claim are 

quite serious. They're serious, particularly as regards the 

directors of the bank of which Mr. Walker was one for many 

years. 

 

And my question to you is this: in light of this action, do you 

feel an obligation, or do you not feel an obligation, in the 

interests of Saskatchewan taxpayers to review the work of Mr. 

Walker while he's been in the employment of this government; 

to review the financial advice he's given; and to review the 

advice that he's given to you on the subject of privatization, 

having regard to these very, very serious allegations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say without any 

hesitation that it's disappointing to listen to the opposition pick 

on Saskatchewan business men and women time and time and 

time again. 

 

Graham Walker initiated a company in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It's now a national company, Pemberton 

Houston Willoughby — deserves credit, deserves credit for 

helping to build this institution locally as well as nationally. 

And they pick on him. 

 

They pick on every single solitary business man. I hope you've 

the courage to say those kinds of things outside the House. All 

right, I mean, why are you against business men all the time? 

You're against business; you nationalize business. Do I have to 

go through the whole  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2599 

 

rhetoric all the time about your attitude towards business? If 

you want to know our attitude towards people like Graham 

Walker, you could have attended the open for business 

conference in Saskatoon this weekend, which was world class. 

 

We invite them here, we encourage them to invest and build, 

and you draw their names in front of the legislature like you're 

some sort of self-righteous saints against every single solitary 

individual that wants to build. Mr. Walker probably doesn't 

want to nationalize companies, he wants to build. And frankly, 

Mr. Speaker, I'll say finally that we design the policies here, 

whether it's public participation or privatization, and nobody 

else. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary. Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Premier, you're not being fair. I didn't sue Mr. Walker. I 

didn't make any allegation against him in this House. I simply 

asked if you were . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order, 

please. Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. I know I 

wasn't able to hear the member from Saskatoon Fairview. I'm 

not sure if the Premier was; maybe he's a little closer. But I 

think we should give the man an opportunity to ask the question 

so we can hear. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I didn't sue Mr. 

Walker; I didn't make any allegations against him. I simply 

asked if you were going to review his decisions in light of the 

serious allegations made in this action. 

 

Now I know he's a member of the board of directors of Saskoil, 

and I haven't seen any information as to his resignation from 

that board. Does he remain a member of the board of directors 

of Saskoil, and if so, are you expecting a resignation from that 

board? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly the hon. 

member is taking the allegations as true, and he's smearing the 

man's name all over. He's prejudging the whole issue, and it's 

not fair at all. 

 

I mean, all he's trying to do is grandstand. He wants to be 

concerned about the law, about human rights, about respect for 

individuals, and he's standing there, I say, Mr. Speaker, quite 

hypocritical, and taking all these allegations as true, asking us 

to fire the individual, take him off the board. He's judging the 

man from his seat right now. That's not fair. It's not 

professional. It's highly political. It's very partisan. And frankly, 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn't belong in this Assembly, and the hon. 

member should know better. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Congratulations to Team Canada 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I think we 

should all calm down now. We've had an interesting question 

period where we've had a chance to perhaps let off a little 

steam, but I think now we should give the Premier an 

opportunity to make his ministerial statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Just a very brief statement. I'm sure all 

members will agree, and it is simply, Mr. Speaker, a 

congratulations to Team Canada last night for winning the 

Canada Cup. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — We know, Mr. Speaker, that the 

three-game final series between the two best teams in the world 

prove to be a display of some of the best hockey ever played in 

this country, or indeed across the globe. It was certainly 

reminiscent of the first real series between these two teams in 

1972, and it will undoubtedly be one of the most . . . memories 

in the country's proud hockey history. 

 

This was the fourth Canada Cup series, Mr. Speaker, and 

Canada has won three out of four. Because of the closeness of 

the match, it was indeed a sweet victory for all Canadians. The 

only Saskatchewan player on the team was Brian Propp, who 

was originally from Neudorf, Saskatchewan, and we 

congratulate him very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The results of these efforts, Mr. Speaker, 

fill the sports pages throughout the country today and, indeed, 

the world. I can say when I was in New York talking at the 

potash meetings, the hockey game was on the televisions 

throughout the hotel, and in fact people in 16 to 18 different 

countries have watched this series. 

 

It is a reminder to all of us of the all-out effort that produces the 

desired results — what a little competition can do and what a 

little professionalism can do. Mr. Speaker, people everywhere 

across Saskatchewan and across the country are a little bit 

prouder today of the fact that they are Canadians. Our hats are 

off to Team Canada. We congratulate you all. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 

with the Premier in extending our congratulations to Team 

Canada. Some may have noticed that I failed to attend the 

hearings . . . the proceedings of this House last night, and 

therefore caught the whole game. I thought the hockey was 

excellent, first class, obviously — world class. I thought Brad 

Park did an excellent job as a colour commentator and a 

somewhat better job than the Premier does as a colour 

commentator. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I thought on the whole, Mr. 

Speaker, it was an excellent, co-operative effort on the part of 

all the members of Team Canada who came  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2600 

 

together in a co-operative spirit, working together, and spoke up 

for Canada and defeated the Soviet Union in three closely 

fought games: 5-6; 6-5; 6-5, as they say in tennis. And I know 

that we would all want to join with the Premier in 

congratulating Team Canada and congratulating Brian Propp, 

and I want to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who were you cheering for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Oh, I was cheering for Brian Propp. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I still prefer Brad Park. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in closing, 

that I want to extend our particular congratulations to Brian 

Propp and the family of Brian Propp, the father of whom lives 

in the constituency of my colleague, the member for Regina 

North West, and we are very proud of Brian and all the 

members of Team Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Business Opportunities Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the 

House about a very successful event which was organized by 

the Government of Saskatchewan, Department of Tourism, 

Small Business and Co-operatives that occurred this past 

weekend in Saskatoon. It was the Business Opportunities 

Saskatchewan, a market-place which brought together 

companies from all across Canada who were interested in 

locating or expanding their businesses in the Saskatchewan 

market with people from Saskatchewan who are interested in 

investing in these business opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Business Opportunities Saskatchewan was a 

success even before the doors opened. Exhibitor space was sold 

out well before the show, and in fact some original exhibitors 

were so successful that they sold all their opportunities in 

advance of the show. 

 

But that's only the beginning of the success story, Mr. Speaker. 

We had 124 exhibitors at the market-place itself, offering a 

broad range of franchises, dealer distributors, retail and 

manufacturing opportunities. We had the participation of 

approximately 6,400 Saskatchewan people searching for the 

business opportunity that was right for them. 

 

Exhibitor after exhibitor told us how impressed they were with 

the entrepreneurial spirit displayed by the people of 

Saskatchewan who visited their booth. They commented that 

the people who came to the show ere not just passive lookers, 

but were seriously interested in pursuing and negotiating 

business opportunities. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the real success of the market-place was in 

the business activity that occurred. I am happy to report that 

Saskatchewan will see immediate results in terms of both new 

businesses and expansion of existing businesses to include new 

product lines. We estimate that as many as 300 new businesses 

could be started in communities across Saskatchewan as a result 

of the show. 

 

I want to congratulate the people of Saskatchewan for the 

entrepreneurial spirit they displayed. For it is that spirit, coupled 

with the new business enterprises, that will help build a stronger 

and a more diversified Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

certainly hope that . . . in the minister's closing remarks, that he 

indicated that as many as 300 new businesses could be started 

in Saskatchewan as a result of the show. And I want to indicate 

that I certainly hope that that is the case. Given the fact of the 

number of small businesses that have gone bankrupt in 

Saskatchewan in the last two years, I think 300 wouldn't be 

enough to compensate for six months of the ones we've lost. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the new Messiah seems to be tourism, and we 

welcome that because there has to be some kind of initiative. 

It's clear that their open-for-business philosophy flopped. And 

so we're waiting for something that this government will do for 

the business community of this province that will finally work. 

 

The economic conditions that they've created in this province 

have not been conducive to new businesses opening, and I think 

that statistics in this province show that that is very clear. We 

are wanting to see in this province, a business climate where 

Saskatchewan people can invest and grow in their business lives 

in this province, as opposed to the kind of open for business that 

they've given us — the Pocklingtons, the Weyerhaeuser’s, the 

give-aways of Manalta Coal to an Alberta firm. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we're hoping that this Saskatchewan 

opportunities business conference will have been a success. The 

member from Saskatoon Centre was there. I was unable to 

attend this weekend because of other commitments. And we on 

this side of the House are certainly hoping that the 300 

businesses you're promising us here today will, in fact, pen in 

this province, but given your past record I'm hesitant to believe 

what you say. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders 

of the day, I rise to inform the Assembly of the passing away 

last night of Niles Buchanan, a former member of the 

Legislative Assembly for Notukeu-Willowbunch. I am told that 

the funeral has been scheduled for 2 p.m. on Monday, 

September 21, at  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2601 

 

Helmsing's Funeral Home in Regina. And I understand that 

there will be an opportunity in a few days for the Assembly to 

express condolences in a more formal way. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Before orders of the day, I 

would like to lay on the Table a petition by 70 residents of 

Regina Centre — I would add for the benefit of the member 

from Melville, most of whom are employed — who urge the 

government, who urge the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

not to discontinue Lorne and 4th Avenue drugs as a collection 

agent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. speaker: — Order, please. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 20 — An Act to 

amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 20, The 

Act to amend the Superannuation Act, is a Bill which ash some 

attributes and some disadvantages from our point of view. And 

we see it as a Bill which provides many with an option for early 

retirement within the civil service. The program that was 

announced in March, I believe, was a program that was 

encouraging to many who wished to have early retirement as 

employees — long-term employees of the government. 

 

One of the reasons I think this is an attribute is because our 

party has long supported programs which in effect provide 

individuals with an option to voluntarily retire at an early age. 

At first blush I think the second attribute, from the government's 

point of view, is that it reduces the number of employees that 

the government has on staff, and at first blush that's an attribute 

because it appears that it will save the government some money 

in terms of salaries and benefits from the day the retirement 

took place, forward. 

 

The Bill does create a little bit of problems because it has some 

disadvantages, and some of the major disadvantages is that we 

do not know the cost of the Bill. We don't know whether it's 

going to be a direct cost to the treasury, whether the 

superannuation fund is in jeopardy of being expended far in 

advance of its projected expenditure date. We don't know 

whether it's going to cost the government and the taxpayers of 

this province 6 million, 8 million, 10 million or $20 million a 

year or more. We just don't know that and we're hoping to get 

that information in committee. 

 

The other disadvantage of the Bill is that for some  

employees it was helpful because they wanted to retire, and 

offers that were made to individuals to retire under this plan 

were offers that were welcomed. However, some were strongly 

encouraged to take it with some suggestions that if they didn't 

take early retirement, they were be terminated. And of course, 

what happened is, indeed, that some people that were eligible 

who opted not to take the retirement package because of many 

reasons, one of the reasons being they had other dependants, 

they were still quite happy with their job and wanted to work 

for the next 10 or 15 years before they reached the natural 

retirement age. They were, I think, at a disadvantage because of 

this Bill. 

 

So the problem we have in that regard is that it was not a 

voluntary opportunity for many people but, in fact, for some it 

was a forced retirement. In that regard it was not a universal 

plan in the sense that it wasn't a longer term offer to employees 

who may be eligible not just in the month that it was offered, 

but perhaps throughout the calendar year. Also, it wasn't 

universal to all employees of the government which included 

Crown employees and in various agencies. 

 

Another disadvantage which I see is that — and maybe it's more 

of a long-term thing, but certainly it has its immediate effects 

— and that is the fact that many employees who took early 

retirement were contributing a great deal to this province. They 

were employed in a number of provincial government 

departments which provided services which were very 

important. 

 

For example, Consumer and Commercial Affairs witnessed 15 

people retiring, and that’s a bit of a concern because we've seen 

through the Principal Trust affair that there was not a lot of 

scrutiny on the government's part with regard to Principal Trust 

because many employees were being retired or terminated. And 

as a result, many people in this province were hurt who were 

not being retired under the superannuation plan. 

 

Another major problem with regard to the civil service is that 

when you retire a fair chunk of experienced people, a fair 

number of experienced people, and well-educated people, not 

only do services become watered down and services become 

gutted, but in effect, services to the people that they were 

designed to help are not helping those people. For example, my 

colleague from Saskatoon in question period today talked about 

the cuts in education — 100 people were retied under that early 

retirement plan and we've lost a lot of professionals as a result 

. . . 

 

An. Hon. Member: — Thirty-seven. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thirty-seven were retired? I'm talking about 

education and continuing education and others. The figures I 

have here are 100, and that is a concern because we've lost a lot 

of professionals. If some of those professionals were being 

replaced by other professionals, we wouldn't see the destruction 

of some of the programs that were offered. 

 

Another example, of course, is the Medical Care Insurance 

Commission where we've seen 15 people retire early. As a 

result of that kind of major reduction in  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2602 

 

staff of experienced people, we see medicare being weakened as 

well. For example, doctors' and physicians' payments under the 

medicare scheme have been delayed to points where many 

doctors are being hurt as a result. 

 

(1445) 

 

So there's many concerns in the civil service with regard to that. 

And I would maintain that the programs such as health 

programs and education programs and other programs that were 

created to protect citizens of this province may be weakened 

and cut back as a result of these early retirements. 

 

The other problem I see is that when people take early 

retirement they are subjected to making decisions about 

whether they stay in the province and whether they leave the 

province. If we have a large number of people retiring at any 

particular time in this province, many people leave the province 

and as a result of that, businesses lose potential and existing 

customers. So that the money that is spent on the pensions and 

the money, the consumer dollars that are spent in the economy 

by the pensioners, go to other jurisdictions in Canada and 

outside of Canada. That of course has a very modest effect, but 

it does have a modest negative effect in terms of businesses in 

this province and therefore our economy. 

 

So as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, I will look forward to the 

questioning in committee as we get to it. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I don't intend to add to the 

comments made by the member for Regina North West, and put 

as articulately as they are. 

 

I simply want to echo the concern that the changes which are 

being made are, I think, relatively expensive. I think they're not 

being funded out of current revenues but the pension fund is 

being raided for it. 

 

I simply want to warn the minister that when this reaches 

committee of the whole, we're going to want to know the cost of 

this. I put him on warning now that he should come with that 

information. It's information we are entitled to and the public 

should have before this Bill is passed. 

 

So I simply rise in my place to warn him these questions will be 

asked, and I would like to have the information here. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do not want to 

prolong this debate. I agree with everything that my two 

colleagues have said before me. I want to make one other point 

here for the record in that, although I think it is fair that people 

who take early retirement should be provided the appropriate 

kind of benefits, it is widely and clearly known throughout this 

province that they methods that were employed by this 

government in causing people to take early retirement were 

somewhat less than appropriate. 

 

Now there are countless numbers of people who have taken 

early retirement not because they thought that they  

wanted to — although there are some who welcomed it — but 

many hundreds who took early retirement because the 

government representatives made it very clear to them that 

either they take early retirement or they may end up not having 

a job down the road at some point in time. 

 

And I personally, Mr. Speaker, as I know many others, object to 

that kind of threatening approach by any government. In fact I 

object to that kind of approach by any employer. But I think it's 

particularly bad when a government in whom the public has put 

its trust treats its employees who have provided many years of 

service in that kind of manner. I wanted to put that on the 

record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that there are many people out there who wish they 

could put it on the record. But like many other citizens in 

Saskatchewan these days, they don't have a voice; they don't 

have a voice except the one that's provided through them by the 

opposition in this House, because the government is not giving 

them the opportunity to speak to them, and is not giving them 

the opportunity to be able to voice their concerns. Because as 

the Premier has shown, and as the members of the treasury 

board have shown, they have busily barricaded themselves 

away behind security systems, multitudes of security systems, 

and other kinds of insulation’s so that the people can no longer 

get to them. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 14 — An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

Superannuation Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I'm just going to 

address a very few words on this. Others of my caucus want to 

make some comments as well. I indicated when this matter was 

dealt with, it must be close to a month ago now, that I had 

concerns about this Bill. It gave the management of SaskTel an 

unrestricted discretion to terminate the services of employees 

without reference to collective bargaining agreements, without 

reference to the normal rights which are considered to be 

attached to any employment that a person has. 

 

This Bill appears to cut through the collective bargaining 

agreement the rights which the courts have developed for 

employees, to give them no rights at all except what the 

government gives them. 

 

In the month I've had to look at, my concerns have not been 

mollified at all. I had brought to my attention a copy of the Sask 

Power Bill. The provisions in Sask Power looked at one point in 

time to be similar. I see now it is not. It is very different. The 

provision in the Sask Power Bill provides that where a person is 

unable, for physical reasons to perform his employment, that he 

may be terminated. This just says . . . this contains no such 

qualification. Management could presumably terminate him 

because they didn't like the hang of his clothes. 

 

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2603 

 

Given the record of the management over there and their 

constant ongoing warfare with their employees, I have very, 

very grave concerns about this. I don't want to prolong it, Mr. 

Speaker, I do ask the minister in closing to deal with this 

question of why he felt it was necessary to have such an 

unrestricted power. 

 

There would have been a time, Mr. Speaker, when I wouldn't 

have been as concerned about this. For decades the relationship 

between the employees of SaskTel and the management of 

SaskTel was as good as any in the country. I would go through 

my constituency time after time. I would meet employees from 

SaskTel. They were happy working with SaskTel. The moral 

was good. They wanted to stay at SaskTel, and most of them 

planned to spend their whole working life at SaskTel. 

 

In the last couple of years that has changed entirely. The morale 

is terrible. There is constant bickering. The management are 

intent, for whatever reason, in weeding out many of the able 

people, promoting some of those who aren't, and that company 

has some very serious employee problems. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, became apparent when there was a strike there this 

spring. There have been very, very few strikes in telephone 

companies in Canada. I'm told there have only been three or 

four. It is most unusual. 

 

It came about not because they were . . . I think not just because 

they were concerned about the issues which were on the 

bargaining table, but because the employee morale over there is 

just awful. That comes about because of the way, largely 

because of the way management has approached them. I don't 

trust management at SaskTel with these broad, sweeping 

powers; I know full well the employees don't, Mr. Speaker. And 

that' why we're as concerned about it. With that I take my chair, 

and I ask the minister to deal with these questions when he 

closes debate. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to speak on 

this Bill 14 as well, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Superannuation Act. I have in the 

constituency of Regina North West, Mr. Speaker, somewhere in 

the vicinity of about 300 families who are employed by 

SaskTel. I have found, having visited many of them on the 

doorsteps, during the calendar year 1986 and a few of them 

since '86, that the employees at SaskTel are absolutely different 

from when I used to work at the corporation. 

 

I used to be employed at that corporation back in 1979, and at 

that time the morale, Mr. Speaker, was good. People were 

proud of the corporation. They got along well with 

management. There were never any labour disputes, were not 

any labour disputes from the early '50s, I believe, right through 

until this government got elected. And they were very happy 

with the type of work that they did and they were very happy 

with the type of distant governing that the governments of the 

day, including on Ross Thatcher's government, were involved 

with respect to the corporation. 

 

What has happened since with many of these employees, and 

almost all of them that I spoke with is that (a) they are 

absolutely different in terms of their morale; the feel that  

going to work is a real chore; they feel they don't know what's 

going to happen at work from day to day because there's a lack 

of leadership and certainly there's a great deal of fear because of 

what the government of the day has done regarding SaskTel. 

They've made an effort to really weaken the corporation. 

There's been rumours about privatizing it and so on. 

 

But what this Bill does, Mr. Speaker — and I guess I'm getting 

to the point of the Bill, and my position with regard to the 

debate is that it has some shortcomings. As my colleague from 

Regina Centre indicated and I concur with, this amendment 

really cuts into the collective bargaining process and it's another 

heavy-handed government move to make arbitrary decisions 

with respect to Crown corporations. 

 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, have always operated with a 

fair amount of autonomy. They've had separate wage scales, 

separate merit packages, separate personnel departments, and 

were tied in through the minister — a couple ministers being 

involved with the board — so that they could be tied into the 

government of the day. 

 

And this is another example, Mr. Speaker, in my view, of the 

government of the day — this so-called Conservative 

government — wearing their jackboots into the Crown 

corporations and telling people what to do when they're 

ignorant of the objectives and the mission of the corporation. 

And in my view, Mr. Speaker, I find that quite distasteful. 

 

So I must rise in this debate and voice my support for the 

employees of SaskTel, both within the union and out of scope, 

and certainly join with my colleagues in taking a position 

against this amendment. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

feel compelled to join the debate on this Bill. I think it's an 

unfair piece of legislation. I think it shows no respect for the 

professionalism that the civil servants of this province have 

shown. I think it also sets a situation where there will be no 

future for anyone in a Crown corporation. If this carries on 

throughout the rest of the government departments and through 

the Crown corporations there will be no future for a new 

employee joining this Crown corporation especially, because 

there won't be any long-term future. Not that people that are 

employed under a Crown corporation expect to start there when 

they're 18 and retire whenever the times does come, the age of 

retirement. I don't believe that to be the case. I think a lot of 

employees move on. They like new challenges. 

 

But I think what we're doing is creating a situation where 

management can arbitrarily unload any employee for whatever 

particular reason. I think it's a very unhealthy piece of 

legislation. I wonder, should there not be some input from the 

employees themselves as to whether or not they would like to 

take an early retirement package. I don't see that as being part of 

this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to suggest today that what this government 

is doing is setting up SaskTel for privatization. I believe this 

government's motives are to get rid of as many employees to 

allow — if it's an outright  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2604 

 

sale of this corporation — to allow for new management to 

bring in their own people and at the expense of those who have 

served SaskTel very faithfully for many, many years. And I 

want to look for a moment, if we can, at what these employees 

have helped to create with SaskTel. 

 

(1500) 

 

In 1986 this corporation netted a profit of some $35.6 million. 

In the last three years, even under this administration with the 

record of losing money through Crown corporations that they 

have, that corporation has delivered over $109 million to the 

provincial coffers. 

 

The people in Saskatchewan are blessed with the lowest 

telephone rates in Canada. The rates have been stable, and rates 

that I think the people who work in the corporation should be 

very proud of being able to deliver to the people of this 

province. I say the rates have been stable, Mr. Speaker, with the 

exception of one area — and it's bothered me for a long time — 

I speak of the increase of about 150 per cent to the pay phones. 

And to me what it does is it shows a lack of caring for a lot of 

young people in this province. I guess I would want to just 

relate the kid that would go to the corner store and want to 

phone home to mom. Can't carry a dime any more; that little 

person now carries a quarter; or in 40 below in southern 

Saskatchewan, the kid that phones home from the skating rink 

because there's a blizzard outside and says, mom, I need a ride 

home. He can't do it with a dime any more; he's got to pay a 

quarter. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, this is a slap in the face of the government 

employees, the people that work for SaskTel. I think it's unfair, 

and it's the kind of legislation that I think the people of this 

province can well do without. The number of people whose 

lives have been affected adversely by the actions of this 

government are growing and growing and growing, and I fear, 

Mr. Speaker, that this is just another move to hammer the 

people, the working people of this province. 

 

And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I cannot for any reason 

support this legislation. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, will join my 

colleagues, the member for Regina Centre who spoke earlier on 

this Bill, and my colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake in 

opposing the Bill, Bill 14, which is proposed. 

 

The essence of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to give the corporation, 

SaskTel, the power to retire any employee, at the option of the 

corporation, any employee who has served 15 years 

continuously. 

 

Now it gives it quite arbitrary power, and that is the substance 

that needs to be opposed in this respect. It needs to be opposed 

on behalf of the workers themselves who will be affected, Mr. 

Speaker, and needs to be opposed on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan because it will . . . I believe it to be a preliminary 

step to be setting up for the sale of this corporation, as my 

colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake has mentioned. 

 

Now I think if the members opposite, and if the minister  

had checked it out with the workers, he would have received the 

answers, the answer that they fear the writing of the way the 

legislation is worded. Because what it does is it gives the 

corporation the complete option, without necessarily having to 

consult, the option of retiring any employee who's been in there 

for 16 years and up. 

 

Anybody that's been employed 12, 13, 14 years will look to this 

legislation as being threatening, because once they received 

their 15th year of service, they can then be very easily faced 

with an ultimatum, an ultimatum of: you retire, or we may find 

other ways of getting rid of you. And that would be based on 

their experience of having experienced sort of a climate of fear 

in the corporations over the last several years. 

 

Now this can happen; the type of decision to force somebody 

into an early retirement could happen, Mr. Speaker, due to 

political reasons, or it also could happen due to personality 

conflicts. And it is my strong feeling that any type of legislation 

of this type should have mutual agreement for any type of early 

retirement. After 15 years it may be quite wise for some people 

to retire, but they should only be able to do it with mutual 

agreement. 

 

So I'm saying that this Bill does not exactly give somebody 

ironclad job security. As a matter of fact, it makes them about 

as secure as a tired flag-pole sitter on a windy day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I mentioned earlier that I believe that this is a preliminary step 

in setting this corporation up for sale. As my colleague from 

Prince Albert-Duck Lake mentioned, it would be very easy now 

for anybody in management to unload personnel that they might 

not want, or personnel in senior positions, on behalf of a 

prospective buyer or on behalf of the corporation itself. 

 

I oppose the setting up of this Crown for sale, because I believe 

that it had done a very successful job for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And we've seen what happens when a 

corporation like this is privatized. There's the British experience 

that I can point towards, and the press has carried several 

articles of what's happened in Great Britain when they 

privatized the British telecom service. The net experience of the 

people of Great Britain has been that the costs certainly have 

not gone down, and the service has deteriorated. 

 

Now I talk about this as a possibility because there are other 

things that are happening in the corporation right now, Mr. 

Speaker, that make it look like it's being set up ultimately for 

sale. The corporation is now being divided internally into two 

corporations or two organizations, one which is known as the 

seven-up group and the other is known as the six-and-under. 

 

This seven-up group which is also called NEWCO 2, new 

company 2, is the group which is now being given the 

responsibility for handling all of those services to customers 

who have seven phones or more installed, and this includes all 

of those companies which have put in . . . companies with major 

networks, major telephone networks like Sask Power or the 

credit union and Social Services, those which are the most 

lucrative and those  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2605 

 

whose money can be used to help and put in the individual 

telephones that are now being put into rural Saskatchewan and 

to reach into the distant and more remote areas in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I'm saying, Mr. Speaker, that this corporation, which appears 

to be being set up for sale, really doesn't need for kind of fixing. 

As a matter of fact, it's working so well and I hate to see it be 

subject to some cockamamy or cock-eyed, impractical 

doctrinaire idea that it should be privatized or set up for sale. It 

seems that any time the government opposite has latched on to a 

program that was set up by the NDP and it's actually working it, 

that they want to set it up and scuttle it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for those two reasons, for the reasons that the 

workers . . . the effect it's going to have on the workers, that 

they will not have the right of mutual agreement before 

retirement, and also because I believe it's being set up for sale, I 

will be opposing this Bill. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, rise to oppose 

this amendment to the Bill. Particularly because of my interest 

and my connection with a whole group of workers in the 

SaskTel corporation that are mainly women, who work in what 

is basically the ghetto-ized area of work, and I'm talking 

particularly about the telephone operators. 

 

I got to know many of them when I belonged to a group of 

women called women concerned about technology, looking at 

the implication of the implementation of the high-tech industry 

into SaskTel. And I discovered in the course of my friendship 

with these many women, the amount of stress and the amount 

of change that they were experiencing in their work place as 

their work place became computerized. 

 

And it's one reason why I am very concerned about the 

unthinking boosterism of high tech that this government is all 

about. Because high tech must be put in carefully and with a 

very human base to it where people are the focus of attention 

and concern, so that they don't become smashed by the way in 

which this new technology can operation. And when I see a 

section of a Bill that says: 

 

Where the corporation is of the opinion that an employee is 

not able to meet the requirements of his employment (and I 

assume that means her employment as well) and the 

employee has served (for) at least 15 years continuously . . . 

the employee may be retied at the option of the corporation 

. . .  

 

Those are very ominous words to many women who are 

working as telephone operators, I'm sure, because what it means 

is that the corporation is going to define how they will be 

employed and what stress they can work under and what 

work-load they will carry. And if they can't do it, and if they 

burn out as many of them are doing, they will be out on their 

retirement . . . early retirement and out on the streets looking for 

other work. 

 

And I have in Saskatoon Centre some many women, as I've said 

in this House before, who have been forced out of their work 

place by high tech, women who are 30, 40,  

50, 60 years old, not yet to retirement by any means in terms of 

their pension plans from CPP or the old age pension, but 

women who no longer have any work. 

 

If you take a woman who's been hired on as a telephone 

operator at the age of 20, she can be retired at 35. She can be 

burned out by the demand from the corporation that she handle 

many, many calls, one after the other, within a certain amount 

of time. And if the stress of that work-load does her in, too bad. 

With this kind of legislation it's the law that she's out. And there 

she is, looking for other work. 

 

There's no voluntary requirement here for her to be able to say 

that she wants to stay on in the work. The corporation makes all 

the decisions. It's not negotiated in a contract. And once they're 

out, even if they're members of the union, I am afraid, and I'm 

deeply concerned, that there will be very little protection for 

them in grieving a forced retirement. 

 

I speak passionately about what's happening to women because 

women are being abused by this government in so many ways: 

through the failure of the education system to continue to 

support the programs that they need to get the training; through 

the way in which they've been tossed out of work by 

dismantling of the dental plan, and we've listed many of those 

examples in this House. 

 

And here's another possible and very likely attack on a group of 

people who are doing a super job, and yet the stress and the 

level of the work-load that's put on them is increasing and 

increasing. And everything that they do now as telephone 

operators is monitored, and if they can't keep up to the pace of 

dealing with the calls as they come in and giving the 

information out, they are going to be considered by the 

corporation to be redundant. 

 

Now what can they do then when they're out of work? And I 

would like to speak briefly about this because it is another 

example of why I feel we must defend these work places for 

women with every ounce of strength that we have, because this 

kind of work has been important to women for a long time, and 

it's not good enough to say that people like that can work for 15 

years and be out on their ear. 

 

I went to the small business fair that we heard the Minister of 

Tourism and Small Business boast about just a few minutes ago 

in the House. And one of the businesses that's going to be 

available for people to buy a franchise for here in the province 

of Saskatchewan, and actually it's a business that's already in 

Saskatchewan, is something called Molly Maid and another 

business called MiniMaid. And these two franchises provide 

opportunities for women to be able to go out and clean other 

people's toilet bowls under a franchised arrangement on 

minimum wage. 

 

And I spoke to the people who were promoting these two 

businesses, as one of the two businesses that this government 

wants to boast about bringing into the province, and I heard 

they say things like this: a good franchise. One of them costs 

$16,900, the other costs $11,000 to buy into it. Good franchise 

for working women because they can work those businesses out 

of  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2606 

 

their own homes and they can look after their children at the 

same time. Great opportunities for women to do that kind of 

work if they've got the $16,900 to buy the franchise to start 

with. They become the boss. And what they were saying was: 

it's good to be your own boss, it's good to make your own 

decisions, and it's good to have employees under you. 

 

And I say the employees under them will be the kinds of people 

that are put out of work by this kind of legislation in regular 

work places like SaskTel, putting people out to the fringe of the 

employment world where they get picked up by people who 

want to operate these kinds of, I say, immoral franchises, 

frankly, because what they were talking about was the fact that 

the employees that they can get to do that kind of work — the 

Molly Maid and MiniMaid — are the single parents of this 

province who are desperate for work, who are often uneducated, 

and who can pick up that kind of work. 

 

(1515) 

 

And they also mentioned the people who were put out of work 

early by their other employment opportunities and are not 

considered able to be retrained because the courses cost too 

much for them to get into, and they very often have very little 

savings. 

 

And it made me very angry, frankly, that this is the kind of 

promotion of job opportunities that this government is putting 

forward to the people of Saskatchewan, because on the one 

hand you have women saying: it's nice to stay home and look 

after our children, then we can own this franchise and do this 

work, and we can employ single parents who have no child care 

for their children to go out for 40 and 50 hours a week to clean 

other people's toilet bowls. 

 

And one of the worst things about this kind of franchise is that 

it's all done on commission work, so you don't even get a 

regular wage. You get paid by the job that you do, and you get 

incentives. And some of the incentives that they're promoting 

are that the owners of the franchises buy special gifts that 

people could not afford or would not buy out of their own 

salary or their own wages and make those the incentive for a 

month's work cleaning toilets and cleaning bathrooms and 

cleaning kitchens. 

 

And they said, and I heard them say to me, as one of the 

promotions of this franchise: you hold this gift up to the 

women, and they will work hard for it because it's something 

that they will not be able to get out of their salary, and also if 

you just gave them money for doing a good job they would go 

and buy food and other things that the need, and that's not what 

we want them to do; we want them to work hard for a pittance, 

and then they can get some vase or something that the 

franchisee has been able to buy wholesale, cheap, and offer to 

them as a great gift, which if they had to pay retail for would be 

completely out of sight and probably useless. 

 

And as I say, I'm extremely angry when I see this sort of thing 

happening in this province. I think it's immoral; I think it's 

wrong. I think we've got to do a lot better in terms of 

employment for our people. I think it's very important that we 

preserve the SaskTel corporation, and  

that sections and amendments like these not be brought in. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who won the hockey game last night, 

Annie? Who won the hockey game? 

 

Ms. Smart: — I know perfectly well who won . . . Lookit! I'm 

talking about something as serious as women's employment and 

the kinds of concerns that people are up against, and those boys 

over there want to know what the score was on the hockey 

game. That's their priority. That's their priority. As they go 

about the business . . . And that was the Minister of Health who 

said that, the one that destroyed the dental plan, the one that has 

been causing those waiting lists in the hospitals and all the other 

stressful things. It's all a big joke to that government opposite. It 

is not a joke to me. 

 

I'm standing in support of the workers. I oppose this amendment 

to the Bill very strongly, and on behalf of, particularly, the 

telephone operators, I think this is dreadful legislation. It's just 

the sort of thing to expect from the government opposite, but I 

assure you it is not at all good for the workers, and I am totally 

opposed to it. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to speak on this Bill that in our estimation will do harm to the 

working people of this province. And like my colleague from 

Saskatoon Centre who spoke just before me, I too stand with 

the working people of the province in this matter. 

 

And while I'm on my feet . . . And first of all, before I speak of 

this, Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to raise the question of the 

belittling of the comments made by my colleague from 

Saskatoon Centre by the Minister of Health and other members 

of the Assembly. And it shows the kind of attitude of belittling 

of women's concerns. 

 

My colleague from Saskatoon Centre has raised concerns which 

concern working women and working men in this province. The 

members opposite have belittled those concerns. And they will 

pay for that come election time. And they can sit there and 

belittle those types of concerns all they want, but when the day 

of reckoning comes three or four years down the road, we will 

see who belittles whom. Because the working men and working 

women of this province will be belittling their efforts, because 

they know that the efforts they have carried forth on behalf of 

them deserve to be belittled because they are little, little indeed. 

 

And it's part of the kind of sexist attitude which pervades in this 

society, that whenever women speak out on issues, those who 

don't agree with those issues or those who don't understand 

those issues tend to belittle them. And I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that those of us on this side of the House do not take 

kindly to having concerns, concerns which directly affect 

working men and working women, whether they're working in 

the home or whether they're working outside the home, we don't 

think that it's in the best interests of the citizens of 

Saskatchewan to belittle those concerns, despite the fact that the 

member  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2607 

 

for Meadow Lake, the Minister of Health, may think so. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, turning to the topic at hand, which is 

Bill No. 14, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Superannuation Act, I'd like to say first of 

all that I have a great many families who work at Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications who live in the constituency of Regina 

Rosemont and who have contacted me personally in order to 

encourage me to speak on this subject. 

 

They have concerns as family members and as working people 

in Regina, and I'm sure that their colleagues throughout the 

province have the similar concerns as to the intent and as to the 

actual effect of this Bill. 

 

And there is a great deal of fear in this province as to the intent 

of this Bill. There is a great deal of fear among Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications employees as to the intent. Because they 

look back at the record of this government and the kind of 

treatment that they have had at the hands of this government, 

and they can see no good in this Bill whatsoever. They can see 

no good because the Bill is worded in such a manner that the 

prince of darkness, those who are in charge of SaskTel, can 

instruct the managers of SaskTel to carry out the kinds of reigns 

of terror that we've seen carried out, for example, in 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation in which people are 

summarily dismissed from their jobs, summarily dismissed 

from the post that they have worked at for 10 or 15 or 20 years 

and provided good service to the people of this province. And 

they feel that that kind of summary, occupational execution, if 

you like, will be visited upon them, and that this Bill provides 

the door through which the executioner, the prince of darkness, 

the member of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, will walk. 

 

And we have . . . Mr. Speaker, that may seem like high-flown 

hyperbole, but I tell you, the kind of fear and the kind of 

reaction to this Bill is surprising — because I want to make 

something clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We on this side do not oppose the concept of voluntary early 

retirement. We think, in fact, that there is a great benefit, that 

there is a great benefit, in fact, to lowering the retirement age to 

55, provided that the retirees receive full pension benefits and 

receive the kind of benefits that people need after working for 

an institution for 25 or 30 and 35 years. 

 

And we think . . . so we're not opposed by any means in 

principle to the concept of lowering the retirement age. And 

we're not opposed to the principle of lowering the retirement 

age below the age of 55 if it's necessary for people who have 

received some kind of physical incapacitation, whether through 

a progressive disease or whether through some other form of 

incapacitation. We think that the flexibility should be there in 

all enterprises, Crown corporations or private enterprises or 

whatever — that, in fact, that kind of . . . that employees receive 

that kind of a treatment on an ongoing basis and have the 

availability to be treated in that flexible manner where, in fact, 

if they're not able to perform their functions through some kind 

of physical incapacitation or mental incapacitation, that in fact 

they're able to live at a decent  

standard of living. 

 

So I want to make that clear, that we on this side of the House 

do not oppose early retirement and do not oppose those kinds of 

early retirement efforts. We don't oppose it for another very 

practical reason. 

 

We feel that early retirement may, in fact, help act as a method 

in which younger people, who are presently out of work, can 

enter into the work-force. And we think that given the situation 

in Saskatchewan where we find a whole generation which is 

becoming a lost generation leaving this province, we find, in 

fact, that the lowering of the retirement age may be a very 

practical and realistic method in order to maintain 

Saskatchewan young people here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So it's not a question of fearing change, or it's not a question of 

being against lowering the retirement age, or it's not any of 

those kind of questions that we raise this. It's a question to what 

intent the Bill is being used for, and what will be the effect, and 

what will be the effect. 

 

And that is . . . underlies all the comments of the members of 

this side of the House in regards to this Bill. And it's reduced 

itself to a very, very short phrase. It's a very short phrase that 

the member from Quill Lake just brings to me now: can the 

workers of this province trust this government? That's what this 

Bill reduces itself to. And I ask the members on this side of the 

House that question — to think about that. Can the working 

people of this province trust that government? And the answer, 

Mr. Speaker, is no. And the answer, Mr. Speaker, is no. And it's 

now just no on my say so, and it's not just no because I stand in 

political opposition to the members of the other side. 

 

It's their record, Mr. Speaker, it's their record, and it's a record 

of one which leaves working people to quake, quaking in their 

boots at the actions of this government — quaking in their boots 

whether they work at a potash mine, or whether they work at 

Sask Power, or whether they work at a coal-mine, or wherever 

they're working in the province. They've seen the record of 

treatment that working people have received at the hands of this 

government, and they have very, very good reasons to be afraid. 

 

And I'd like to refer to a letter, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

received from the representatives of the people who work in 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications in regards to that Bill, and 

it'll back up what I'm saying in terms of the kind of fear and the 

kind of trepidation that working people feel that this Bill may 

impact on their lives. 

 

And this letter . . . and it's from Mr. Jeff Smith, and he's the 

national representative of the communication workers of 

Canada, from their western region office, and I emphasize that 

— western region office — which is located at 2629 - 29th 

Avenue, Suite 102, in Regina, Saskatchewan. We're not talking 

about some big eastern union boss here; we're talking about Mr. 

Jeff Smith who lives and works here in Regina, right? — 

downtown Regina; someone who has had firsthand, a good 

glimpse at the political record of this government. 

 

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2608 

 

And Mr. Smith writes in the letter to our caucus, and he asks us, 

first of all, he says: 

 

Who Requested the Amendments? 

 

There's the question of who requested these amendments. 

 

Contrary to the minister's response (that is contrary to the 

response to the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, 

contrary to what he said, what he has been quoted as 

saying in the newspapers), the Union does not recall (that 

is the SaskTel workers there and their collective 

organization) does not recall the specific amendments 

requested by the Government. 

 

And they go on to say: 

 

We have made comments in the past concerning the 

Retirement Age be reduced to Age 55 and make the 

requirements universal that the employees could request as 

the employer could (request that type of early) retirement. 

 

So the people who work at SaskTel say that they didn't request 

this amendment; they did not request this amendment, contrary 

to what the minister said. 

 

And then they go to ask: 

 

Why the Specific Wording Change? 

 

Why, specifically, was this wording change introduced? 

 

Specifically the deletion of (and in the Bill it says) "is not 

physically or otherwise qualified," . . .  

 

The deletion of that phrase . . . and here I'm going to quote the 

words of Mr. Jeff Smith who lives in Regina. Mr. Smith said 

the deletion of that phrase: 

 

. . . conjures up fears (conjures up fears) . . . the employee 

could be requested to retire for a myriad of reasons . . .  

 

Political reasons, reasons due to technological change, and 

other reasons. And it's interesting to see that the very first word 

that Mr. Smith mentions in this is political reasons. 

 

(1530) 

 

Here we have the workers at SaskTel, who've had experience 

with this government, saying, we fear that we're going to be 

asked to give up our jobs for political reasons. And the political 

reasons are obvious, Mr. Speaker. They’re the political reasons 

that everybody in Saskatchewan knows. The political reasons 

relate to the whole concept of the introduction of patronage 

which has become rampant and ripe in the upper levels of 

Saskatchewan Tel, as it has through all the Crown corporations 

— political reasons to fire people from their jobs. 

 

And the workers at SaskTel fear — they fear the minister in  

charge of SaskTel; they fear the member for 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden. And we don't think that that's a good 

situation, Mr. Speaker, to have in our province where working 

people have to fear their elected representatives, have to fear the 

government. But here it is in black and white. They don't want 

the legislation in here because they fear they're going to get 

fired for political reasons. 

 

They go on to say, in regards to the specific word changes of 

the Bill, why delete section 16(3). And that section, 16(3), I say 

to the people of the province, is: 

 

No yearly allowance payable under this section shall be 

less than $360. 

 

And the letter goes on to say: 

 

Although the Company has stated that this has become 

superfluous. We say why not leave it in that it still 

(maintains) a minimum benchmark. 

 

I think that's a good point, Mr. Speaker. I think that's a good 

point. If I were to introduce amendments, however, I think I 

would raise that minimum bench-mark beyond the $360 a year. 

 

And I wonder from the minister whether he'd be, in fact, willing 

or not to entertain an amendment to that matter; that we could 

raise that minimum bench-mark up to a number, say, $3,000 a 

year as a minimum bench-mark which a retiree would receive. 

And that if, in fact, the removal of that bench-mark is to make 

sure . . . if as the government says it's superfluous, why not, in 

fact, introduce a bench-mark which is not superfluous, and 

which would guarantee retirees, and which would come to put 

to rest some of the fears that working people in SaskTel feel. 

 

The letter finishes, Mr. Speaker, as I shall finish. Mr. Smith 

says: 

 

We had left these questions with the Company at a 

meeting on July 21 where they stated that, "the answers 

will be forthcoming" and since we haven't heard from 

them, we would appreciate these questions being asked in 

the House. 

 

And that's why I've read the letter today, Mr. Speaker, is I want 

to put the questions to the minister in charge of Saskatchewan 

telephones; to have him on his feet; to try to get him to directly 

deal with these questions raised by the workers at SaskTel, so 

that he can either confirm their worst fears that what this Bill is, 

is nothing more than a method of opening SaskTel to the 

hatchet of the "prince of darkness", or whether in fact it actually 

does deal with the planned reorganizations of SaskTel and will 

allow the kind of humane and decent treatment to SaskTel 

workers that I know that all members, at least on this side of the 

House, want to see happen. So I lay these questions before the 

House and before the minister, Mr. Speaker, and in doing so I 

will finish my address on second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Calvert: Mr. Speaker, I too am happy to enter this debate 

around Bill 14, a Bill that proposes to amend The  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2609 

 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Superannuation Act. Mr. 

Speaker, as this Bill has been presented to this House, I see it as 

a rather imprecise Bill and, indeed, a potentially dangerous Bill. 

And since the Bill was first introduced to the House, I have 

received a number of concerns from constituents of mine, and I 

do feel it my responsibility to relate those concerns to this 

Assembly before we act on this Bill. 

 

I have in my constituency, as many members do - perhaps all 

members - men and women who are at work in the field of 

telecommunications who have chosen that field, many of them 

young men and women, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many of them 

who would wish to pursue a lifetime career in 

telecommunications, and in this province, essentially, that 

means with SaskTel. 

 

And they are looking at this piece of legislation, and what it 

says to them is that after only 15 years of service with the 

corporation, after only 15 years, at the option of the 

management of SaskTel, at the option of the corporation, at the 

whim of the corporation, they can see their career with SaskTel 

effectively ended. And that's got them concerned, and 

understandably so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the sake of illustration - if this legislation is to 

pass, and pass unamended - for the sake of illustration let's just 

say that someone began work with SaskTel at the age of 20 

years, at the age of 20. That means at the age of 35 years, 35 

years old, just when that individual may have a spouse, 

children, family, a mortgage - just at that point in his or her life, 

at the whim of SaskTel, that individual could be retired. Their 

career with SaskTel is effectively ended, and of course the 

retirement benefits are going to be pretty low at that point. And 

so I understand why these individuals are concerned about this 

legislation, for some individuals at age 35 could be retired at the 

whim of SaskTel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we could take another example - the individual, 

let's say, who is now 50 or 55 years of age who perhaps has 

already given 20, 25 years of service to the people of 

Saskatchewan through SaskTel. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they're 

now looking forward to retirement, but they know for 

retirement security they will need to work another number of 

years. They know it is impossible perhaps for them to, at age 

55, to go out and start a new career and find a new job. They 

know it may be impossible financially to survive. And so at age 

50 or 55, at the whim of SaskTel, they can be retired. 

 

And so it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, it's not much wonder that 

people are concerned about this legislation which clearly 

provides to SaskTel all of the options for early retirement, and 

that's the nub of the concern. The nub of the concern is that this 

legislation puts all of the choice in terms of early retirement in 

the hands of the corporation. It's just as clear as clear can be. 

 

Let me just read a part of the Bill. The substantive amendment 

says the new Bill would read: 

 

Where the corporation is of the opinion that an employee 

is not able to meet the requirements of his employment 

and the employee has served at least 15 years continuously 

with the corporation,  

the employee may be retired at the option of the 

corporation . . .  

 

All of the options then belong with SaskTel. Now what is so 

imprecise in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, is the grounds upon 

which the corporation may exercise this option. All that this 

legislation says is: where, in the opinion of the corporation, an 

employee is no longer able to meet the requirements of the 

work, that employee can be retired. 

 

Now that's a pretty significant change from the current 

provision which exists in legislation. Currently, Mr. Speaker, 

for SaskTel to enforce an early retirement, the corporation must 

prove any employee is either physically or otherwise 

unqualified to do his or her work. And on those crucial words, 

"physically or otherwise", decisions can be made and decisions 

can be disputed. 

 

In this new legislation, if it passes unamended, then the 

definitive phrase, physically or otherwise, is removed, and it's 

being replaced by much more imprecise language. All it will 

say is that if an employee is not able to meet the requirements 

of the work, in the opinion of SaskTel. 

 

So then if the legislation passes unamended, any employee 

whom SaskTel determines to be no longer able to meet their 

requirements can be retired, and that employee, it seems to me, 

then will have very little recourse to dispute the decision. So I 

ask: is it any wonder that employees in SaskTel are concerned? 

 

It seems to be, Mr. Speaker, that as legislators it's incumbent 

upon us to ask ourselves, why - then why is this Bill proposed? 

What indeed is it attempting to accomplish? If we are to be 

responsible to our position in this legislature, we need to be 

asking that question on behalf of SaskTel workers, on behalf of 

all public employees, indeed on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, because this is not just a bit of housekeeping. 

We are here debating the future of individuals and families in 

this province. And we need to ask ourselves: is it good 

legislation for them, or is it bad? 

 

I would suggest there are two scenarios, Mr. Speaker, to explain 

the reasoning for this Bill - one of them an appealing scenario, 

and on of them a frightening scenario. 

 

The first scenario would be as the minister paints it. The 

minister responsible for SaskTel has suggested publicly, and in 

this House, that in fact the legislation has come at the request of 

SaskTel people in order to provide for them a broader option in 

terms of retirement. And indeed, for a whole variety of reasons, 

there may be those who would appreciate an option for early 

retirement, and I think all members in this House could be 

unanimous in supporting that desire and direction. If this 

scenario be the case, if it is indeed to broaden the options for 

the workers at SaskTel, and I sincerely hope it is, then all this 

Bill simply needs is a little cleaning up - some amending, 

perhaps a withdrawal and redrafting, but some simple cleaning 

up. 

 

If indeed we desire to widen the scope of retirement 

possibilities in SaskTel, then clearly it seems to me the  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2610 

 

provisions of this Bill ought to permit the option of early 

retirement to both the employer and the employee. Surely the 

Bill ought to be written to enable both the employee to request 

retirement, and the employer to suggest retirement, in those 

situations where an early retirement might be mutually 

desirable. Surely if that's the intent of the Bill - and I sincerely 

hope it is - then the Bill should say so. 

 

If it is then the goal of the government to broaden retirement 

possibilities for SaskTel workers, then I suggest that that can be 

accomplished through relatively simple amendments to the 

wording. And if in fact it is the government's goal, then I would 

suggest when and if amendments are proposed, that all 

members and members opposite will support those 

amendments. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if in fact amendments are proposed to 

strengthen this Bill and we find members opposite voting 

against those amendments, then the conclusion must be, there 

must be another goal for this legislation - another agenda that's 

attached to what's happening here. 

 

And so that brings me to what has been suggested as the second 

scenario or the second agenda, as why we are looking at this 

piece of legislation. And if that second agenda be true, then it 

ought to concern every employee in SaskTel. It ought to 

concern every employee of a Crown corporation in this 

province, every public employee. It ought to concern every 

thinking person in the province. 

 

If this Bill passes unamended, it places in the hands of this 

corporation the entire power to determine an employee's future. 

And I don't think I need to remind members that this particular 

corporation acts as the direction and at the will of the 

government of the day. And so it's not hard, Mr. Speaker, to 

imagine some possible scenarios and implications of this Bill, if 

passed unamended. 

 

For instance, if a SaskTel employee dares to express a political 

viewpoint that differs from the government of the day, it's not 

unreasonable to suggest that that same employee will soon, in 

the opinion of the corporation, no longer meet the requirements 

of his or her work, and will be summoned to a manager's office 

and informed of an early retirement package. 

 

Or if an employee of SaskTel dare question a management 

decision, or if an employee of the corporation would dare 

suggest or criticize some management decision or suggest some 

new direction, or if that employee would stand up to the right of 

his fellow employees, it's not unreasonable to suggest that that 

same employee might soon, in the opinion of the corporation, 

no longer meet the requirements of his or her position, and find 

on his or her desk a summons or a notice in regard to early 

retirement. 

 

(1545) 

 

That this possibility is left open in the Bill as it's now worded 

ought to concern every employee of SaskTel, every public 

servant in Saskatchewan - indeed, every thinking person. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of the SaskTel people that I've spoken with, 

in my own constituency and elsewhere, many others who are of 

the employ in this government, and indeed, people that I've 

spoken with who have no relationship to government at all, 

when I speak to them about the provisions of this Bill, they 

express concern. 

 

I think those concerns and those fears can easily be put to rest if 

in committee we can have some unanimous acceptance in this 

House of construction amendments - amendments that make it 

possible for both the corporation to suggest retirement or for 

employees to request that early retirement. Those kind of 

amendments can turn the Bill around to make it, I think, into a 

very positive and progressive piece of legislation. 

 

But, if we pass it without amendment, then it's my position 

we're putting into place a law which is very negative, very 

dangerous, and a very regressive piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that we on this side of the House want to 

see something good come of this. I certainly want it to be one of 

the few things we have done in this sitting that we all could 

look back on with some satisfaction and pride, knowing that we 

have done with a clear conscience something that will safeguard 

justice and improve the quality of life for the people we've been 

elected to represent. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the Bill at this 

time, awaiting to see what amendments can be made. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make a 

few brief comments on this Bill as well, and I want to say that I 

am most pleased to follow the speaker who just spoke before 

me because he so articulately outlined. I think, what the real 

concerns about this Bill are, and what some possible 

alternatives might be. 

 

And so I shall not repeat what he and others have said, but I do 

want to speak on behalf of the employees of SaskTel who have 

contacted myself by telephone and have spoken to me 

personally on many, many occasions since this legislation has 

been introduced. 

 

They are concerned, they are seriously concerned, and I think 

they have a right to be. They expressed, those people who have 

contacted me and have contacted many other members of this 

side of the House, they expressed the concern which is shared 

by all of the people work for SaskTel. 

 

Those kinds of concerns didn’t used to exist, Mr. Speaker. 

There was always a feeling in SaskTel among management and 

among employees that there was a way available to them to 

resolve differences that might arise from time to time, and in 

fact that took place. But when this kind of legislation is 

introduced, all of a sudden coming out of nowhere by a minister 

of the Crown, that good will then obviously, Mr. Speaker, 

becomes very threatened. And it has. 

 

What does section 10 . . . what does this section propose to do? 

Well it gives the corporation, which means the minister, 

because ultimately it all comes to the person answerable for the 

corporation to this Assembly, and that  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2611 

 

is the minister - but it gives them the power to terminate the 

employee at the option of the corporation or the minister 

through the corporation after 15 years of service. And I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that that is a very, very ominous power. If there was 

some provision in the collective bargaining agreement to 

mitigate against some indiscreet action that the minister or the 

corporation might take, then that’s another story. But I know 

that’s not the case here. 

 

If you look at the words of the Bill that’s being proposed, the 

operative words, Mr. Speaker, are very serious. It says, “Where 

the corporation is of the opinion . . . “ So all it takes is the 

opinion of the corporation. It can decide on its reasons and then 

state whatever it wishes. 

 

But if in the opinion of the corporation, “. . . an employee is not 

able to meet the requirements of his employment and the 

employee has served (for) at least 15 years continuously,” the 

corporation can cause the employee to lose his or her job. 

 

Now what might the opinion of the corporation be? I want to 

list two or three examples of what they might be which may 

cause the corporation or the minister to cause this to happen, a 

little later in my remarks. But I think those words in themselves 

should make members of this House, no matter whether they’re 

government members or opposition members, reconsider what 

this proposal states. 

 

I would only hope as my colleague from Moose Jaw South has 

just indicated, that members opposite will look at this proposal 

when some amendments are introduced and concede that well, 

maybe the wording is wrong and something needs to be 

changed. I hope that will be the case, and that we will be able to 

make this fair for the employees of SaskTel. 

 

What makes it even worse, Mr. Speaker, is that with that 

wording we’re giving all the power to the minister and giving 

all that power to the corporation. There is no ability or no 

channel for appeal - absolutely none. They have the final word. 

When one considers the way this has come forward, one then 

certainly has to question what might be the motives of the 

government in bringing this forward, or certainly the minister. 

Surely there have to be other motives than some great feeling of 

benevolence about the need for early retirement provisions. 

Everybody agrees to that. 

 

We on this side of the House agree that in some cases there has 

to be provision for early retirement. It has to be a situation in 

which it’s optional, in which no one feels threatened. We’d be 

able to support that kind of a provision. 

 

But this Bill comes to the House, Mr. Speaker, without the 

members, the employees, or the representatives of the 

employees, ever being consulted about it before it came here. 

That in itself leads us to have to wonder whether the real motive 

of the government is, as one of the members on this side of the 

House has said earlier, the setting up for the selling out of 

SaskTel. Or is it to provide the government an opportunity 

through its corporation board to, should I say, to get rid of 

certain employees that certain  

members on the other side have developed a dislike for for 

whatever the reason that they may think are good reasons. 

There are other motives here, Mr. Speaker, and there can be no 

doubt about that. 

 

If an employee is suffering from ill health, may become 

handicapped, may be suffering from stress, certainly there has 

to be a situation where arrangements have to be made in some 

cases for early retirement. We concede that. But there should 

then be a system which is rational and meaningful in which 

everybody understands, in which there can be some options 

provided and they can be worked out between employee, or the 

employee’s representatives, and the management, to make sure 

that the employee is not wrongly done by. 

 

My colleague used the example of the 35-year-old family 

person who has been working for the corporation for 15 years. 

What this proposal says is that after that period of time that 

35-year-old individual is threatened because in the opinion of 

the corporation that 35-year-old employee can be let go. And I 

think that that is wrong. I hope members on the opposite side of 

the House will reconsider and also conclude that it is wrong, 

and will consider the kind of amendments which will make it 

right. 

 

You know, the Bible teaches us that we are supposed to be our 

brothers’ keepers, that we’re supposed to be understanding of 

each other. This is not the kind of a provision that is in keeping 

with that kind of teaching. This is not the kind of provision that 

allows us to still be able to say, we are going to make sure that 

everyone is treated equally and fairly when they are employees 

of the government of the day. 

 

I can’t support that kind of a provision, and therefore I will not 

support it when it comes to a vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It seems to me that what has developed since 1982 is a kind of 

an attitude by the government that the most effective way to 

govern is to use the tactic of fear. If you make people afraid - if 

you make people afraid of their job, if you make people afraid 

that they may not get an education, if you make people afraid 

that they may not be able to get a promotion if they say the 

wrong thing or if they happen to have a different political 

leaning than the government of the day, that somehow that will 

cause the government to remain in power and in control for as 

long as it wants. 

 

I regret to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that in my personal opinion, 

for whatever it’s worth, that is the kind of an approach that this 

government has taken since 1982 and has led it to introduce 

many Bills in this House, this one being an example, which has 

tried to put itself in the position to be able to govern in that way. 

 

Now I could say and spend a great deal of time on the fact that 

even because of the particular minister who introduces this Bill, 

causes fear in the hearts of those people who work for SaskTel. 

Because here is the minister who said in a formal letter to all the 

employees of SaskTel a year ago, that if there is technological 

change, he gave a guarantee there would be no loss of jobs or  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2612 

 

employment. Then when the negotiations came in the contract 

which was being negotiated, the minister would not take a stand 

because the election was over. 

 

Now that same minister brings in this Bill and wonders why 

there is distrust of his word, or the word of the government. 

You can’t deal with people that way. That is not the way people 

want their government to treat them. They think that when they 

elect a government they do it in good faith. They do it because 

they can trust the government to act fairly and in their best 

interests. Yes, make the hard decisions from time to time, but 

not make those decisions without any regard for what’s fair and 

what’s right. 

 

This Bill provides a greater opportunity to create greater 

unfairness upon the employees of SaskTel by the corporation or 

by the minister, whether it is the present minister or some 

minister in the future. 

 

I oppose this Bill because people who have committed their 

lives and have planned their futures around their employment, 

in my opinion, should be treated fairly by their employer. They 

deserve that. And over the years in SaskTel it has been said by 

many people in the province and out of this province, that this 

corporation used to be looked upon as a model of 

labour-management relations. For over 40 years there was never 

a major dispute between management and the workers of 

SaskTel. Only very recently did it reach that stage. 

 

What has gone wrong? Surely it has to be because of the 

deterioration of labour-management relations throughout the 

province since this government was elected in 1982. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to simply conclude by saying that I am 

worried about this Bill because it gives the corporation, and the 

minister, or the government directing it through the minister, an 

opportunity, in the opinion of the corporation, to dismiss an 

employee because the employee happened to believe that it was 

important for that individual to become involved in he activity 

of that individual’s union. That’s wrong. It gives, in the opinion 

of the corporation and the minister and the government, a 

chance to dismiss an employee after 15 years because somehow 

that employee was seen at the function of a political party that 

was not the political party that was governing on that particular 

day. If they dismiss an employee - because in the opinion, the 

corporation feels that employee is not being able to meet 

requirements of the corporation - for being seen in the wrong 

restaurant . . . And that may seem like a frivolous example, but I 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, it is not, because it is known in 

Saskatchewan, that to some degree, that kind of network exists 

which reports back to this government. 

 

The provision gives government unrestricted discretion to retire 

employees for virtually any reason at all if it deems that they 

don’t meet the requirements of the corporation of this 

government. 

 

(1600) 

 

I therefore stand in this House today to voice my support for 

those employees who express their concern. And on  

behalf of them and their families, who with this provision will 

be threatened, I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I intend to 

oppose this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted to enter this 

debate. I’m not delighted with the reasons for the debate, but 

indeed it’s a pleasure to follow so many speakers on this side of 

the House who have spoken so well for the employees of 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications and against this Bill 14, 

which is going to potentially force early retirement on many 

employees of SaskTel. 

 

I want to state up front that many of us on this side of the House 

favour the option of early retirement. We certainly see an 

enhancement of early retirement options as being a desirable 

direction to go. We also, many of us, favour enhanced 

portability of pensions, where pensions can be moved if you 

work for SaskTel, for example, for . . . pick a number of years, 

but say eight years, and then you go to SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance), for another example, you could take 

that pension and move it straight into the SGI pension plan so 

that when your retirement comes along, that working person - 

though he or she may have worked at two or more Crown 

corporations - that person’s pension would be just as large or as 

significant as though that person had stayed with SaskTel right 

from day one in their working lives, right through to the end, to 

their retirement. 

 

So we favour the option of early retirement, and we certainly 

are in favour of portability of pensions. Early retirements, Mr. 

Speaker, should allow tired people out - people that have no 

longer got the enthusiasm for their employment, but are 

approaching the time of their lives when they should be able to 

take a break from their working careers and enjoy the balance 

of their lives. 

 

Early retirement, also, would offer the option for many 

employees that are simply tired of working for that particular 

employer, for whatever their reasons, to take their early 

retirement and perhaps enter into another career, and their 

pension still be maintained - their pension being at a reasonable 

level that they could live on. 

 

So I’m against Bill 14 because this gives SaskTel the sole 

discretion, sole discretion, Mr. Speaker, regarding retirement. It 

has been pointed out that this is not acceptable to members on 

this side of the House. We see this unilateral, heavy-handed, 

thin edge of the wedge, so to speak, Bill as just being 

wronged-headed. 

 

What Bill 14 does for SaskTel, it most certainly will be set up 

to do for all of the other Crown corporations in Saskatchewan. 

There can be little doubt that SaskTel is only the first Crown 

corporation that is going to have this new mandatory retirement 

introduced and this uncertainty forced upon the workers of 

SaskTel. And for those reasons I am certainly against Bill 14. 

 

Section 10(1) of the Bill, and it has been read before but it leads 

into the next part of my argument where it says that: 

 

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2613 

 

Where the corporation is of the opinion that an employee 

is not able to meet the requirements of his employment . . .  

 

And I’ll stop there for a minute because there already are 

provisions in the collective agreement. When an employee is 

not able to satisfactorily perform their work, there are already 

methods of dealing with that unsatisfactory work performance. 

And in the case of an illness there is already, Mr. Speaker, 

provision to take care of someone that perhaps suffers, for 

example, a stroke at whatever age. That provision is in the 

sickness and disability insurance that all employees pay into, 

and as a matter of course if they are struck with an illness such 

as a stroke, they are entitled to receive sick and disability 

benefits. So it’s simply a red herring to say somebody’s health 

may deteriorate and thus we have the need for a forced early 

retirement. It just simply is not so. 

 

And as I’ve mentioned before, the unsatisfactory work level is 

already dealt with. Every single employee of SaskTel has a 

supervisor that should be dealing with any unsatisfactory work 

performance. There is a grievance procedure if that supervisor 

does something that the employee feels is not fair and not right. 

That’s one of the reasons why we have unions. So both 

unsatisfactory work performance and illness are both presently 

covered. That makes the imposition of a mandatory early 

retirement at the sole discretion of SaskTel totally unnecessary. 

 

The member for Moose Jaw South has pointed out earlier in his 

speech that any reason for a mandatory retirement is simply 

heavy-handed and that, indeed, if the intention of the minister 

responsible for this Bill is simply to enhance early retirement, 

then we are urging the minister to withdraw the Bill or to adopt 

some substantive amendments that take out - and what we 

really want taken out is the words where it says “at the sole 

discretion of the corporation.” That’s what we object to, at the 

sole discretion of the corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s one other element to this debate that I have 

not heard previously, and that is simply that there’s many 

people now working in SaskTel and many people 

contemplating employment in SaskTel that have taken specialty 

training to get into the telecommunications field - specialty 

training for which there is one major employer in the province, 

the major employer being SaskTel. 

 

For those people with the specialty training, if they are forced 

into an early retirement and yet they are, as in the example 

cited, 35 years of age or some similar age to that, those people 

most certainly would then have to leave Saskatchewan, not 

come in, not bringing the children home - it’s rather a move to 

force the people out of the province. And for that reason, it’s 

just a bad Bill. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I just want to urge the minister to 

withdraw and amend . . . make some serious amendments to 

this Bill. It should be a fairly simple and straightforward way of 

proceeding on this, unless indeed there is this hidden agenda 

that says: we have to know what the political affiliation of an 

employee is, and if that employee does not happen to have a 

little blue card that says “PC” on it, they’ll be fired. 

That’s what we fear. And we deal with this daily, Mr. Speaker. 

I know in my own constituency we are now in a membership 

drive, and I’m running into it on some doorsteps. There is a 

good number of people, thank goodness, that are saying, now if 

I don’t exercise my political freedom, I don’t have a political 

freedom. And despite the threats that they see hovering over 

them, they are going out and they’re purchasing memberships 

in our party. And to those people I’m most grateful, and indeed 

I’ll welcome any new additions along that line. 

 

So in conclusion I stand here in support of the employees of 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications and in support of all 

employees of the various Crown corporations that will be next, 

if this Bill proceeds as it stands now. I’m in support of those 

employees, and I am against Bill 14. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As minister 

responsible for SaskTel, I’d like to just take the opportunity to 

respond to some of the allegations made by members opposite; 

some of them I find rather strange, but I think one can weave 

them all into one theme. 

 

And let me take several of them . . . first of all, the member 

from, I believe, Saskatoon Centre who espoused for the first 

time, I believe, in any forum, that women should be protected in 

the traditional work place; that is where they should be and that 

there should be no effort to encourage them to move into the 

non-traditional jobs. And if I’ve ever heard a more retrograde 

argument, it was from the female member from Saskatoon 

Centre, where she defended the ability of women to be 

telephone operators. And that’s what she wanted protected. And 

she said, we have to defend that right to be telephone operators. 

 

They’re 10 years behind times, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel has the 

most progressive legislation and activity to enhance the ability 

of women to take the non-traditional jobs of any 

telecommunication company in North America. And our 

affirmative action program was approved three years ago by the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission and is considered, in 

North America, the most progressive. And no corporation has 

made a greater effort to enhance the position and opportunities 

of women than SaskTel. 

 

And yet we have the NDP defending: keep them as telephone 

operators. And that is precisely what the member from 

Saskatoon Centre did. I found her comments about the business 

conference absolutely shocking. “Women shouldn’t buy 

franchise that hire women,” she said. 

 

There have been more women in business under this 

administration than ever in the history of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and I don’t think that should be fettered because the 

hon. member doesn’t like the type of franchise. And I find her 

activities, Mr. Speaker, rather . . . I suppose Edwardian would 

be polite. I think they are antediluvian more than anything, Mr. 

Speaker, they go back so far. 

 

It’s rather amazing, Mr. Speaker, when a couple of those  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2614 

 

members had the opportunity in this debate to make up their 

own speeches, rather than the canned speeches, where their real 

thinking comes from. 

 

I find, Mr. speaker, the criticisms of the members opposite 

rather strange in that three months ago, Mr. Speaker - and the 

press will verify this - the member from Regina Rosemont, the 

member from Regina North, the member from Regina North 

East, and member after member stood up in this Assembly and 

condemned this government for an early retirement program for 

civil servants. They condemned it; they condemned it publicly; 

they condemned it in this Assembly and everybody is witness to 

it. And today they stand up here saying, oh, we support an early 

retirement program, don’t get us wrong. 

 

I’ll tell you why everyone had to repeat that, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 

tell you why every single member had to repeat that, is because 

they’re getting the same message from SaskTel employees that 

we’re getting, which is they like the early retirement program 

and they didn’t like the comments of the members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

And I find it interesting that within three months, within three 

months, the members opposite have gone from attacking and 

opposing . . . And I think the opposition critic of the Public 

Service Commission, as a matter of fact, was even stronger in 

his condemnation, saying you can’t have an early retirement 

because it’s too costly and it doesn’t save any money. Isn’t it 

funny, the flip-flop that we see going on. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the strangest argument was the last one. The 

strangest argument where the hon. member said there are people 

who want to get into SaskTel, or people who are taking the 

technical studies where they look at their occupation in 

SaskTel, or maybe they’ve been doing a particular technical 

activity for 15 years and SaskTel isn’t going to do it any more, 

they have no choice but to leave the province. Where would 

they go? Let me tell you, if SaskTel isn’t using a new 

technology, I strongly suspect that there are very, very few 

other telecommunication companies in North America that 

would be using it. So where would they go? I’ll tell you where 

they would have to go if you take the hon. member’s argument - 

the Third World, Mr. Speaker. Now that was the silliest 

argument I have heard. 

 

And let me tell you what SaskTel does, in fact, do. When there 

is technological change, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel gives the training 

to its existing employees and takes the opportunity and the time. 

And I said that there was a common theme running through, 

and we’ve heard it over and over and over again from the NDP 

opposition, and that is: don’t change anything; don’t change 

anything. If they had their way, Mr. Speaker, people would be 

talking with tin cans and strings - tin cans and strings - and the 

repairmen would be going out in a horse and buggy, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s the telecommunication system they want. 

 

And let’s take a look at the changes, Mr. Speaker, it’s not very 

long ago under a New Democratic Party, under a  

New Democratic Party . . . you shouldn’t be reading, you 

should be listening . . . the hon. member, you should be paying 

attention, because you would certainly learn something. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can remember nearly six years ago, Mr. Speaker, 

the only province in Canada, Mr. Speaker, that the people 

couldn’t even buy a telephone, couldn’t even buy a telephone, 

was the province of Saskatchewan, under the NDP SaskTel 

communications policy, couldn’t even buy a telephone. They 

couldn’t go, Mr. Speaker, down to their telmarts. They couldn’t 

go to a SaskTel telmart, Mr. Speaker, to look at telephones. 

That was a sin, Mr. Speaker. That was a sin. What happens 

now? SaskTel has telmarts. You don’t think the employees like 

them? Let me tell you that the employees happen to believe that 

the telmarts, Mr. Speaker, are one of the best symbols of a 

progressive attitude in SaskTel that didn’t exist before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, business men were so limited in the number of 

phones that business men under the NDP administration ere 

having to hook up illegally to try and get the most modern 

means of communication because SaskTel didn’t want to carry 

it under the NDP. Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that they now 

have the access to the most modern communication facilities 

anywhere in the country. And I find, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP 

so opposed individual line service when they were in 

government so that the people in rural Saskatchewan could have 

the most modern telecommunication facilities and services and 

equipment anywhere in Canada, and they opposed it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they also on the other side insisted on the 

absolute monopoly to keep people out, to keep equipment out, 

to keep this new technology out. And of course on the other 

side they wanted the absolute monopoly of cable television. 

And that had to be owned, run, and hooked up by the 

government, Mr. Speaker. That’s the NDP policy. 

 

So we take a look, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 

say that because there were numerous changes that we’ve made 

over the last few years. People can, in fact, have a choice on 

telephones and they’re not complaining about it. People are not 

forced to subsidize the cable television industry through 

SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, rural people are getting individual line 

service and getting it leased at a minimum city-level service. 

 

And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, through all of this and 

through all the doom and gloom and scare tactics opposite, 

there wasn’t one lay-off because of technological change during 

those years, Mr. Speaker. What we have seen, what we have 

seen - and I must freely admit, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps I have 

not communicated with the employees of SaskTel as 

aggressively as I should, and I will rectify that; and I know, 

when I get the information back to the individual employees, 

that I will have the full support of the members opposite for 

doing it - that through all of those changes, Mr. Speaker, there 

wasn’t one lay-off. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, is change going to stop in SaskTel? No, it is 

not. We intend to make the changes so that  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2615 

 

Saskatchewan people will have the most modern 

telecommunications system over the next 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25 

years, Mr. Speaker, and we won’t apologize to anybody about 

that. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that we will have the support 

of everybody in the province of Saskatchewan to that objective 

except for the New Democratic Party members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no industry is undergoing more change than the 

telecommunications industry. It would be an unwise 

government that says: we are going to stop that change; that we 

can’t have the new technology; that we have to go back to the 

crank telephones. Mr. Speaker, that is not realistic; that is not 

realistic. It is not good government to take that approach, and I 

believe most strongly that it is not in the best interests of the 

people of this province to resist change in the 

telecommunication industry - just the opposite, Mr. Speaker, we 

must move rapidly. We must move rapidly to allow our 

business men access to the latest telecommunication 

technology, access to computers, access to the services that they 

need to continue to be efficient and effective. 

 

We must look at new means of telecommunication for our 

distance education. We must, Mr. Speaker, continue, and I 

suggest most rapidly, with rural individual line service so that 

rural people have access to the most modern means of 

communication. 

 

To go backwards, Mr. Speaker, as the hon. members have 

advocated, have advocated, Mr. Speaker, is wrong, and it’s 

wrong-headed. We’ve been over the legislation, and the 

legislation in no way justifies the extreme attacks made upon it 

by the members opposite. As we go through with this rapid 

change, and give the employees of SaskTel the opportunity to 

take the training, we know unfortunately that some won’t, and 

we want the ability to deal with them fairly. 

 

At the same time we want to be able to deal, Mr. Speaker, with 

the right of the people of this province because we believe it is a 

right to have the most access to the most modern 

telecommunication means possible, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

really what this Bill is about. Are we going to stand still as the 

NDP want, or are we going to change and maintain a leadership 

role in telecommunications? And that’s what this legislation is 

all about. 

 

Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I’m disappointed that we have had 

another example as the NDP continue to pound the nails into 

their own coffin of the past. Mr. Speaker, I support the 

legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1634) 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas - 27 

 

Devine Duncan 

McLeod Andrew 

Toth Sauder 

Johnson McLaren 

 

 

Berntson Lane 

Taylor Maxwell 

Gerich Hepworth 

Hardy Klein 

Meiklejohn Pickering 

Hopfner Swenson 

Martens Baker 

Gleim Neudorf 

Gardner Kopelchuk 

Britton  

 

Nays - 11 

 

Prebble Brockelbank 

Koskie Tchorzewski 

Rolfes Atkinson 

Lyons Calvert 

Trew Smart 

Koenker  

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 39 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Mr. Chairman, when this minister’s 

estimates were last before the House, I was in the process of 

asking him a question about the level of the water in Lake 

Diefenbaker, and I was forced to take a detour by the Minister 

of Highways to adjournment. 

 

I just want to lay out the question for the minister again. And 

the reason I raised the question about the level of the water in 

Lake Diefenbaker is that it varies, in my reckoning, about 18 

feet - and that’s quite a variation in the lake level, and it has its 

impact on resort areas that surround the lake. And I ask the 

minister because there is a resort area called Douglas Provincial 

Park, and I was wanting to know if it’s a matter of concern in 

the park that the level of the lake varies a great deal, because I 

will tell the minister, the resort village immediately north of 

Douglas Park, which is Mistusinne, it is a matter of 

considerable concern there. 

 

And I realize that’s not pertinent to this information here, but I 

wanted to know from the minister whether on the resort areas 

that the minister has a responsibility for around Lake 

Diefenbaker: is the large variation in the elevation of the lake of 

a serious concern and, if so, has it been necessary for the 

minister to make representations to the commission that 

controls the level of the lake? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, the resort village referred to 

has got nothing to do with my department. It’s not under my 

jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: That’s exactly what I stated, Mr. Minister. I 

said the resort village is peripheral to the  

question I was asking you. I was asking you the question: is the 

large variation in the water level in Lake Diefenbaker a matter 



 

September 16, 1987 

2616 

 

of concern to the provincial parks or other villages or other 

establishments and facilities that you are responsible for? Is it a 

matter of concern there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Well, Mr. Chairman, as the hon. member 

would know, water fluctuation and monitoring those levels is a 

responsibility that is ongoing with the water Crown, and 

they’ve been looking after that. We haven’t had any specific 

complaints other than one to do with a boat launch this year, 

and we try and address those problems as they arise. And the 

fluctuation is not 18 feet; it’s 27. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your response. 

I realize that the water fluctuation is quite severe, and it may be 

more. I was being conservative in my estimate when I said it 

might be 18 feet. It think it was over that in the last 12 months - 

well over that. 

 

All I really wanted to know, Mr. Minister, if it was necessary 

for you to make representations to the commission, and you 

said it is not, and that’s fine; that’s the answer that the minister 

has given. 

 

The second question I have for the minister has to do with a 

request that I made in writing to him, I believe, in the latter part 

of July or the beginning of August. And it had to do with the 

space allocation from the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation. And the second part of it was with regard to 

departmental consultants that the department retained over a 

period of time. Is the minister familiar with the request that I 

sent him? If not, I’ll read it into the record. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I am familiar with the 

request. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: I wonder if the minister has the information 

with regard to the (a) and (b) part of the requests that I made. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. chairman, I have all the pieces of part 

(a); it’s quite extensive. I have some of part (b); some is 

ongoing, and I can make a commitment to provide it in writing. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the minister 

for providing the information. And I might say at this point that 

he is the third minister that has complied with my request in a 

rather expeditious fashion, and I want to thank him for that. 

 

Mr. Calvert: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, it’s been 

some time since we’ve been together in estimates . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: I missed you. 

 

Mr. Calvert: And I missed you. I was beginning to wonder if 

we were ever going to get back together, so it’s good to have 

you back, and I’m sure we will finish these estimates some day 

- some day. We’ve got, I think,  

today about 10 minutes, so we can maybe tidy up one little 

issue. I’m kind of reminded of a colleague of mine who says, 

you know: inch by inch, everything’s a cinch. So we’ll do it 

inch by inch, and we’ll get there. 

 

When last we were talking, we ended talking about Mr. Light’s 

collection in Battleford, and at that time you indicated to me 

that you, or officials of your department, would be meeting with 

Mr. Light in regard to the purchase of his collection. I’d like to 

know if you’ve had that meeting, and the results of that 

meeting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, officials had met with the 

gentleman in question on the ninth of the month to discuss 

options for acquisition of his ethnological collection. It was a 

very amiable meeting and discussions are ongoing, negotiations 

are ongoing. 

 

Mr. Calvert: Mr. Minister, are you then confident that we will 

see this collection purchased by the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and that in fact it will remain in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: I’m confident that if the gentleman would 

like to meet our conditions it will remain in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Calvert: Mr. Minister, I, and certainly other members of 

this caucus, and I’m sure the whole community of North 

Battleford, will be watching the progress carefully on these 

negotiations. 

 

If we may perhaps, Mr. Minister, just turn to another collection 

that is seemingly being threatened by the inaction of your 

government in its regard, and we may be able to just explore 

this a bit before 5 o’clock. 

 

I, on the ninth of this month, wrote you a letter, and I know you 

haven’t had time yet to respond to it, regarding the Plains 

Historical Museum here in Regina. These folks, too, are in 

danger of having to close their doors. You’ll be well aware that 

this museum holds a very valuable collection and offers 

valuable programming to the city of Regina and beyond the 

city. You’re aware that the current financial uncertainty that the 

board faces means that it’s not able to replace its one staff 

member who has left the province, or is leaving the province. 

And you will also be aware that this Plains Historical Museum 

has some real potential to be a leader in creating a Regina 

Plains Historical Museum. 

 

Now, it’s my understanding, Mr. Minister, that the Plains 

Historical Museum board has, in fact, approached your 

department for support and funding. Could you, this day, report 

on their request and whether in fact that request will receive a 

favourable response from you and your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Chairman, I believe that some of the 

consternation stems from the fact that there was some 

uncertainty on behalf of the museum as to whether or not the 

grant program would be ongoing, under which they have been 

covered n the past. In fact, they have the last four years received 

some assistance from the province to the maximum allowed 

under that particular program, which is called museum and 

gallery grant  

  



 

September 16, 1987 

2617 

 

program. I’m happy to say, Mr. Chairman, that they will be 

supported again this year, $9,000, which is the maximum grant 

allowable under the terms of that program. 

 

I realize that their one full-time staff member is moving to 

Hamilton, I believe. And the reason for that move has nothing 

to do with the government or the gallery. The gentleman’s wife 

accepted a job in Hamilton, and he’s decided to move with her. 

So that’s the situation as far as that’s concerned. 

 

Yes, we will be granting them, as we have in the past, $9,000, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 


