


















































June 29, 1987 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 29, 1987 
 

803 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

The Clerk: — On Friday last I received certain petitions at the 
Table from certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. 
Under rule 11(7) I have checked the petitions and report 
favourably on the same. The following petitions are hereby laid 
on the Table for reading and receiving. The petition prayer is: 
 

Of certain citizens of the Province of Saskatchewan praying 
that the Assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to retain the school-based dental plan. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my please to introduce to 
you, and to the other members of the House, the Canadian 
women’s national volleyball team. And before they stand up 
and be recognized, I would like to mention that they have now 
been in Regina in the national training centre for the last four 
years – a four-party agreement between the Saskatchewan 
Volleyball Association, the provincial government, the 
University of Regina, and the city of Regina. The four-party 
agreement is really unique in the history of Canadian sport. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an unusually gifted bunch of athletes who 
have represented us in international competition for the last 
number of years. They’ve just returned from Cuba, in a 
competition, and will be leaving shortly for the World Student 
Games in Zagreb, Yugoslavia and then, later, the Pan-American 
Games in Indianapolis. 
 
Aside from the fact, Mr. Speaker, that they are representing us 
internationally, they have also made a serious and positive 
contribution to the development of volleyball in this province 
by unselfishly going to various communities around the 
province and developing volleyball to such an extent that we 
are now probably the best province in the country in terms of 
men’s and ladies’ volleyball at all levels of competition. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I can’t take time to introduce all of them, 
although I wish I could. I would like to say, however, that 
almost every area of the country is represented here, as you see, 
in the Speaker’s gallery, from coast to coast. 
 
I would, however, like to introduce the head coach, Dr. Lorne 
Sawula, assistant coach Steve Wilson, manager Julie Hughes, 
and co-ordinator Joe Celentano, and ask the ladies and the 
gentlemen to please stand and be recognized and receive our . . . 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, may I also add greetings and 
welcome from members on this side of the House to the 
women’s volleyball team. We wish you much success. 

We hope that you enjoy question period today. You may see a 
few spikes over the net here, and we’ll be doing our best to 
ensure that support for your good program continues through 
lottery funding in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to 
you, and through you to the members of the Assembly, four 
people who are seated in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker. They 
are people who are close to my heart and I’d like to introduce 
my mother and father who are visiting from Beiseker, Alberta – 
Joe and Doreen Hagel. 
 
They’re accompanied by two of their grandchildren and my 
daughters, Kristin and Meredith Hagel. I ask all members of the 
Assembly to join in extending a warm welcome to them here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would also like to take this opportunity to 
introduce guests to the House. The guest is Annabelle 
Kaukinen, seated against the wall, who works in Hansard as a 
tape machine operator. And also I see with her is her director, 
Mr. Melia. 
 
Annabelle has worked in Hansard for two years, and I would 
like to ask all members to please welcome her here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Situation of the Province 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to 
the Premier. It will be known that there have been many 
statements issued on the need for financial restraint. My 
question is to the Premier, dealing with whether or not the 
legislature and the public can rely upon what you and your 
Minister of Finance have been telling us about our finances, and 
about whether or not the finances are as you represent them to 
be. 
 
In March of 1986, the pre-election budget of your Minister of 
Finance, it was declared that the budget deficit for the year 
would be $389 million. In October, before the election, about 
half-way through the fiscal year, you, sir, told the people of 
Saskatchewan that the deficit would be about $500 million, and 
I believe I recall hearing about those precise words. 
 
In March, 1987, five months later, you and your Minister of 
Finance announced that the budget deficit would not be $500 
million, but $1,200 million — $1.2 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier: sir, when did you know that the 
deficit figure would not be $500 million, but $1,200 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, to the Hon. Leader of the 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

804 
 

 Opposition, I think I made it abundantly clear at the time of the 
economic statement what the changes were that would impact 
on the deficit. And I made it clear that they included, amongst 
others, an overestimate as to revenues from oil which I have 
acknowledged on numerous occasions. I . . and we did not 
forecast it accurately. I indicated, as well, that certainly other 
provinces were in the same position. I indicated, as well, that 
we weren’t taking into account certain expenditures or revenues 
that we had proposed to last year – for example, the liquor 
board. I indicated the home program, and I gave a rather 
detailed list of the items, both on the expenditure and on the 
revenue side, which led to the difference in budgetary estimates 
and deficit estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. As is 
obvious from the remarks of the Minister of Finance, many of 
those items – home program, oil revenues – were fully known 
to the minister and to the Premier when the Premier made his 
statement. 
 
And what I ask of the Premier again is: when did you know that 
the figure would not be $500 million as you said, but $1,200 
million as you and your minister announced five months later? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Put again to the Leader of the Opposition, I 
made it abundantly clear what the items were that were not 
included in last year’s deficit. 
 
Again I freely acknowledge not estimating accurately the oil 
revenues last year. And I think, in fairness, that there were not 
many people in Canada, and certainly none of the expert 
opinions that we had were predicting last year that oil would go 
from $30 a barrel to 10 and back up to what other level. 
 
Secondly, keep in mind that when we did not take into account 
revenues, $100 million from the Liquor Board, we made that 
decision certainly prior to the economic statement. The question 
that has been raised with regard to what level of reserve should 
we have for the production loan program, as I indicated as we 
debated last year, the budget last year, we had the traditional 
amount of reserves that the Canadian . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, and I 
direct it to the Premier again. The minister has indicated that 
one of the major factors in the change from his figures of March 
’86 to his figures of March ’87, was oil royalties and the price 
of oil. The minister will know that the price of oil was higher in 
October than it was in March; therefore, that is no reason why 
there would have been any different figure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — My question to the minister again, and 
I direct this specifically to the chief minister, the Premier: when 
did you know that the figure was not 500 million, but 1,200 
million? 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, I have some . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The opposition may try and shout me 
down, but I find it a little strange to hear a former provincial 
treasurer in this province . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. Order from the 
left side of the House. Let the person answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I find it a little difficult that a 
former provincial treasurer would project on one day’s oil 
prices to what the estimates were going to be for the full year. 
That is a rather unwise position to take, Mr. Speaker. I’m a little 
surprised that the proposition was put forward. 
 
They are estimates as to what we estimated the revenue. They 
were estimates at last year’s budget time, and that’s what they 
are – estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, and I address this to 
the Premier. I will cease asking when you knew, and ask: did 
you know that in October, when you advised the people of 
Saskatchewan that this budget deficit would be of the order of 
$500 million, did you know that at that time the $500 million 
figure had every likelihood of being false. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, they want to go back to 
October. We did not have to take into account, at any time 
during the year, any differences in what we estimated the losses 
for the production loan program would be – that’s a hundred 
and some million dollars. Certainly the government didn’t have, 
I don’t believe, any idea of the cost of the home program by 
October. 
 
Thirdly, we did not have to make a decision. We did not have to 
make decisions on things like the Liquor Board revenues, 
whether they would be taken into the particular account. I could 
go on and on that . . the question of which debts were going to 
be written down. Those decisions were made, the reserves for 
the production loan program, etc. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I direct 
this to the Premier. The minister has indicated that in October, 
when you indicated that the deficit would be $500 million 
rather than $1,200 million, one of the points of variation was 
the home program, and as the minister indicated, you didn’t 
know how much it would cost. 
 
Now my question very simply to you is this: when you were 
quoting a figure of $500 million, did you assume that the home 
program would cost nothing, or did you assume that it would 
cost approximately the amount that it has? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

805 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I know, Mr. Speaker, that there’s going to 
be a fair degree of humorous response in the people of 
Saskatchewan when they gave us estimates as to what their 
home program – that went anywhere from $500 million to $2.2 
billion, Mr. Speaker. For them to argue that the 7-7-7 would 
give a precise number, I think every single New Democratic 
Party supportee in Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I direct this question to the Premier. 
My question is this: when you gave the information to the 
public last October that the deficit would be $500 million, were 
you relying upon information supplied by your Minister of 
Finance, and if so, do you offer any reason why we should 
believe anything said by that Minister of Finance today any 
more than we believed it – or at least it was accurate – Last 
October? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order! I would just like 
to remind the hon. guests in the gallery that while they are no 
doubt tempted to enter the debate, the rules of this House are 
that traditionally members in the gallery do not enter the debate 
in any way. So I’d just kindly ask you to listen to the debate, 
but that’s about the extent of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition may want . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I again . . whether the 
opposition, the public, or anyone else is going to believe the 
Minister of Finance, of course, is a matter of obviously partisan 
public debate. And that’s where it should be. We are dealing 
with estimates. 
 
I did give a detailed breakdown of where the deficit numbers 
came from at the time of the economic statement. I did indicate 
as well, Mr. Speaker, some of the policy choices that we made, 
including not taking into account revenues like the Liquor 
Board; setting aside a higher reserve for the production loan 
program than even that recommended by the Provincial 
Auditor. And I could go on and on with those, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The opposition on the one hand said that I was not accurate, and 
then in the next position say that I’ve overestimated the deficit, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — A final supplementary, I believe. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary, yes, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a final supplementary to the 
Premier. 
 
Sir, you told the people of Saskatchewan last October that the 
figure would be 500 million. You and your Minister of Finance 
five months later said the figure would be 1,200 

million. There may well be a perfectly valid explanation for 
that. Would you care to offer that valid explanation from your 
mouth as to why you said 500 million in October and why you 
said 1,200 million in March? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the hon. member 
is fully aware that we are dealing with estimates, and that has 
been the traditional practice of any legislature under the British 
parliament. 
 
I do indicate to the hon. member if he is at all concerned about 
discrepancies in numbers, if that’s his word, that I look back 
and see that the former minister of Finance and now . . was out 
– out, Mr. Speaker – some two and a half billions . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Next question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Premier, who appears to have been muzzled by his Minister of 
Finance today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier: from 
your silence here today, you’re indicating either that the 
Minister of Finance did not inform you, or you are clearly 
saying that he misinformed you, or you are saying, Mr. Premier, 
that you misinformed the public yourself, knowing that the 
deficit wasn’t what the Minister of Finance said it was. I ask 
you, Mr. Premier, in light of that: will you do the honourable 
thing and will you ask your Minister of Finance to resign, or 
will you resign yourself, because you have deceived the public 
so badly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, if the argument –if the 
argument, Mr. Speaker, that a Finance minister, if not precise 
on his estimate, should resign, I ask, Mr. Speaker, it is very, 
very obvious that in 1981 the then minister of Finance 
overestimated oil revenues by $1 billion, that he overestimated 
potash revenues . . . 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the 
Minister of Finance. In light of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Minister of Finance gave away exactly $1 billion or more to oil 
companies because of the tax holiday, will he not admit to the 
House, Mr. Speaker, that not only in the financial white paper 
but again in the House today, he is trying to deceive and 
mislead Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — You can make all the political accusations 
that you wish. All I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is that if one is to 
look at estimates that have been made, I go back and propose to 
the hon. member, who was once Finance minister of this 
province, how anyone could . . I missed out on oil by $300 
million, not some $1 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the optimistic over-projections of 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

806 
 

 potash, $185 million, the actual 37; uranium . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to direct a question to the Premier. My question to the hon. 
member from Estevan is simple. Did he or did he not in October 
1986, in the middle of the general provincial election, declare 
that the estimated deficit for the province of Saskatchewan, at 
that time, was $500 million? Mr. Premier, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, and I note very much, Mr. 
Speaker, that . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
We have one side of the House trying to intervene on the 
answer from the member, from the Minister of Finance. Please 
allow him to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m pleased to recognize, Mr. Speaker, that 
finally the Deputy Leader of the Opposition party finally 
recognized the differences between estimates and actual. I 
commend him for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, we have given the list of the changes from 
last year’s budgetary estimates. I did that in the economic 
statement in March. They detail with some degree of precision, 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, the changes that we have made, 
including some policy changes which put the deficit higher in 
the next fiscal year than we had estimated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been over that. The questions are repetitive. 
They have the right to ask them, obviously But, Mr. Speaker, 
we have made it abundantly clear what the change was. I 
believe that that’s a matter of some public debate, as is the 
matter of debate as to how the now Finance critic could be out 
so far in his projections. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have either a supplementary 
or a new question to the Premier. By way of very brief preface, 
I want to say this: we’re not asking about the explanation of the 
Minister of Finance or the government about the wide 
discrepancy. That, I think, will be questions in subsequent 
question period. 
 
We are asking what the Premier knew, when did he know it, 
and what he told the people of Saskatchewan, speaking directly 
to his credibility. This is something exclusively in the 
knowledge of the Premier alone. I ask you, Mr. Premier: when 
did you know that it was $1.2 billion and not $500 million? Did 
you know in October? Give us a simple yes or no, please, on 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve indicated now, I believe, on five 
occasions, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon as to the factors that 
went into the economic statement which gave us a $1.2 billion 
deficit. I indicated where that deficit arose, the factors going 
into it, including the numerous policy changes. 
 
I’ve now been over this five times, Mr. Speaker. It includes a 
higher loan loss provision for the production 

loan program. It includes not taking into account the revenues 
from the Liquor Board that we had proposed to. It included 
several debt write-downs of some of the Crown corporations. It 
included an estimate on the home program. 
 
It included several other items, all of which have been detailed, 
Mr. Speaker. And so, if the hon. member has concern, and I 
think it would be proper for him to go back to his caucus and 
find out how his caucus could be out $1.2 billion on the 
estimate . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I would 
like the member from The Battlefords to please resist these 
violent outbursts from time to time because it disrupts the 
whole House. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to direct yet again a question to the Premier, 
which I say, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, speaks to the 
credibility of the Premier, and therefore the credibility of the 
entire government. 
 
And I say that as a preface to urge you strongly, sir, to clear up 
the doubts about your credibility and the government’s 
credibility by answering this question, which I shall put to you 
one more time: is it correct that you knew in October of 1986 
that the deficit was $1.2 billion, but that you deliberately misled 
the province and the people of Saskatchewan by saying there 
was only $500 million? Is that correct? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. I think, before 
we move on to the question, the answer . . I’d just like to 
caution the member that the term “deliberately misled” is not a 
term that we normally use in this House. I would like to ask 
hon. members to keep that in mind in the comments that they 
make. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, Mr. Speaker, we have been through 
this. We made several policy changes with regard to the 
estimated deficit. I’ve been over several of those policy changes 
and would indicate that I can repeat them again: a much higher 
projected reserve for production loan losses – even higher than 
that recommended by the Provincial Auditor. We indicated, and 
the hon. member should know, as you approach year end you 
get a more accurate idea of where your particular resource 
revenues or your tax revenues or your E&H tax revenues . . . 
 
And so the hon. member should know and be aware of the 
budgetary process. He showed just a spattering of knowledge 
there for a minute, Mr. Speaker, and has now fallen away. But 
as you approach your fiscal year end, you get more and more 
accurate estimates as to what your revenues and expenditures 
were. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, question to the Premier. Did 
your Minister of Finance, or any official in the Department of 
Finance, advise you at any time during the months of 
September and October of 1986 that the deficit of the province 
of Saskatchewan was approaching $1.2 billion, and not the 
$500 million that you stated to the 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

807 
 

people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, when I gave an estimate of 
half a billion dollars with respect to the estimated deficit in the 
fall of ’86, that was the best information that I had or my office 
had. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Is it 
the Premier’s position that, as the leader of the government and 
the provincial leader for all of us in the province of 
Saskatchewan, knowing the size of the deficit over the last four 
or five years under his administration, that in October of 1986 
no official of the Department of Finance – and mark my words 
carefully, Mr. Premier – no official of the Department of 
Finance advised you or your Minister of Finance that the deficit 
was not 500 million but 1.2 billion? Is that your position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the estimates that we had at 
the beginning of the year said something in the neighbourhood 
of 2 to $300 million. By the fall of the year it said something 
like half a billion dollars; and by the time we got into 1987 it 
was in excess of a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. So I can just 
reiterate, as my colleague has, as my colleague has, it is an 
estimate that you’re making – an estimate. And the former 
minister of Finance in ‘81-82 did the same. And he was out a 
great deal. He was out over a billion dollars alone in oil, and he 
was out over half a billion dollars in the rest of it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is an estimate that you have to forecast 
wheat prices, you forecast oil prices, you forecast potash prices, 
you forecast retail sales. And the best estimate that we had the 
first six months into the year is that our deficit was going to 
increase rapidly. And it went from $300 million up to half a 
billion dollars. And I said, as far as I know it’s half a billion 
dollars to date, is our best guess. Now when we move on into 
1987, Mr. Speaker, obviously we found out that it was a half a 
billion more than that. 
 
Now when you look at the combination, Mr. Speaker, of 
estimating what it should be and you look at what other people 
have done, it is an estimate. And if you can forecast flax prices 
and if you can forecast oil prices and if you can forecast world 
potash prices, and not any more accurate than the member that 
was in the finance portfolio in ’81 that was out a billion dollars, 
well then you know something about the forecasting business 
that the former minister of Finance doesn’t. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Gas Inspection and 
Licensing Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Swan :— Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Gas Inspection and Licensing Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Boiler and Pressure 
Vessel Act 

Hon. Mr. Swan :— Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 11 – An Act to amend The Farm Security Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Farm Security Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 – An Act to amend The Management 
Accountants Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Management Accountants Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Rule 39 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of the 
day, Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 39 to seek leave of the 
Assembly to move a motion on an issue of urgent and pressing 
necessity. 
 
If I may take just a moment, Mr. Speaker, to explain very 
briefly the issue and why I believe the Assembly should deal 
with it at once, I will indicate the motion for which I seek leave 
of to the Assembly. 
 
I have already notified the government, by letter to the Premier 
this morning, of my intention to seek leave. 
 
As all members will know, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian 
Transport Commission (CTC) has approved a system of 
variable freight rates for grain transportation. That decision was 
made against the recommendation of hundreds of Saskatchewan 
farmers and others who made submissions. That decision will 
have grave, long-term consequences for Saskatchewan 
agriculture and Saskatchewan rural life. It is a bad decision. It 
must be opposed; it must be stopped; and it can be stopped. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that CTC decision can be overturned by the 
federal cabinet in Ottawa. The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the 
National Farmers Union, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), among others, have urged the 
federal cabinet to overturn that decision. 
 
The federal Minister of Transport, Mr. Crosbie, has recently 
indicated that the federal cabinet will soon be considering this 
matter. It is clearly, therefore, a matter of urgent and pressing 
necessity. I believe that the importance and urgency of this 
matter are such that this Assembly should, with one unanimous 
voice, call on the federal cabinet to overturn that CTC decision. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave of the Assembly to 
move a motion along the following lines: 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

808 
 

That this Assembly expresses its deep concern that a system 
of variable freight rates for grain transportation in Western 
Canada will have severely adverse and widespread 
consequences for Saskatchewan agriculture and rural life, and 
that this Assembly, therefore, calls on the Government of 
Canada to review and overturn the recent decision of the 
Canadian transport Commission which permits variable 
freight rates. 

 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $1,197,269,100 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending 
March 31, 1988. 

 
Mr. Chairman, this obviously is interim supply. The numbers 
are calculated as follows in general terms. That’s the special 
warrants to date plus, the month of July. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a 
few remarks on the motion because I think this is a motion that 
is another Saskatchewan first. 
 
This province has been known, and people are very proud in 
Saskatchewan, for having been the innovators of many 
important things, many important programs, many important 
management successes which were witnessed until 1982. All of 
those things Saskatchewan people and members who have had 
the honour to sit in this House have been able to point to with 
some pride and say, Saskatchewan was first. 
 
Today we have a first, Mr. Chairman, of which no one can be 
proud, least of all the Minister of Finance. We witnessed here 
today, Mr. Chairman, a spectacle which was never would have 
thought was possible in this House, when questions addressed 
specifically to the Premier, time and time again, the Premier 
refused to answer. That’s carried on, that kind of arrogance is 
carried on in this resolution which we see here today. It’s a first, 
Mr. Chairman, to have an interim supply resolution and then a 
Bill which covers a period retroactively of some four months 
since the beginning of the budget fiscal year on April 1 of 1987. 
That is a first for Saskatchewan. 
 
That is a shameful first – that is a shameful first – for a lot of 
reasons: one, Mr. Chairman, because it underlines all of the 
desire of this government opposite to hide from the people of 
Saskatchewan the facts, to hide from the people of 
Saskatchewan the facts of how their tax dollar has been spent 
during this period of time. It underlines, once again, the fact 
that the Public Accounts have not been tabled until today for the 
year 1985-86. We have here a situation 

where the taxpayers’ money, and the taxpayers know only too 
well – every family in Saskatchewan knows only too well – that 
this government has taken more and more money out of their 
pockets since its election in 1982, while providing fewer and 
fewer and more inferior services. 
 
Now in this interim supply Bill, he and she and the families of 
Saskatchewan are asked to pay more. But since over two years 
ago, this government has made expenditures which it did not 
make public and did not show the taxpayer where it was 
spending their money for almost two years. That’s another first 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. 
 
It might be of some interest to point out that since 1945 until 
1982, that the latest that any budget was ever presented in 
Saskatchewan was March 24, and that was in 1976, as best as I 
can find. 
 
I have every year that a budget has been presented in this 
legislature since 1945 until 1987. And the latest, until this 
government, until its election, the latest a budget was presented 
was March 24. 
 
Now I say to you, Mr. Chairman, there is good reason for that. 
There is good reason for that, the reason being that people of 
Saskatchewan who depend on government funding needed to 
know so that they could do some planning, so that they knew 
where they stood. Municipalities needed to know so that they 
could set their mill rates. School boards needed to know so they 
could decide what kind of education they could provide for 
their children. All kinds of organizations, non-profit groups, 
needed to know so that they could prepare for the forthcoming 
year. 
 
But this government, which knows nothing about planning, 
knows nothing about vision into the future, has tried to put its 
incompetence and its mismanagement stamp on all of the rest of 
society by withholding this budget, in this fiscal year, until June 
17. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was unforgiveable. Now there are reasons for 
that. The reason why we have this interim supply motion here 
today, some four months into the new fiscal year, is because 
this government tried to hide from this legislature and tried to 
hide from the public of Saskatchewan. It has this cynical view 
that if you have a session in Saskatchewan in the summertime, 
that nobody will notice what goes on. 
 
That’s why they have done it. And the member from Weyburn 
who keeps chattering away from his seat will know, Mr. 
Speaker. He, who sits in cabinet, will know that the reason this 
interim supply Bill, another first in Saskatchewan – want to 
cover retroactively until April 1 – is here is because this 
government hasn’t had the courage to stand up and tell 
Saskatchewan people the truth. 
 
It deceived them in 1986; it deceived them during the election 
in October of 1986; and it’s been deceiving them ever since. 
And so here we are today with this interim supply motion, and 
this interim supply Bill, at a time that is a first in Saskatchewan. 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

809 
 

Now it may very well be we might have had an interim supply 
motion by the minister which would have been five or six or 
seven months, except for one thing, and that is that finally, after 
work by this opposition, there was a legal opinion which said 
clearly to the government, you better have a budget because 
what you’re doing since April 1 is illegal. That’s why we’re 
here, otherwise we may not be here still. 
 
(1445) 
 
Oh, I now, the Premier stood up right after the Legislative 
counsel made the write up and gave the legal opinion. The 
Premier said, no problem. He said, I don’t care. Who is this 
person? The member from Kindersley, who’s had to apologize 
in this House, tried to make some comment about this 
Legislative Counsel being the lawyer of the opposition – such 
nonsense. 
 
The Legislative Counsel, who was appointed by this Legislative 
Assembly, serves all members of this Assembly. That’s why the 
member for Kindersley had to apologize for his comments that 
were made. They were not . . and those comments were not lost 
sight of by a lot of people. Even editorials from one end of this 
province chastised the member from Kindersley for his 
indiscreet remarks. Editorials confirmed what lawyers and 
constitutional experts and members of the New Democratic 
Party opposition had been saying, that the government was 
acting illegally. 
 
Now it’s somewhat ironical that here is a government who 
speaks of law and order. They talk of law and order, but they 
themselves set the worst example of all and break the law — 
and break the law – and provide, through special warrant, 
provide through special warrant which we’re going to pay for 
now with the taxpayers’ money through this interim supply, an 
expenditure of over $600 million, simply by the signatures of 
some cabinet ministers. 
 
And to show, Mr. Chairman, how incapable and unconcerned 
and irresponsible the Premier was in all this process, many of 
those special warrants were not even signed by him as the 
president of the Executive Council. 
 
We’re now asked to pass this Bill to pay that expenditure. There 
are special warrants, Mr. Chairman, signed by one minister. The 
member from Kindersley signed an $18 million special warrant. 
Now most people would not consider that to be loose change. 
He signed a special warrant for $18 million for the Department 
of Highways, and he signed as Acting Minister for the 
Department of Highways because the acting minister was not 
around. He didn’t even know what was going on, as usually is 
the case with this minister. 
 
Then on the second line on this order in council, Mr. Chairman, 
this member from Kindersley, who appears to become a very 
powerful man after being dumped from the position of minister 
of Finance, he signs as Acting Minister of Finance, because the 
Acting Minister of Finance was obviously too busy to know 
that he was going to spend another $18 million. No wonder he 
spent 208 per cent . . or made a mistake of 208 per cent on his 

deficit projections, because he did not even take the bother to 
look at the expenditures which his ministers were making, in 
this case $18 million in one special warrant, so that the member 
from Kindersley had to sign on his behalf. 
 
And finally, guess who the third signature was? Eighteen 
million dollars, the Premier did not sign it as the president of 
the Executive Council; it was signed by the member from 
Kindersley – signed as the Acting Minister of Highways, signed 
as the Acting Minister of Finance, signed as the Acting Premier 
– all three of which couldn’t give a dam about what was 
happening in Saskatchewan because they were too busy going 
off to Japan at the cost of $200,000 on the part of the taxpayer, 
was where the Premier was when the first cuts were announced. 
They were too busy, as the Minister of Finance usually is, 
trying to figure out how do you add two and two and get three. 
 
They were too busy, as the Minister of Highways is, and I don’t 
know what he does because he never seems to be anywhere 
when he’s needed. One minister, without even a cabinet 
meeting, signs those kinds of order in council. That’s the kind 
of irresponsibility that we have seen, and no wonder people are 
asking: where did all the money go? Where did my tax dollar 
go? Why did any taxes increase at the record level since 1982 – 
record in Saskatchewan history – while I’m getting less and less 
and less in the services that government provides. That kind of 
irresponsibility, Mr. Chairman, we are asked now to approve in 
this interim supply. 
 
Well I want to say to you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to say to 
the members of the House and to the public of Saskatchewan 
that we’re not going to approve that irresponsibility. We’re 
going to approve the interim supply. We’re going to provide 
leave for that because there are people all over Saskatchewan 
who have waited too long. There are people all over 
Saskatchewan who did not get their appropriated funding from 
this government because there was not a budget; because they 
had to wait for orders in council so they could find one minister 
to sign for two others – in the example I used, for three others. 
 
We’re not going to let those people wait any more. But we want 
to make the point, Mr. Chairman, as Saskatchewan people from 
one end of this province to the other have been making, that this 
kind of deception and irresponsibility is not acceptable in 
Saskatchewan; this kind of mismanagement which took this 
province from a surplus from $140 million in 1982 to an 
accumulated deficit of $3.4 billion in 1987 – that’s just not 
acceptable. 
 
And that’s why today, Mr. Chairman, the Premier didn’t have 
the backbone to answer the questions which were directed at 
him about the deficit. Now this is leadership? Is this leadership? 
It is certainly not. It’s that kind of lack of leadership, it’s that 
kind of I-don’t-give-a-darn attitude, it’s that kind of arrogance 
that puts us in a situation where we have to have another first in 
Saskatchewan. And that is the first time we have to improve 
retroactively an interim supply Bill to the tune of something 
like four months. 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

810 
 

Now, Mr. Chairman, why didn’t we have this session? Why 
didn’t we have this budget? Now I know that the Minister of 
Finance has been going around arguing – oh, but they have to 
take so much time to look at all of the different operations of 
government. What nonsense! Every year the treasury board – 
oh, he probably doesn’t even know he’s got a treasury board – 
but every year the treasury board scrutinizes every department 
line by line. Every year the treasury board says through the 
Minister of Finance to the various departments, bring your 
proposed expenditures to the treasury board on which there are 
members of cabinet, and we will deal with them. 
 
I recall when it was done that way. I recall when it was done 
that way from 1971 until 1982. I recall particularly well when it 
was done that way for the three years which I had the honour of 
being the Minister of Finance. Every single cent that was 
expended was accounted for, and every department’s programs 
were reviewed. And in that period of time, Mr. Chairman, the 
budget was always timely. It wasn’t a review that they were 
really doing that held up, that held up this process. It was 
simply a political agenda that the Minister of finance and his 
colleagues in cabinet were trying to implement. 
 
Now, they don’t have time to look at the taxpayers’ interests. 
They don’t have time to bring in a budget on time. But they’ve 
got time on Friday, I am told, when the Premier isn’t here to 
answer questions which are asked about the concerns of the 
people who’ve had their children cut off from the dental 
program, the Premier who is too busy out somewhere on a golf 
course, too busy to be here answering the question. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The members are not supposed to 
make reference to people’s absence or presence in the 
legislature. I’d ask the member to keep that in mind. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I will keep that in mind, Mr. Chairman. 
The question is: was the Premier at the golf course? And the 
way he acted in this House today in question period, he might 
as well have been in the golf course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Chairman, we are going to 
have some questions to ask of this Minister of Finance when we 
get to the committee on this Bill, because he is going to have to 
explain what it is that his government has spent over $700 
million without the authorization of this legislature. And he is 
going to have to explain where he proposes to spend some 
more. 
 
While we are now going to pass some money to pay some of 
the bills for an almost destroyed dental program, and we’re 
going to pass on some interim money to pay for a destroyed 
program under the prescription drug plan – and the list goes on 
and on – friends of the government, friends of the government 
which this Bill is going to pay the salaries of and other perks are 
riding high on the hog. 
 
This interim supply Bill doesn’t pay the salary of Paul 
Schoenhals in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, but 
indirectly it does, because if they were not wasting $150,000 on 
Mr. Schoenhals’ salary in the potash 

corporation, then the potash corporation might have that money 
available to pay as a dividend to the taxpayers and the treasury 
of Saskatchewan. So indirectly this interim supply Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, is going to pay for the high living, for the high living 
of an ex-cabinet minister whose constituents on October 20 
decided that he should retire because he was not doing an 
adequate job. 
 
Now this Bill, Mr. Chairman, does not pay the similar kind of 
salary for one George Hill, the president of the power 
corporation, directly. But indirectly, I’m telling you, because 
that is another expense to the power corporation and may 
become a burden on the treasury; it is paying the salary and the 
high living of one George Hill, former president of the 
Conservative Party, former friend of the Premier, and 
constituent of the Premier, and presently a very close friend of 
the Premier, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But I want to say that with this interim supply the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan are going to pay the bill for the cost of hiring one 
Tim Embury, the former member from Lakeview, the former 
minister who the electorate also said they didn’t want to have 
anything to do with. And we don’t know how much he’s getting 
paid, but we know that the firm he’s working for is probably 
getting paid well in excess of $500,000 for studying how to 
down-size the government. 
 
The first place that they should start with down-sizing the 
government is, get rid of some of this patronage that has 
become so rampant in Saskatchewan, and they really will have 
been doing something worthwhile. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Chairman, because it’s money the Liquor Board 
and the liquor commission won’t put back into the treasury, 
indirectly pays a salary of one Keith Parker, former MLA for 
Moose Jaw North. He didn’t do bad by defeat. He didn’t do bad 
by defeat, you know; he’s getting something like $50,000 a year 
as an executive assistant to the head of the Saskatchewan 
Liquor Board. What a double standard! 
 
They can’t find $34,000 for the Voice of the Handicapped, 
which does a terrific job, a necessary job. They can’t find 
$34,000 for the Voice of the Handicapped, but they can find 
$50,000 to pay the salary of a defeated MLA from Moose Jaw 
North simply because he’s a Conservative MLA. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the public may vote to defeat some 
Conservatives, but they just can’t get rid of them – they just 
can’t get rid of them. They still have to be given the bill for 
keeping them living high on the hog. 
 
This interim supply Bill, Mr. Chairman, is going to pay for the 
salary of one Paul Rousseau in London. This interim supply 
Bill, because special warrants had to pay for some of his salary, 
helped to sustain one Sid Dutchak, who is also a defeated 
cabinet minister. And the list goes on. And this whole patronage 
sets the double standard which the public of Saskatchewan will 
just not accept, and nor should they accept, Mr. Chairman, 
because it’s not fair. 
 
The public understands that you have to deal firmly during 
times when things are tough. But the public 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

811 
 

understands and will not accept when they have to be second 
class when it comes to what they have to pay, and what friends 
of the Conservative Party have to pay. 
 
(1500) 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, some time ago, on January 27, 1987, when 
the Premier was talking about expenditures of government, he 
made a very telling comment which I think deserves repeating. 
And the headline in the Prince Albert newspaper of January 27, 
1987 said, “Lean, Mean Province Premier Devine’s Goal.” He 
went on to say that Saskatchewan must become leaner and 
meaner to tackle world economic conditions – now 
Saskatchewan has to tackle the world economic conditions. 
Well, Saskatchewan . . He said this at a Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association regional meeting. 
 
Well, I want to say, as my colleague from Riversdale says: Mr. 
Speaker, we’re meaner. Certainly this government is meaner. 
But it’s selective in its meanness; it’s selective in its meanness. 
It wasn’t mean to George Hill. It wasn’t mean to Paul 
Schoenhals. It wasn’t mean to Dave Tkachuck, who runs a 
mailing service now, former special assistant of the Premier, 
who’s getting millions of dollars from the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer through this interim supply Bill. Or Dome 
Advertising. 
 
We see once again, and we’re paying; the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer is going to have to pay through this Bill, millions of 
dollars being spent on advertising which you hear on the radio 
several times every hour, every day—full page ads in the 
newspapers. Television ads, which don’t come cheap – millions 
of dollars. Now, the Saskatchewan taxpayer is asked to pay 
through this interim supply Bill for those expenditures, while 
the government is preaching restraint. 
 
What kind of restraint is that? It’s restraint on ordinary citizens. 
It’s restraint on the part of most of the constituents of Regina 
North East, or the constituents of Quill Lakes, or the 
constituents of Wascana. It’s restraint on their part. And even 
Eastview. But it’s not restraint on the part of friends of the 
government. It’s not restraint on the part of high-flying cabinet 
ministers who, between all of them, have political staff of 183 
people — 183 people on their political staffs who are getting 
paid something like $10 million a year. And these people 
preach restraint? 
 
The children of Saskatchewan aren’t any longer going to have a 
superior dental plan. Children over the age of 13 won’t have 
any at all. But those high-priced, political assistants in those 
ministers’ offices, who are sent away to Saskatoon for a 
weekend of wining and dining so that expensive consultants 
from all across Canada can come in and tell them how to sell 
the budget cuts to the press – at a five-star hotel. This is 
fairness, Mr. Chairman? I don’t think it’s fairness. That’s why 
this budget is being rejected by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, the Minister of Finance, he pleads. He pleads. He says, I 
didn’t know what I was doing. I’m surprised he hasn’t said, the 
devil made me do it. And maybe he did. But I suspect it was the 
Premier who made him do it. It was this leadership of this 
Premier who made him do it. 

The Minister of Finance pleads, he says, oh but things have 
collapsed around my ears. I didn’t know that we weren’t going 
to have these kinds of revenues. And he pretends in the way he 
says it that they have had this problem building up since 1982. 
 
I want to show you, Mr. Chairman, that that’s not true. That’s 
not true. In the years from ’82 to 1985, this government had as 
much resource revenue, each and every one of those years, as 
did the former New Democratic Party government in the last 
few years before 1982. In 1981-82, Mr. Chairman, the resource 
revenues was $760 million. In 1982-83 there were $770 million 
during their term. Actually went up. In 1983-84 there was $760 
million again. In 1984 and 1985 the revenues from resources to 
the treasury of Saskatchewan was $865 million. 
 
And yet these incompetent people, these uncaring people, these 
people who know nothing about mismanagement, ran deficits to 
the tune of hundreds of millions of dollars, so that by the end of 
1986 we had an accumulated deficit of some $2 billion. And it 
wasn’t necessary. 
 
The only reason that that bill was put on the backs of 
Saskatchewan people, why there were mortgaged – and every 
child that is now born in Saskatchewan immediately picks up a 
debt of $3,400 – the only reason that is the case is because they 
deliberately made political decisions which had nothing to do 
with responsible government. 
 
Now I would like some time for the Minister of Finance to 
explain this. Because now we are having . . Part of this interim 
supply Bill, Mr. Chairman, is to pay for the interest on the debt 
that has been incurred by that Minister of Finance, the member 
for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, and by that former minister of 
Finance, the member from Kindersley. 
 
Why will they not explain, and hopefully they will, that in 
1982, when the value of oil pumped in Saskatchewan, out of the 
ground, gone for ever, was $1.1 billion, Saskatchewan had 
revenues of $700 million, but in 1985, when the value of the oil 
pumped out of the ground in Saskatchewan, that’s gone for 
ever, was $2.4 billion, our revenues were only $650 million? 
Why? 
 
I’ll tell you why. That was the case because those people in the 
Conservative Party felt obligated to pay off a political debt to 
the oil corporations who made massive contributions to them 
during the election campaign of 1982 – a political debt of $1 
billion between ’82 and ’86. Now think. Just think what $1 
billion could have done for Saskatchewan people. We wouldn’t 
have had the deficit that we have today. 
 
You would think that after the election they would have learned 
their lesson. But no! Do you know what their first cut was, in 
December of 1986? The first cut was cutting oil royalties to the 
oil corporations once again. After they cut the royalties to the 
oil corporations so they’d get three years of tax holiday on wells 
drilled, even if the price of oil increases to 30 or $40 a barrel – 
three years of tax holiday they cut in December. That was the 
first cut. 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

812 
 

And how were they going to pay for it? They’re going to pay 
for it by cutting out the dental program for our children. 
They’re going to pay for it by increasing the rates for people 
who are living in our nursing homes. They’re going to pay for it 
by telling people who are now going to have to, out of their 
pocket, pay 500, 1,000, $1,300 for prescription drugs — that’s 
how they’re going to pay for this gift to the oil companies. 
 
How are they going to pay for it? Well they’ve cancelled the 
farm purchase program, which they were so proud of when they 
introduced it. Now, my goodness, is the Premier now saying 
that the agricultural economy has improved so much that it’s no 
longer necessary? Is that what he’s saying? What a betrayal. 
 
What a betrayal, at a time when the farm and the agricultural 
economy’s probably worse than it’s ever been. That’s when the 
Premier and this Minister of Finance choose to cut out the farm 
purchase program. Why? Because they have got to pay for the 
gift to the oil corporations which was introduced in December 
when they provided a further cut, a further cut to the oil 
royalties. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the unfortunate truth here in all of this is that 
this government is systematically tearing down the whole fabric 
of life in this province as it has developed over the past few 
generations. It appears that anything not moulded in their own 
image is not good enough to keep around. 
 
All that the Minister of Finance can do, when he could have had 
revenues of $500 million under a real tax reform at the federal 
government level, all he could do when the Minister of Finance 
in Ottawa, another Conservative, stands up and brings in a farce 
for a tax reform is say, good thing. He praises it. 
 
He praises it even though people who are earning low and 
moderate incomes are going to have, they pretend, a saving of 
$320, but in fact they’re not going to be. They’re going to lose 
money because they’re going to pay more in the sales tax. At 
the same time, people of incomes of over $100,000 a year are 
going to save over $4,000. And all this Minister of Finance can 
do is stand up and say: good thing, Michael Wilson. Good 
thing, Brian Mulroney. 
 
What a price we have to pay. What a price we in Saskatchewan 
have to pay for this federal government bail-out of this Premier 
during the election campaign. We’re now going to be paying 
more and more and more. That’s not fairness, Mr. Chairman. 
This interim supply Bill that we’re considering here today is a 
disgrace. 
 
It’s not a disgrace because it’s going to provide money to needy 
people in Saskatchewan, and pay the wages of public servants, 
and provide grants to municipalities, and provide money for 
hospital boards and school boards. That’s not why it’s a 
disgrace. 
 
It’s a disgrace because it is a first time in Saskatchewan history 
that we have to have an interim supply Bill that covers a period 
all the way to April 1, because this government chose to hide 
from the public of 

Saskatchewan and would not introduce a budget because it 
wanted to have a session during the summer when, they 
thought, nobody would pay attention. 
 
And I want to say here today, they have misjudged badly, 
because the public of Saskatchewan knows, and the public of 
Saskatchewan is questioning, and they do not agree with what’s 
happening, and they will not forget next fall. They will not 
forget in 1988, when there is a federal election, and every 
Conservative federal member of parliament is in danger of 
being defeated. And they will not forget in ’89 or 1990, 
whenever the next election is come. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this budget and this deception of this 
government will eliminate the Conservative Party from any 
kind of profile in Saskatchewan for a long time to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now we will support he motion. As I 
said, we will not oppose, we will not oppose the interim supply, 
but we will not support . . And the member from Kindersley 
laughs, and so he . . It’s funny to him. It’s funny to him that 
during his period of time when he was the minister of Finance 
is when this crisis was created. 
 
Now that member from Kindersley who laughs at the people of 
Saskatchewan was the one who stood in this House and 
described his budget of 1985 as the most intelligent budget. 
Now, Mr. Chairman, that most intelligent budget presented by 
the minister of Kindersley was so intelligent, do you know what 
happened to him? The Premier couldn’t stand the heat, and he 
had to demote him out of the Department of Finance to some 
other department. And today he sits in his seat, he sits in his 
seat, and he thinks that his mismanagement was funny. 
 
Well it may be funny to him, Mr. Chairman, but it’s not funny 
to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to enter 
into this debate very briefly to say that in my judgement, Mr. 
Chairman, this motion is about one thing, and one thing only, 
essentially, and that is the credibility of the government. 
 
What this motion speaks to is whether or not we, as the 
legislators of this Assembly, and those who are the voters, the 
electorate of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, the 
public of Saskatchewan, are entitled to believe in what the 
government says and what it does with respect to, not only 
fiscal matters, but matters generally. This debate is, in my 
judgement, a debate about the credibility of this government. 
 
(1515) 
 
Let’s take a look at this. We have here an interim supply 
motion, Mr. Chairman, which is four months now, three of 
which are retroactive, in effect – four months late. Everybody in 
Saskatchewan knows that the tradition and 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

813 
 

the history of our province has been to introduce our budget 
some time in March, to call the legislature for February/March, 
and thereafter use interim supply as the session goes on until it 
is completed by the end of June, or approximately around the 
end of June. 
 
On this occasion, and probably on one of the rarest occasions, if 
ever before – I don’t think it has happened in Saskatchewan 
history – we have witnessed this government delaying the 
process of the budget being introduced and the session being 
recalled for a period of up to nearly four months. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I say that that speaks to the credibility of this 
government. The retroactivity aspects of this resolution speak to 
the credibility of this government. We are asked by this interim 
supply motion, Mr. Chairman, to approve the estimates, in 
effect, to approve that the forecasts of the Minister of Finance 
for the current year, or portion of the current year, are 
something that we can believe in, that we can trust. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Chairman, I have some serious doubts about that, 
based on the proceedings of the last four months, and even 
perhaps the last six months. Here we had in the budget of 
March of 1986 an estimate by the Minister of Finance that the 
deficit it would be about $00 million. We find out that the 
deficit is $1.2 billion, which is missing the mark by at least, as 
we know, $800 million. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, that it is incredible that any treasurer, be it 
corporate treasurer or a private treasurer, would be so wildly off 
base in the estimates that we are now asked to approve a portion 
thereof, as this government has proven itself to be. There is, in 
my judgement, no credibility. This motion, this resolution, is an 
issue dealing with the credibility of the government. 
 
Earlier, Mr. Chairman, there have been questions asked of the 
Premier as to when his government – and he is the leader of the 
government – knew about the desperate financial situation for 
the province of Saskatchewan. Summarized briefly, the 
questions are of the Premier: when did he know; what did he 
know; who told him; what actions did he direct the government 
to take to deal with this crisis? 
 
I think it’s fair to say that the spectacle of question period today 
speaks to the credibility of this government and of this Premier 
and of this administration. The failure to answer these questions 
which deal with knowledge, not the way the Hon. Minister of 
Finance tried to explain it away, the discrepancies as between 
his estimates – that’s another rebate for another occasion, 
perhaps even during this debate, I don’t know—but the issue of 
trust, the issue of what it is that we as legislators are expected to 
believe when a motion of this nature is introduced, is what is 
being spoken to and addressed to. 
 
It’s an issue of credibility. Can we believe the financial 
forecasts of the Minister of Finance? Can we believe the 
assurances of the a premier with respect to estimates and 
deficits and budgetary forecasts and fiscal projections? Can the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan accept and rely upon 
the representations that any minister of the Crown might make? 
That’s what this resolution is all 

about. 
 
We are being asked by this four-twelfths estimate of interim 
supply to accept certain assumptions pertaining to the 
credibility of this administration. And I say to you, sir, Mr. 
Chairman, that the whole history of this session, this particular 
session since the election, the wildly missed forecasts; the delay 
in calling back the House; the question of the special warrants 
of questionable lawful acceptance, of dubious legality; the 
terribly miscast forecasts, wildly off base – not close in a 
marginal way, but wildly off – raised some fundamental 
questions as to competence and/or credibility of this 
government. That’s basically the situation. 
 
Either the Premier and the Minster of Finance knew that we 
were $1.23 billion in the hole but didn’t tell the people of 
Saskatchewan in October of 1986, which is a condemnation of 
the government; or in the alternative, the Premier and the 
Minister of Finance did not know that we were 1.2 billion in the 
hole, which is an equally condemnatory position for the Premier 
and the Minister of Finance to be in. 
 
Either way, the election of 1986 has proven to be a cruel fraud, 
almost a cruel hoax, perpetrated upon the people of 
Saskatchewan. Promises were made willy-nilly, some of which 
have been maintained and kept, but some of which have 
resulted in serious cut-backs elsewhere – the dental technicians’ 
programs, drug plans. I won’t belabour all of those which are 
now well-known to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Chairman, sir, that when we are debating 
this motion for interim supply we are talking about something 
which is at the core of any government’s raison d’être in a 
sense; it is its credibility. We may disagree in terms of ideology 
or policy. Obviously we do – the official opposition and the 
government. But the one thing which sustains government is 
credibility. That when the Premier and the Minister of Finance 
say something to the people of Saskatchewan inside this House 
and outside this House, it ought to be believed and it ought to 
be believable. Because if it isn’t believed or it is not believable, 
as we argue this resolution casts doubt on, based on these 
actions of the government, then the government has lost its 
moral authority to govern. It’s lost its moral authority to 
impose. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Because look at it, Mr. Chairman. It may be 
argued that the government is in a terrible fiscal position. 
Obviously it is in very dire straits. If it’s asking the people of 
Saskatchewan to tighten our belts, if it’s asking us to take the 
outrage of cut-backs, it’s got to do so with the moral conviction 
and the moral authority which allows us in the interests of the 
province of Saskatchewan to accept – perhaps not willingly – 
but to accept that fate and to pull our load to get us over this 
time. 
 
But if the government by its profligate expenditures, if the 
government by its mismanagement and its waste, if the 
government by its misleading statements in the election period 
or elsewhere destroys its credibility, then it is virtually 
impossible . . No, Mr. Chairman, I’d even say 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

814 
 

the people of Saskatchewan should legitimately ask why it is 
they’re called upon now to do their bit, to do their share of 
trying to pull us out of this catastrophic economic circumstance. 
 
And to me, Mr. Chairman, as I take my place, this resolution is 
an argument and a discussion about the credibility of the 
government. I invite all members of the House, on the 
government side and on this side, to examine carefully under 
the close scrutiny of this debate, whether or not the actions and 
the statements of the province of Saskatchewan, as exemplified 
by its Premier and the Minister of Finance, are believable. I ask 
them whether or not in the future we should believe them. And 
because I have some very serious worries about those questions, 
Mr. Chairman, I feel that it’s important that I voice them. And I 
raise them, and I continue to do so, because members of the 
voting public in my constituency are asking me these kinds of 
questions about what the Premier knew, when he knew it, who 
told them, and what actions they took, which is what this 
finance motion is all about. 
 
For me, Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Finance and the Premier 
have got a lot of explaining to do in order to convince me and 
members of the voting public in my constituency that this kind 
of resolution and action, in the light of the history, is totally 
acceptable. Thank you, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, I want to just convey some of 
the concerns that have been expressed to me over the last three 
or four months by constituents from Regina Lakeview, by 
people in Regina, and by people all over Saskatchewan, as a 
matter of fact. 
 
There has been a very serious and grave concern expressed 
about the lack of accountability of the government, Mr. 
Chairperson. This lack of accountability doesn’t just arrive; it’s 
not a recent thing. We saw in Bill 5 prior to Christmas – the Bill 
5 that was introduced and passed by this government – a 
movement towards reducing accountability by the government 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In this reorganization Bill which allows the government to 
reorganize and dismantle departments and create new ones, 
behind cabinet doors, that’s not open to the public, it has a very 
profound effect in reducing accountability to the public. Now 
how is the government attempting to do this? We now see a 
budget that is delayed some three or four months beyond the 
normal course of when a budget would be introduced. Why are 
they attempting to reduce accountability to the government? 
 
I ask you, Mr. Chairman, why? Why would a government not 
want to account to the public? Well I think the answer is very 
simple, Mr. Chairman. I think it’s because they are ashamed of 
many of the things that they’ve done, and that what many of the 
things they have been doing are wrong in terms of priority, and 
they’re concerned that the people of the province will be so 
upset with them that they may not re-elect them at the next 
election. 
 
Accountability to the public sector, Mr. Chairman, is 

basic and fundamental to the democratic system. It prevents 
abuse by the executive arm of government; that’s why we have 
it. That’s why our laws are written up; that’s why tradition has 
dictated that there be complete accountability by the executive 
arm of government at appropriate times – not four months after 
the fact, but at appropriate times. 
 
Proper accounting to the Legislative Assembly allows members 
of the Legislative Assembly to perform their duty, Mr. 
Chairman; their duty of scrutinizing the executive arm of 
government; their duty of scrutinizing governmental spending, 
which is a very major duty, a very major duty of each and every 
member in this Legislative Assembly. It’s fundamental to our 
parliamentary democratic process, and in the last few months 
we have. . this accountability has not been there; we have not 
been allowed to perform our duty in the manner in which we 
should, or that we would like to. 
 
The end of the fiscal year, as you know, is March 31, and we 
didn’t have a budget tabled until June 17. And as my colleague, 
the member from Regina North East, indicated, that is a first in 
the history of Saskatchewan. And why was this done? It was 
done also under questionable legal circumstances. As you 
know, we have a legal opinion that says that the failure to call 
the legislature, government spending by special warrants, is 
probably illegal. But why did the government wish to risk, wish 
to risk the possibility of committing an illegal act? Why did 
they want to do that? 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, the reason why they wanted to 
do that was because of their political agenda. Their political 
agenda was more important to them than following 
parliamentary tradition, than being accountable to the public, 
and more important than doing what was right for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and that was to come forward and come clean. 
 
The government is holding a trust, Mr. Chairperson, holding a 
trust. It is spending other people’s money. It’s spending your 
money, it’s spending my money, it’s spending the money of the 
people of Regina Lakeview, and money from people all over 
Saskatchewan. It’s holding a trust. It has an obligation to 
perform that duty to the best of its ability. And I think its 
actions of the last three or four months have certainly put that 
into question. 
 
Mr. Chairperson, special warrants are exactly what they’re 
called; they’re special. They’re intended for unexpected 
expenditures – not to replace a budget and continue 
governmental financing on an ongoing basis over a period of 
three or four months, simply to serve the political agenda of the 
government. 
 
And if we look at The Department of Finance Act, and in 
particular section 33(1), the wording makes it perfectly clear 
that special warrants are only intended for unexpected 
expenditures. Can one say that when a government decides, for 
political purposes, not to call the legislature, not to call the 
session until the summer-time so people are interested in what’s 
going on, is that an unexpected expenditure? Hardly! Hardly, 
Mr. Chairperson. That’s dishonest on the part of the 
government to suggest that those were unexpected 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

815 
 

expenditures, because they weren’t. They knew full well what 
they were doing. 
 
(1530) 
 
After spending some $900 million, or 700 million plus – I’m 
not sure of the exact figure – we heard the Premier today, Mr. 
Chairperson, say in question period, or leave us with the 
impression in question period, that a few hundred million here 
or there didn’t really matter; that these sorts of inaccuracies 
happened on a regular basis. Well that’s not so, Mr. 
Chairperson, and the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
aren’t going to believe that sort of answer. 
 
It’s also important to note, I think, that in The Globe and Mail 
article of April 30, 1987, the Minister of Justice had indicated 
or agreed that the Lieutenant Governor would be justified in 
intervening if the provincial government did not schedule a 
budget until this fall. I suggest to you, Mr. Chairperson, the fact 
that the Minister of Justice felt that the Lieutenant governor 
may be justified in intervening that the government knew what 
it was doing was improper. It knew what it was doing was 
wrong. And it knew that the legislature should be in session so 
that the members of the Legislative Assembly could properly 
deal with the expenditures of government. 
 
And so I suggest to you, Mr. Chairperson, that that affects their 
credibility, and that the people of Saskatchewan are not going to 
accept that. They are . . and you will see the results of that in 
the next election. The reaction to the Legislative Counsel and 
Law Clerk’s memo saying that the expenditures through special 
warrant was illegal, the very strong reaction condemning the 
Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk, Mr. Chairperson, is a 
reaction of a government that knows what it is doing is wrong. 
 
I also want to refer to briefly, to what the – to the auditor’s 
concerns. As you know in the report of the auditor, the auditor 
has expressed some very grave concerns about the failure to 
come forth and present a budget on a timely basis and to present 
accounting on a timely basis to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The auditor has also expressed concerns about private sector 
auditors. And as you know there is suggestion that the 
government is going to be having auditors in the private sector 
audit the public accounts and the accounts of Crown 
corporations as opposed to using the office of the Provincial 
Auditor. Now that causes members in this House concern, and 
it causes the auditors concern. 
 
The auditor claims that this could detract from the ability, from 
his ability, to satisfy himself as to the true state of affairs of 
public money. And we also raised the question, not only does 
this mean that it diminishes the office of the Provincial Auditor, 
but when these private auditors are vying for the contracts, does 
that mean that they would be less likely to say something 
controversial about the government than would they be if they 
were entirely independent and stationed in the Provincial 
Auditor’s office? I think that’s a very grave concern the public 
has. And this government should not forget that. And this 
government should not forget that, 

that the Provincial Auditor has to be independent of 
government. And the Provincial Auditor, and auditors dealing 
with government, should remain as independent as possible. 
 
There is also some concern that the auditor has expressed about 
changing Provincial Auditor’s supervisory role re: the Crown 
corporations. And the Provincial Auditor is concerned that, if 
his supervisory role is changed, this will reduce his powers. He 
also expressed concern, he was deeply concerned over the lack 
of timely, appropriate financial information. 
 
And the reason why I want to raise all these things Mr. 
Chairperson, is because this brings us back to the argument of 
accountability. If the Provincial Auditor’s office is not strong, if 
it is not properly staffed, if he cannot review the accounts and 
report to the legislature on a timely basis, if his supervisory role 
over private auditors is reduced, this could ultimately – and I 
suggest probably will – affect the accountability of this 
government to the people of Saskatchewan. And those concerns 
are very real concerns, and the government should take note of 
them. 
 
Now what has been happening in the last three or four months? 
While programs were being decimated, Mr. Chairperson, while 
we had programs like our dental program being decimated, 
while advocacy agencies were being eliminated or their funding 
was being substantially reduced . . the Voice of the 
Handicapped pops to mind, Mental Health Association, the civil 
liberties association, the drastic cut to the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Commission, all these agencies, Mr. Chairperson, that 
deal with government, they’re advocacy agencies that take on 
government, and they bring problems to the government’s 
attention – problems that may very well involve government – 
all these agencies are being reduced and cut back. That’s what’s 
been happening in the last three or four months. 
 
That, Mr. Chairperson, goes to accountability. That, Mr. 
Chairperson, affects the accountability of this government to 
this House. If these agencies and boards and commission are 
unable to function properly because the government refuses to 
properly fund them, it ultimately affects accountability. 
 
But on the other hand, as my colleague from Regina North East 
pointed out, this government has lots of money for its political 
friends and for friends of the PC Party. 
 
An Hon. Member: — George Hill. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Yes, that’s right. The member from Souris-
Cannington says George Hill, and I quote agree with him. 
 
But what we see here is a picture of the government in every 
way possible attempting to reduce accountability to this 
legislature by introducing Bill 5, by refusing to call the 
legislature, by cutting advocacy agencies and agencies that take 
on government. 
 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Chairperson, that it’s important to 
bring this aspect to the attention of the people of 



 
June 29, 1987 

816 
 

Saskatchewan. And it’s important to warn the government that 
this course of action is not going to be successful. The people of 
Saskatchewan will not stand for this; they will not allow 
themselves to be brow-beaten and reduced into being servants 
of this government when this government should be their 
servants. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to address 
a few remarks with respect to this motion. And I think that an 
interim supply motion addresses itself to the budgeting of the 
government, what it wants money for, and what justification it 
lays before a legislature before asking a legislature to vote 
money. 
 
The very essence of our system of democracy, parliamentary 
democracy, is that the legislature must vote money to the 
Crown. There is a great deal of history which I won’t trouble 
the House about to repeat now. But all of us know that the 
bedrock of our system is that you cannot pass a law without the 
legislature saying so, and you cannot levy a tax without the 
legislature saying so. Aside from some trifling exceptions, that 
is the bedrock of our system. 
 
And we are now dealing with one of those pillars of our system, 
now voting money to the government; voting money to the 
government so that it may spend it in a way which is 
satisfactory to the taxpayers whom we are elected, on each side 
of the House, to represent. 
 
We are now dealing with an interim supply motion and in due 
course a Bill, and this breaks new ground in Saskatchewan. 
Never before have we had an interim supply Bill under these 
particular circumstances. I believe I’m accurate in saying that. 
Never before have we had an interim supply Bill where the Bill 
was presumably designed to deal with a great number of special 
warrants which were passed for the same fiscal period. 
 
I may be wrong in suggesting that there is no precedent. 
Certainly it would have to be a long way back if there was a 
precedent. I have checked some figures since 1945, and, in each 
of those years except one, the budget was introduced in March 
or February, from which I can deduce, I think correctly, that the 
legislature was in session during that period. And I can also 
deduce because the law has been the same for many, many 
years as it is now, and that is that no special warrants may be 
passed when the legislature is in session. 
 
It follows therefore that when we have been asked to vote 
interim supply in the past, it has been because a budget has been 
before the legislature, but under debate and not passed. The one 
exception to this rule since 1945 was the year 1985 when the 
government opposite was tardy in its budget and did not bring it 
in until April – April 10. 
 
I do not believe there were special warrants to cover the period 
from April 1 to April 10, and accordingly I think therefore that 
this is a new circumstance where we are passing an interim 
supply Bill when we believe that it subsumes – it takes into 
account special warrants which have already been passed. And I 
want to say that we on 

this side of the House are acting on the assumption that the 
proper legal interpretation of the Appropriation Bill, the interim 
supply Bill which will be before us, is that the sums which we 
will be asked to vote, roughly $1.2 billion on the consolidated 
account, will be first used in effect to match the special warrants 
which have already been issued, and secondly will be used to 
supply funds for the future for the month of July. 
 
And I’m assuming that this is the case. I don’t know whether 
we have any law on the point, since it is my belief that this 
situation has not occurred since 1905, but this is our 
understanding and we’re acting on that specific understanding, 
and we are asking the government to confirm that they are not 
asking for $1.2 billion over and above the close to $1 billion 
they have already provided themselves with through the 
medium of special warrants. 
 
I don’t propose to detain the committee on the propriety of the 
government passing special warrants to the extent that they 
have. My colleague from Regina Lakeview has set out what is 
pretty firm, I think, that the propriety is at least very 
questionable, very questionable. And I hope we will not see a 
repeat of this assertion by the government opposite that they 
have a right to govern without a legislature, because they have a 
right to provide funds by special warrant indefinitely, and 
therefore they don’t ever need to call the legislature except to 
have it meet once a year in accordance with the Saskatchewan 
Act and the federal legislation or the constitution of Canada. I 
shouldn’t call it federal legislation; it is our constitution, federal 
and provincial. 
 
They shamelessly asserted that, that somehow they had the right 
to pass special warrants indefinitely and that a legislature was 
not necessary to make a parliamentary democracy work. I think 
that they would not have wished to have that pressed in the 
courts, and I think it was our assertion that the time had come to 
make them defend that in the courts that caused them to 
summon this legislature. 
 
They gave us four weeks’ notice, which I think is 
unprecedented in the calling back of a legislature to hear a 
budget, absolutely unprecedented, and the only reason they 
gave us four weeks’ notice was our prior announcement that we 
proposed to go to the courts to test the matter of the legality of 
their special warrant. 
 
(1545) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We did not wish to engage in frivolous 
litigation or in — far from frivolous — engage in litigation 
which would not have an immediate use, because we knew that 
we would be unlikely to get a decision by the court within the 
four weeks, and we drew back. 
 
But I want to say to the government that I suspect that the 
opposition would take the view that if the government proposes 
to proceed as they did in 1987 and attempt to finance the 
government by special warrants and not by calling back the 
legislature, there will be a test of the legality of it. And I think 
that the government ought to get 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

817 
 

some legal advice before they pursue that course of actin 
. . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
The member for Souris-Cannington suggests that they will get 
advice. That’s different from the member for Kindersley who 
said that they had got advice. All I could say is that neither the 
member for Kindersley nor the member for Souris-Cannington 
will put their alleged advice on the Table so that anyone can see 
it. And the advice that we were operating on was public. The 
advice – and let us be charitable and assume they had advice – 
whereby they said that our advice was faulty, was kept close to 
their bosom. They certainly didn’t indicate to any member of 
the public, whose business was being discussed, the legal 
advice on which they felt that they could govern this province 
and spend billions of dollars without the involvement of the 
legislature. I think they will find that if they had advice of that 
kind, they’d better have another opinion. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to touch on another matter alluded 
to by my colleague, the member for Regina Lakeview, and that 
has to do with the Provincial Auditor and, more particularly, the 
move by the government to have private sector auditors operate 
for some government agencies. 
 
I think there is no quarrel with private sector auditors 
performing an audit function for some agencies of the 
government. I do quarrel, however with the suggestion that this 
is somehow in substitution for what the Provincial Auditor is 
charged to for this legislation. 
 
It is very clear, both from the provisions of The Provincial 
Auditor Act, and based upon any principle of parliamentary 
government, that this legislature must have, from the Provincial 
Auditor and not any other auditor, an opinion as to whether or 
not the accounts of the Crown, whether they be in the 
Consolidated Fund or on other agencies, are properly prepared 
and give a proper picture of the financial statement of the 
Crown and its affairs. 
Now that, Mr. Chairman, is fundamental to the operation of this 
legislature, and I want to say to the members opposite that if 
they seek to substitute private sector auditors for the Provincial 
Auditor, the members on this side of the House, at least the 
members in the official opposition, will be raising the most 
strenuous objections. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We understand what we’re talking 
about. One of the members on the government side asks 
whether we were in any way questioning the professional 
competence of private sector auditors. And the answer is, of 
course, no, we are not. We’re questioning the manner of their 
appointment, who their client is, and what their reporting 
mechanism is. 
 
And I think there’s a very real analogy here when we look at the 
private sector itself. We would not allow any company 
incorporated and operating under The Business Corporations 
Act of Saskatchewan to have the board of directors appoint an 
auditor and prepare the report and send it along to the 
shareholders and say: here, here’s a 

report from a private sector auditor, and they are professional 
and they are honourable men, and therefore you should accept 
the report. That’s isn’t how it works. That isn’t how it works. 
The private sector is governed by a law which says that he 
shareholders, the ultimate owners, must appoint he auditor, 
Now that’s the way it works in the private sector, and that is 
how it works here in this legislature, and that is how it ought to 
work in both sectors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I’ve had an occasion to discuss this 
matter with some people who are familiar with auditing, and 
I’ve asked them, well if somebody is appointed – Clarkson 
Gordon, I’ll simply use a firm in whom I have every confidence 
– are appointed by somebody, by the cabinet or by the board of 
directors of the power corporation, to audit the power 
corporation, who is their client? And that’s key – who is their 
client? To whom do they report? Whose interests are they 
protecting? 
 
If the power corporation were a private sector company – if we 
were talking about, let us say, the Ipsco or the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool, no question there. We know which the 
shareholders who appoint them, and we know that Clarkson 
Gordon, to use my example, would have to prepare a report 
giving the shareholders the information they needed to judge 
the financial and accounting performance of the management. 
That’s what auditing is all about. 
 
Now I ask again: in my power corporation analogy, who is the 
client? Who’s appointing – who is appointing Clarkson 
Gordon? Not this legislature. I don’t know who it’s going to be, 
but not the representatives of the ultimate owners. And 
therefore, while there is no problem in having Clarkson Gordon 
do some auditing work . . auditing work doesn’t have to be 
done always for the benefit of the shareholders, it can be done 
for the benefit of management. But the ultimate report, the 
report on whether or not the financial statements fairly represent 
the state of accounts of that corporation, and the results of the 
carrying on of business of that corporation – that must be done 
by someone who represents the shareholders, the ultimate 
owners. That is the Provincial Auditor, and nobody else. 
Nobody else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And we know, of course, that this 
operates in every jurisdiction. We all know that the Auditor 
General in Ottawa feels perfectly free to report on activities of 
federal Crown corporations. And so he should. 
 
And I know that the Provincial Auditor here will continue, I 
trust, to examine into the accounts of all Crown corporations 
and report to this legislature on whether or not those accounts 
are prepared in a manner so as to reveal to this legislature, and 
to the public of Saskatchewan, the true financial position of the 
Crown corporations, and to reveal the results of the carrying on 
of business of those Crown corporations for the period covered 
by the audit statement. 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

818 
 

And there can’t be any doubt about this, and it’s got nothing to 
do with the professionalism of the auditor or anything of that 
kind. Anybody who operates in the profession knows – and I 
think of my own experience in the legal profession – an 
absolutely key question is: who is your client? Who is your 
client? 
 
No professional person wants to get himself in a position of any 
sort of conflict of interest. And very clearly, if a board of 
directors of a Crown corporation appoints an auditing firm and 
the auditing firm feels that they must reflect adversely on the 
management in that board of directors, we set up, immediately, 
a potential conflict of interest. And we simply can’t have it. The 
system doesn’t work that way, and it will not work that way. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to go into a few more aspects of the 
financial management of this government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mismanagement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well my colleague from Quill Lakes 
says mismanagement, and he is entirely right. A number of 
people in this House, and they include the member for 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden and myself, have been around a fair 
while. And we’ve seen a lot of reports from the Provincial 
Auditor. But I venture to think that neither of us have ever seen 
one like the last couple that have been coming from the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
They’re one long litany of comments, saying: this government 
is operating sloppily; this government is not keeping the right 
books; this government is not attending to its knitting; they’re 
not counting their beans, and all of them. 
 
And I can’t help but feel that this condition of not paying 
attention to the careful management of funds is seeping into the 
public service from the top – from the top. We have heard the 
Premier today say, well the deficit was predicted to be 2 or 
$300 million. It was $389 million. Well, it’s just $150 million. I 
mean, and that was as much as several months ago. You 
couldn’t expect us to keep figures, tiny figures like that in our 
heads for all those months. But that I think is the sort of 
mentality which ash seeped down into the public service. 
 
We have seen the many, many statements by the auditor about a 
couple of the corporations, and there are just a long, long series 
of them. And I’d say the agricultural credit corporation, the 
system development controls were not adequate. And no 
security or collateral other than promissory notes was taken, 
and no net worth or cash flow statements were taken, and no 
credit checks were made. And all we did was lend about a 
billion dollars on that basis; lend about a billion dollars on the 
basis of virtually no documents. 
 
Now everybody knows that there were some pressures in this 
case. But I doubt whether the pressures were such that there 
couldn’t have been a few checks. In fact with that program, as I 
recall it, if you owed the government money under a lease, you 
didn’t get the money. But if you owed the bank money under a 
lease, you did get the money. I don’t know the standards which 
were applied, and I’m here not talking about penny ante stuff — 
$1 

billion. 
 
And as the Minister of Finance, the member for Qu’Appelle-
Lumsden, was fair enough to point out today, a part of the 
debacle which produced a deficit in one year of $1.2 billion was 
that the auditor was pressing him, pressing him to provide some 
reserve for bad debts for a loan program which was operated on 
the basis of no security or collateral and no net worth statements 
and no cash flow statements and no credit checks. 
 
And what do you know? Losses were sustained, very significant 
losses. Now I am not suggesting that this program could have 
been operated without some losses. It was . . the nature of the 
program involved some losses, and we concede that out of 
hand. But I suspect that there will be tens and perhaps hundreds 
of millions of dollars of losses because ordinary precautions 
were not taken in lending public money. 
 
And then we move to the livestock cash advances, and deals 
were made. And the auditor points out to the corporations: say, 
you’re not really living up to the deal, you know. And the 
management says, well of course, we’re not required to collect 
the interest; just said we were supposed to. 
 
I don’t think that can work, Mr. Chairman. It is pretty clear that 
if deals are made, if contracts are made, if loans are made on a 
given basis, then they must be collected on that basis, or else 
they must be changed for everybody, or else they must be 
changed for everybody. 
 
(1600) 
 
We have here a situation where, so far as we can tell from the 
audit report, the management decides that it’s not going to 
collect, in some cases. Not good enough. Not good enough. 
This legislature is not authorizing civil servants, public 
servants, to decide when citizens have to pay their debts and 
when they don’t. that is not a function of management. That is a 
function, by and large, of this legislature, but if not of this 
legislature then of the cabinet. If we are going to have people 
saying: oh yes, somebody owes the Crown money, the 
taxpayers money, but the management of a corporation decides 
well, gee, I don’t think that this fella should have to pay . . not 
good enough. Not good enough that public servants are 
deciding which of the citizens of this province are required to 
pay their debts and which are not. 
 
I move to something like the Crown investments corporation, 
and I see in their audit and statement, in their certificate for the 
year ended December 31, 1985, a statement that I don’t think 
I’ve ever seen in an audit report – certainly don’t recall it in a 
very large number of years, if at all, where the auditor says: 
 

. . these consolidated financial statements do not present 
fairly the consolidated financial position of the corporation . . 
. 

 
Well that’s a fine how-do-you-do. I don’t know what we have 
an auditor for unless it is to say that the financial statements 
fairly present them. And if they don’t, then it seems tome up to 
the management to produce some 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

819 
 

statements which satisfy the auditor. If they want to produce 
their own and put them out and say, these are the statements 
that the auditor insists upon, but these are ours, and we think 
we’re right and the auditor is wrong, fair enough. I don’t 
approve of that, but at least we would know what the area of 
contention was. 
 
Here we just have a statement which the management puts out 
and the auditor says: well, well, it’s an interesting set of 
statements, but they don’t fairly represent the picture of the 
corporation. And it’s left at that. I think this is a government 
which is simply not attending to public affairs in the careful 
way that Saskatchewan people have traditionally managed their 
own money and that they expect from the government in 
managing their own money when it comes to the government 
through the public purse. 
 
And there are so many, many other examples. We’re here 
talking about the Department of Advanced Education and 
manpower . . (inaudible interjection) . . And well, a good 
department, a member opposite says: I wonder whether it’s 
asking too much of them to get statutory authority for the 2.1 
million they spent without statutory authority referred to on 
page 36 of the auditor’s report. Well it can always be said that 
this is a merely technical error. But it seems to me that a 
government ought to be attending to its affairs to the extent that 
errors involving $2.1 million get attended to. 
 
Please understand, Mr. Chairman, I know that the Government 
of Saskatchewan is a large organization, and there will always 
be errors. We have 10 or 12,000 employees there who will be 
making human errors. And no one is suggesting that the system 
should be perfect. If we made the system perfect, it would be 
excessively expensive. We all concede that. We all concede that 
there will be errors made, and no one is expecting perfection. 
But $2.1 million ought to have attracted somebody'’ attention. it 
seems that it did not do so. 
 
We have that same Department of Advanced Education and 
manpower saying that . . the auditor saying, look, I don’t like 
the look of your books here. I can’t figure out what you’re 
doing with your money. I don’t think your control systems are 
in order. When the auditor was pushing them in that regard – 
and I’m referring to page 40 of the auditor’s report, and you can 
see it for yourself – they said, well, gosh, if you think so, we 
will review every transaction. And they went and they reviewed 
every transaction. The investigation identified authorized 
expenditures – total 143,000 – that hadn’t been recorded in the 
books. I’m not saying that anybody took the money. I’m just 
saying that this is Wascana Institute. That’s not such a big outfit 
that they shouldn’t be keeping track of their expenditures to the 
extent that $143,000 can be spent and not recorded. 
 
That is the sort of inattention to business that I think has found 
its way into this government right from top to bottom, and I 
think is one of the reasons why, increasingly, people in 
Saskatchewan believe that this government doesn’t have a grip 
on its spending, and why, therefore, we are seeing these 
massive deficits. Only by getting a grip on spending can we 
really limit the spending of any government, any organization. 

Because it is not confined to public servants. But in any 
organization it’s always nicer to spend money than not to spend 
money. Indeed it’s nicer in the private life to spend money than 
to not spend it. And if people are not held accountable pretty 
strictly for money they spend, then practices become sloppy. 
When practices become sloppy, then money trickles away. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Chairman, and to all members opposite, when 
we’re asking people in this province to tighten their belts, to 
watch what they spend, to get by with less, to put up money for 
their own drugs and wait for six or eight months or maybe 
more; when we’re asked to pay 7 cents extra litre for gasoline 
and put in the slips and get back the money next April, simply 
because they . . Then we know what’s going on. 
 
I think all members know that what’s going on is that they want 
to give back the 7 cents, but they don’t ‘want to take it out of 
this budget and are going to send it back next April, and then it 
comes out of next year’s budget. 
 
And somehow they say, well we just haven’t spent that money 
this year. We’ve promised it, but then you can send in your 
bills, you can send in your bills in January and February, but 
wait, you’ll get your money in April, and that won’t come out 
of this budget, and it won’t look so bad. And I don’t think 
there’s a . . (inaudible interjection) . . Well, I don’t think there’s 
any doubt of what I’m saying . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Give them the “tax the oil companies” 
speech. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well a member opposite suggests that I 
give them a “tax the oil companies” speech. I would prefer to 
deal with the matter I’m dealing with, but if he wants to enter 
the debate and give his speech on taxing the senior citizens, 
which he is doing for drugs, and taxing the people in rural 
Saskatchewan, and forcing them to drive for 50 miles to get 
dental care for their kids, which he is doing, then I will talk 
about taxing the oil companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I look at the Department of 
Agriculture, which is a department which the member for 
Weyburn is not totally unfamiliar with, and looking at crop 
insurance, and here again I know that we’re always going to 
have errors, but 75 calculation errors and amendments to the 
crop insurance claims resulted in overpayments of $207,000. 
That’s not very careful work; $207,000 – not very careful work. 
And as I say, we’re not talking about penny ante stuff here. 
 
We’re having the Department of Agriculture, another error here 
of 36,000 on page 48. I don’t want to deal specifically with all 
of these matters, but I want, in effect, to make a point that what 
we are dealing with is a government which asks everybody else 
to tighten their belt, but they will not even tighten their 
accounting procedures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

820 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I look at this . . And when I say 
tightening their belts, I look at this provisions with respect to 
the Hong Kong trade office, and that doesn’t look like a belt 
tightening operation to me. We have, so far as I’m aware, one 
person, one senior employee and one clerical employee there, 
and we’re renting space for this one person, one man or one 
official, one secretary operation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What did it cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well we are . . It’s a three-year lease, 
and it costs $168,000 a year – a year – so that it’s $500,000 for 
an office . . for a trade officer in Hong Kong. I know that rents 
are high in Hong Kong – I know that – but $168,000 a year for 
an office for one person and a secretary? 
 
That strikes me as a shade on the high side. And it’s all very 
well to say that we’re trying to generate trade. But we very, 
very clearly have to be careful and prudent in how we spend 
this taxpayers’ money when that same 500,000, over three 
years, if you cut it in half and add an extra 250,000 over three 
years to deal with problems of people here in Saskatchewan, I 
suspect we could find some very useful purposes to spend that 
kind of money. But instead, we’re spending it for rental in Hong 
Kong, for what kind of premises I don’t know, but they 
certainly do not look as if they’re modest in their appointments. 
 
Unfortunately, the errors and omissions of the government 
opposite are not confined to spending more money. 
Occasionally they decide that they’re going to spend less money 
than they provide for. And guess who gets less money? Well, 
it’s the northern school districts who, if they’d followed their 
own rules, would have got an extra $288,000 – and that’s a 
significant sum of money for the northern school districts. But, 
however, it just didn’t seem to get there. 
 
I guess it was needed to provide some breaks for the oil 
companies, as my colleague from Weyburn would say, and 
would cheer. Why, indeed, should school children in northern 
Saskatchewan have the 288,000 when perfectly respectable 
Alberta oil companies could have it. And that is the position he 
has consistently taken. And I don’t know why he wouldn’t 
continue so to do. 
 
And I turn now to the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. 
And I’m pleased to say that, at least as of now, that’s a public 
enterprise, and we have . . that’s not a large corporation, the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. And it used to operate 
in really quite a modest compass, borrowing a few hundred 
thousand dollars here and not being required to find vast sums 
of money. That was before it came under the tender 
ministrations of the previous member for Wilkie, Mr. Jim 
Garner, who decided that he was going to turn this into a 
corporation whose attributes were letting their buses get older 
and running enormous deficits. So that in each year of the 
operations of that company, under his ministrations, the loss 
exceeded all previous losses since 1945 – that’s in each year, or 
at least in 1945 to 1982. 
 
In all, accumulated losses didn’t add up to the losses 

which he managed to roll up every year. And is it any wonder? 
Because the auditor points out, say, it looks like you borrowed 
$1.2 million for which you didn’t have any authority. 
 
(1615) 
 
Now once again, having regard to the size of that operation, a 
$1 million oversight is a lot of money. And when the company 
is being operated so that people are not concerning themselves 
with $1.2 million, it’s not surprising that the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company is in difficult financial circumstances 
these last four or five years, and it’s not surprising that 
members opposite feel that the way to solve the problem is to 
sell the company. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I suggest that the way to solve this problem, and 
a good number of other government problems, is for this 
government to get a hold of its finances, to manage the province 
properly, and then there will be returns, there will be profits, 
and we will not have to sell off the public heritage in order to 
finance their profligate spending habits for another two or three 
months. We will be able to have something to pass on to our 
children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, the members opposite 
suggest that somehow we’re arguing that more government is 
good government. We can have that debate another time. 
 
All I’m just saying that just because you cut down the size of 
government, doesn’t mean that you can throw money out of 
every window. And that is really what has been happening. It is, 
I think, significant; it is significant that this audit report contains 
many, many more reports of simply bad management, simply 
diaper league management, than we have had for many, many 
years. And that is because this government has adopted that 
style of management. They regard all matters as matters of 
principle. If you’re expanding government, it’s bad; if you’re 
contracting government, it’s good. But they’re not directing 
their attention to whether or not they’re running the ship 
properly. 
 
And I think that the public of this province who, for the most 
part, run their own affairs with a great deal of frugality, are 
getting fed up with a government that decides that it can deal 
with everything on the basis of a slogan, and nothing on the 
basis of hard figures which add up to numbers which they can 
understand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We had another display of that during 
the question period. We had more gobbledygook about the 
difference between 500 million and 1,200 million than I’ve 
heard in a long time. No, it was Liquor Board and it was this – 
none of them would add up to 700 million, none of them. And 
they didn’t attempt to say, look, here is the situation: one, two, 
three, four, five. They present the appearance, at least, of not 
being able to add up as high as five, because they really will not 
address the 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

821 
 

hard numbers which they must address if they are going to 
manage this province properly, and which the public are 
expecting them to do. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we are talking in this Bill about spending some 
hard-earned money – hard-earned money, and the public have a 
right to expect that this money will be spent with care and 
prudence, and they are simply not getting that. They are simply 
not getting that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, members on this side of the House will be 
raising some other issues. I wanted to confine my remarks 
largely to what I felt was the lack of business acumen of this 
government; their unwillingness to manage the affairs of this 
province in a way which would be respectable for any business 
man, their unwillingness to do that; and their apparent desire to 
cover their managerial shortcomings with sloganeering. And 
we’ve seen that time after time after time. 
 
All we ask them during the discussion of these finances is to 
lower the decibel count; say, indicate exactly where the 
spending is going to be and why it needs to be less or more than 
the year before, or why new spending is necessary, or old 
spending is not necessary. 
 
That’s what this process is all about. It’s not going to be 
effective for the people of Saskatchewan if it reduces itself to 
simple sloganeering. Any opposition has a duty and an 
obligation to ask how money is being spent, and any 
government has an obligation to give simple, clear, and crisp 
answers as to how money is being spent. 
 
And I think that we have not been getting that from this 
government, particularly. And I invite hon. members opposite, 
because they too have a right to know – the back-benchers – to 
encourage the ministers of the Crown to give clear and simple 
questions about how money is being spent. And then we will be 
able to make judgements as to not only the broad policy 
questions which are involved in those expenditures, but also 
whether or not reasonable management acumen is being applied 
to the management of the affairs of this province. 
 
No one is expecting that there will not be errors. We are all part 
of organizations which make errors, but we think that when 
errors are made they should be acknowledged and said, yes, in 
hindsight it wasn’t a good judgement, but it was a good idea 
and looked like a good idea at the time, as so many of us have 
so often said. 
 
And what we do not expect from members opposite is an 
attempt to bluff and bluster and suggest that no errors are made, 
and in the course of such bluff and bluster, withholding from 
the people of Saskatchewan the figures which will allow them 
to make judgements. 
 
And I close by saying that this government has been notorious 
for withholding information. I believe it is true to say that never 
in the history of this province have we seen the public accounts 
come down just about 15 months after the end of the fiscal year. 
 
The federal government requires even the largest corporations 
to have their financial returns in for tax 

purposes in four months – in four months. I see no reason why 
this government could not have their affairs in order in four 
months, five months, and that the auditing proceed in another 
month, and at six months after the end of the financial year the 
statements would be available to the public. It has not always 
been true in the past, but on many occasions, the public 
accounts, for the year ended on March 31, have been available 
before December 321, and this year they only just became 
available before June 30. 
 
Now that is simply a totally unsatisfactory state of affairs. The 
Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, in their statements 
on public sector auditing, suggests that the statements – they 
suggest the obvious – that statements simply are no good if 
they’re not timely. And they suggest that steps be taken to see 
that timely financial statements are published and that 
consolidated financial statements are published. 
 
I’m dealing now with the timely aspects of it. This government, 
far from providing financial statement son a timely basis, has 
withheld them, and they’ve withheld them not, I suggest, out of 
pure political malice but because of incompetence. I have every 
reason to believe that these public accounts were not published 
by the first of June; they were not printed. And if that’s true, 
and I believe it is, then we have got 14 months after the end of 
the financial year, and this government doesn’t have its 
financial statements prepared and printed, and that is total 
unvarnished incompetence – total unvarnished incompetence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And it’s showing up. And now the 
people of Saskatchewan are being asked to pay, being asked to 
pay in so many ways. And we are being asked now to vote a 
budget which involves very, very significant sacrifices on the 
part of Saskatchewan people in the withdrawal of services and 
the very significant increase in taxes. 
 
Because of the reasons mentioned by my colleague from Regina 
North East in that we do not wish to hold up the payments 
which we wish to see going out to nursing homes, and hospitals, 
and others who are relying upon this interim supply Bill, we 
will be supporting it. But we want to underline the fact that we 
support it with reluctance because, among other things, we 
think that it indicates that the government is incompetently 
handling the people’s money, and that the government should 
improve the fiscal and financial management of this 
government so that the public of Saskatchewan are not asked to 
bear still further burdens stemming from the managerial 
incompetence of members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I would like to respond to this interim supply 
Bill. First of all, I would like to present this interim supply 
measure in its broader context, and then narrow it down later on 
into its impact on the North and on Indian and Métis people in 
this province. 
 
On the broader level, one has to look at the development 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

822 
 

of the interim Bill as part of a larger package. This larger 
package is of course part of Bill 5 which was presented before 
Christmas. A lot of people were wondering why we were 
standing up and fighting against Bill 5 before Christmas. It 
becomes quite clear that the reasons are right in front of us, as I 
will state forward in it’s immediate impact to the North and also 
to Indian and Métis people. 
 
On the most broader context, what we are seeing in terms of the 
international levels of governmental operation is this: whether 
you looked at Britain or whether you looked at Marcos or 
whether you looked at Reagan or whether you looked at 
Pinochet, there was the same type of governmental operation. 
Number one thing was this: it was to keep government from the 
public, keep it away from the Legislative Assembly, and keep it 
away as long as possible. That is the number one device that is 
used by right-wing governments throughout the world. 
 
Bill 5 also went one step further. And that is something that is 
utilized by right-wing governments throughout the world. That 
device is to take, again, the power of debate in the legislature 
and give it to the executives of the government where they can 
do secret decision making on their own so that they can deceive 
the public and hide the facts from the public. That’s the similar 
strategy that is utilized right throughout the world by right wing 
governments. 
 
(1630) 
 
There is deception . . You keep the facts from the public. And 
this specific interim supply Bill is precisely the continuation of 
this strategy. I would say, in combining this interim strategy 
with the budget, that it has very deep implications for those 
people that are in the greatest need in this province: seniors, 
youth, all ordinary people, workers, small business, 
Indian/Métis people, and especially also the people in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This interim measure is a device to attack and to keep hidden 
those things that are destructive to ordinary people, the people 
in the North, and Indian and Métis people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — This interim measure is therefore part of the 
plan which will increase the possibilities for the generation of a 
greater amount of, not only ageism, handicapism, sexism, but 
also racism. 
 
When I look at the concept of racism, one doesn’t have to look 
very far for ideas in regards to the budget. One has to only look 
at how it started in the spring. Which was the first group that 
the members from across here attacked? One of the first groups 
was the native court workers program. 
 
The people from across figured, well this group will not get 
public support, and it’s a good time to smash them. We’ll smash 
this native court workers program because they will not have a 
public leg to stand on. We are so brave that that is what we are 
going to do, the government thought. 

But what was the impact of this cut which this interim measure 
is now trying to protect? What was the impact? The first thing I 
thought of when I talked with the native court workers was 
great concern for their own families, because the basis for 
putting food on the table was no longer there – that this 
government had taken that away. Since a majority of those 
workers were Indian and Métis people, we know that it is 
extremely difficult for any of the Métis people to get hired on in 
many situations in this province. The government knew that, 
but it deliberately took that step to take away the basis of 
putting food on the table for the many families and children of 
Indian and Métis people in this province. 
 
But as I talked with the workers, they said, we have come to 
you, not because we are too worried about ourselves; we have 
fought for a job before and we will continue fighting. We have 
helped build part of our communities and we will continue to do 
that. As the true builders of our communities, we will continue 
to fight in that direction. But, they said, what we are really 
concerned about was a very important mechanism that provided 
justice for Indian and Métis people in this province. 
 
We well know the great numbers of Indian and Métis people 
that are in jail or in corrections programs in this province. We 
well know the institutionalized unfairness of the system 
throughout all these years. We don’t have to explain that to a 
very great extent. But what is clear is this, and this is what a lot 
of the workers were saying. The very mechanism and the 
means, Mr. Speaker, the very mechanism and the means to get 
fairness and justice was taken away from many Indian/Métis 
people in this province. 
 
And the workers also said: and this is the government that calls 
themselves builder? This is the government that says build, 
build, build? They said, these are simply destructive destroyers 
of the means of fairness and justice for Indian and Métis people. 
They have taken that means aware from us. 
 
When I looked at that issue, the statement of Sinclair rings loud 
in this province and in Canada during the constitutional talks. 
He said that the government will spend more money building 
jails and improving corrections, but will not create jobs for 
people. But only in those specific areas of the following year, 
they will fill those jails up with the people who work there. And 
it seems that that is the strategy of this government. 
 
The other aspect, whenever an important mechanism for change 
arises, and this has happened again on an international 
framework, right-wing governments tend to take those away. 
And they take them away right throughout the society that they 
are in. The example here is the employment equity program, the 
program which helped people with disabilities – women, and 
people of Indian ancestry – in this province to get a job in the 
institution that we control through this legislature, the 
government civil service. 
 
For about a 20-year period since the late ‘60s, people had 
recognized the importance of having a specific affirmative 
action type program for the hiring of Indian and Métis people in 
this province. They were called by 



 
June 29, 1987 

823 
 

various names. Some called it at different stages, the shadow 
positions – creating shadow positions. At another time it was 
training on-the-job programs specifically related to that. Then 
later on we changed its wording into affirmative action. And 
still later we called it employment equity as a response to 
section 15 of our Canadian constitution. 
 
As we look at that particular device of affirmative action, one 
knows that in government there was very few Indian/Métis 
people working in government. Throughout the years there was 
steady improvement, from 1 per cent to 2 per cent to 3 per cent 
to 4 per cent, till we reached the stage of about 5 per cent of the 
civil service. The employment equity type programs and the 
affirmative action strategies have done more in a short few 
years than all the previous years since 1905. 
 
They were an important historic mechanism. It wasn’t just 
sloughed off to the departments to say, let it be done there, 
because it’s these very departments that did not hire in the 
previous history. When something is important, you have to 
have a concrete concept to work from and a concrete 
mechanism to work from. That mechanism was employment 
equity. 
 
Again, when I talked with the workers in the employment 
equity program, again they were not concerned about their own 
jobs, although I was. They said, destroying this mechanism will 
make it extremely hard for Indian and Métis people to enter the 
government civil service. Even with the law on a specific 
program backing us up, they said, it was difficult; it was very 
difficult because of the resistance. 
 
What they said very clearly, Mr. Speaker, is this. This 
government calls itself the builder, but yet it destroys. It 
destroys the very means of not only access by Indian/Métis 
people, but by people with disabilities, and women in this 
province. They said it was a destructive government. 
 
When you look at the specific examples of the employment 
equity program, it also became clear that the government 
strategy was not only to destroy the means of access by women, 
Indian/Métis people, and also people with disabilities, they also 
wanted to make a change so that people who were the most 
knowledgeable in every one of those situations were the people 
to be knocked off from the system. 
 
(1645) 
 
In that specific situation, I talked with people – 16 years 
experience, 18 years experience, and 22 years experience – 
people who knew the historic nature, and the pros and cons of 
every program that has been developed by all governments in 
the history of Saskatchewan; people who knew in detail the 
processes, the structures, and the means to best put these 
programs into play. These very people were the ones that were 
attacked by this PC government. 
 
They wanted to make sure that they left people in there with the 
least amount of experience so that they could put in their own 
right-wing agenda into the affirmative action 

and employment equity programs. 
 
So what it is, as you look at the first few examples, Mr. 
Speaker, what you’re seeing is that the very mechanisms for 
change have been destroyed by this government. But it was not 
only simple destruction. It was to knock off the people who had 
very important connections, those who built the basis of what 
we have in Saskatchewan today. They wanted to get away from 
the traditional roots of Saskatchewan experience. But that 
wasn’t enough. The very devices that this government promotes 
also increases sexism, ageism, handicapism, and racism. This 
budget can rightly be called, in Saskatchewan’s future, the 
budget of racism. 
 
But these aren’t the only examples. There are other examples. 
Take a look at the transition homes. People in the South 
rightfully fought for and made sure that their budget weren’t cut 
back. In the first demonstration in this province this year, where 
1,000 people spontaneously responded against a destructive axe 
by this government, the people, said, hold on. The government 
reaction was of course to knock off 10 per cent from the leading 
organizing groups from Regina on the transition homes at that 
level, but they were kept at zero for the rest of the province 
except for the North. For them the North had to suffer. Maybe 
it’s because the North was silent. Maybe it’s because it’s just 
the North. Maybe it’s because the organization in northern 
Saskatchewan is made up mainly of aboriginal women. Maybe 
that’s the reason. But they cut it back by 30 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker – 30 per cent. 
 
When I look at other devices, I look at the great statements of 
build, build, build in this province, providing money for 
economic development to the Weyerhaeusers, to the 
Pocklingtons, to the oil companies. But you hear a Premier 
saying they spend a million dollars a day. But I think he was 
misreading the estimates because when I read the estimates, it 
wasn’t $1 million a day in economic development, it was $1 
million for the whole year. It was $1 million for the whole year. 
 
There was a new program, they said, when they were asked 
about whether or not there was any new programs. They said 
there was a native economic development program of $500,000. 
But when I looked at the Indian economic development 
program, the Indian economic development program was 3 
million the year before. It was cut back by 66 per cent. It wasn’t 
cut back by 5 or 10 per cent — 66 per cent cut-back. And they 
only left $1.5 million out of the 3 million. 
 
The other thing that I recognize is this. The member from 
across is busy talking, and that’s quite an ordinary response all 
the time that we get in this province when Indian and Métis 
people talk. The members always, opposite, always want to 
keep Indian and Métis people silent. They don’t want to make 
them communicate. And that is also an essential strategy that is 
written in the history of this province. 
 
If you remember back in 1982 when the Tories were first 
elected in this province, in the fall of ’82, 80 positions were lost 
from the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. The key 
cut-back in there was the 
  



 
June 29, 1987 

824 
 

communications budget. The communications budget was the 
best and most excellent journal on that time that dealt with 
treaty Indian rights and the constitution. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I would ask the member to relate his 
comments to the interim supply resolution that is before the 
committee. It seems to be going back into 1982, and this is 
before the House now, and I would ask him to refer to the 
resolution before the committee. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You did not 
allow me to finish my statement because there was a clear 
connection. Because in this interim budget, which cut off this 
past while, the New Breed was cut out. The New Breed was cut 
in the past three months. And that is the clear connection, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I use that because, Mr. Speaker, it was not a fluke. It was just 
not an off-the-cuff thing. It’s been done deliberately to silence 
Indian/Métis people in this province for dealing with their 
constitutional rights and their rights related to the interim 
measures budget Bill and so on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — When you look at this interim measure to cut 
off the funding of the New Breed, again here was a journal that 
was dealing specifically with the constitutional rights of Métis. 
It was communicating information that was very important in 
the building of self-government for Métis people. In much the 
same sense as you saw in ’82 on the constitutional rights of the 
treaty, it had to be silenced by this government. It had to be 
silenced. 
 
Rather than building on the effective communications as 
provided by these two journals and most recently the New 
Breed Journal, the government chose to destroy. They chose to 
destroy. All they want to do is keep Indian and Métis people 
silent in this province. 
 
When I looked back at the connections, also from this spring, 
the minister was overheard saying that the reason why they cut 
back the funding to the Association of Métis and Non-Status 
Indians was because the constitution was all done. He said, the 
constitution is all done. But that’s not true. Constitutions are 
never done. Whether in Saskatchewan or whether in Canada or 
whether in international law, constitutions are always created by 
people, and people in turn always change them. 
 
But what Indian/Métis people wanted to do was to make sure 
that their rights were entrenched so that it could not easily be 
changed by a system such as this legislature; this same 
legislature which will debate whether or not there will be an 
amendment; this same legislature during this initial stage of the 
interim bills debate. 
 
So what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is this: this interim measure is 
part of the plan to make sure that treaty Indian and Métis people 
in this province do not get self-government. That this province, 
this PC government, will go down in history as the greatest fool 
of the self-government rights of Indian and Métis in this 
province. 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


