













































September 22, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 22, 1987 

 

 

2759 

 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Constitution Amendment, 1987 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. .Mr. Devine. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — — Mr. Speaker, with the understanding that 

we’ll be proceeding to the Bills and with the understanding also 

that I’ll be speaking more on the Langevin-Meech Lake accord, 

I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 19 — An Act to 

amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do hope that 

the member from Weyburn is listening because the remarks that 

I and my colleagues have to make on this Bill I think are 

important, and express the concern of those thousands of people 

of Saskatchewan who have no other voice except that which is 

given to them by the official opposition on this side of the 

House because the government has abandoned so many of 

them. 

 

Now this Bill which I want to speak to this evening, Mr. 

Speaker, Bill No. 19, the education and health tax Bill, can only 

be described as a Bill of betrayal. It’s a Bill of betrayal in every 

sense of the word and I want to point that out in the remarks 

that I make here this evening. 

 

As well I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, how this Bill, along 

with other legislation and tax measure which this government 

has introduced, are creating a growing and ever-growing 

unfairness in our tax system and switching the tax load more 

and more on to the backs of ordinary working people and the 

farm people of this province, people who are paying far more 

than their fair share already. 

 

One of the first requirements, Mr. Speaker, of any government 

in our parliamentary system, is that it be honest. Honesty is a 

major requirement of any government. People should be able to 

feel confident that what their politicians say and what their 

leaders say will be the truth. They need to be able to trust them, 

Mr. Speaker, and if they don’t believe that the political leaders 

of the day are honest with them, the result is a loss of 

confidence in the politicians and then, Mr. Speaker, a loss of 

confidence in a political democratic system which has taken 

hundreds of years to develop to the state in which ours exists 

today. 

 

It is a fragile system. Its existence and growth depends on  

the strength of the people who work within it. And when there 

are people who work within it, Mr. Speaker, who do not show 

the kind of integrity that is required, the fragility of that system 

becomes exposed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask 

the public in Saskatchewan: has this government, has this 

Premier, has this Minister of Finance been honest with them? 

And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that as I go, and I know my 

colleagues go, from one corner of this province to another, in 

growing numbers the people of Saskatchewan are saying, no, 

this government and this Premier has not been honest with 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I regret that, Mr. Speaker, and I regret 

even having to say that because I go back to my opening 

remarks where I say that that’s one of the very fundamental 

requirements of people in public life, in order for our system to 

be able to function properly, the requirement of honesty. 

 

Today this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and I want you and others in this 

House to note, this Bill proposes an increase in the education 

and health sales tax of the magnitude of 40 per cent. Now that’s 

not an insignificant increase in anything. Forty per cent is 

almost half as much more as what the existing tax is. 

 

Now as other members on this side of the House have asked, is 

that what was promised by those people on that side of the 

House? Is that what was promised by the Premier who went 

around the province in the last election and in 1982, saying that 

they’re going to build Saskatchewan? Well regretfully it seem, 

Mr. Speaker, that the only thing this government is building in 

Saskatchewan is the level of the tax system which continues to 

grow and grow and grow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now I’m not going to spend a lot of time 

on the examples of these broken promises and this dishonesty, 

Mr. Speaker, because others have done it. But I think it’s useful 

to always remember some of those members opposite, including 

the member from Shellbrook — or from Lloydminster — who 

continues to speak from his seat more than he does from his 

feet. And I have some reminders for him here as well. I know 

his memory might not be so good, but I think I have some 

evidence here that will bring his memory back to a period of 

time when he said something to his constituents which then . . . 

a confidence which then he broke, and is continuing to break as 

he votes on each one of these Bills that are before us today, 

including this one here. 

 

Let me first of all refer to a member who is no longer here with 

us, the former member for The Battlefords, who ran an ad in the 

newspaper in his constituency making a firm promise which 

was sanctioned by the Premier, who then was not yet the 

premier, and it says here, Myles Morin, and why people should 

vote for this gentleman who is  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2760 

 

 

going to represent them well. And one of the commitments that 

he made on behalf of this Conservative Party was the removal 

of the E&H tax. Now that’s pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, pretty 

clear — a total removal in the first term of this Conservative 

government. 

 

Now you remember that, Mr. Speaker, but unfortunately some 

of those members’ memories have become short and they have 

forgotten. And I remind the members opposite what they 

promised. 

 

Well, the member from Lloydminster asks what it has got to do 

with him. I want to let him know that I’m ready now to address 

that question because I have another ad which was put in the 

newspaper. I assume that it was probably put in the 

Lloydminster newspaper, but it may have been one other one in 

his constituency. And it talks here of . . . A nice little picture 

here of the member from Lloydminster. It can’t be mistaken for 

anyone else, and it says, “Michael Hopfner, man of 

achievement.” 

 

And he says to his constituency, Mr. Speaker — and they 

believed him; they believed him — he says, a Progressive 

Conservative government will phase out the sales tax. Now this 

man of achievement, Mr. Speaker, this man of achievement has 

achieved quite the contrary. He has now achieved a 40 per cent 

increase in the sales tax rather than the promise which he made, 

along with every other candidate, to eliminate the sales tax in 

the first term of that government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — What could be more dishonest and 

deceitful than that? And I regret to say that, too, Mr. Speaker, I 

have some respect for the members opposite as I do for any 

other people who are involved in public life. But I can tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, when people in public life tell their constituents 

one thing and do something else, I begin to weaken in my 

respect for that kind of approach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Of course, in front of the member from 

Lloydminster sits the member for Redberry, and I wouldn’t 

want him to feel that he’s being ignored. He too made this 

promise in advertisements he ran in his local newspapers, 

authorized by the PC Association of Redberry, in which he said, 

we will cut and slash — now that is a good one — he said and 

he promised that, we will cut and slash the cost of living — 

highlighted in yellow, I did, so that it wouldn’t be missed. And 

then he said how the Conservative government would bring 

savings to you in other areas, meaning to his constituents. Now 

at least . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m glad to hear that the 

member from Lloydminster is now going to get into the debate 

because I and my colleagues on this side of the House are 

anxious to see how he will defend this 40 per cent increase in 

the E&H tax and how he will explain his promise, in light of 

that, to remove that sales tax when he was running for public 

office. I welcome that opportunity and I hope that he will keep 

his word, at least in this House, since he can’t keep it out there 

at home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Redberry made the same 

promise. The member from Yorkton . . . Here it says,  

Lorne McLaren, member from Yorkton, will remove the 

education and health tax. Same thing from this member in 

charge of the oil patch, the member from Swift Current who 

made the same promise. Now I could take, Mr. Speaker, 64 of 

those candidates who ran for public office in 1982, and talk 

about them. But I think it is sufficient to point out by using 

some of these few examples why this Bill is, as I described it at 

the initiation of my remarks, a Bill of betrayal. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this betrayal was introduced by a minister of 

Finance who promised back in 1982 some other things. You 

will recall in the budget speech debate, Mr. Speaker, that I 

brought to your attention and to the attention of this House 

because I was so shocked when I heard in that budget speech 

announcement, and some announcements before it, what this 

government was going to do to the prescription drug plan. It 

was almost beyond belief. But when I stood in this House and 

began to speak about it, I was given this guarantee which this 

minister, who was then not the minister of Finance, made in his 

election literature, in which he said, and he signed personally a 

guarantee, that the Progressive Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan is committed to continue the medicare system in 

our province and the Progressive Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan regrets any form of deterrent fees or health 

insurance premiums; the Progressive Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan will abolish the unfair deterrent fees for 

prescription drugs. Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask you: isn’t that just 

as dishonest as this Bill? I believe that it is and I know that the 

people of Saskatchewan believe that it is, from one end of this 

province to another. 

 

But this year, this year, Mr. Speaker, this Minister of Finance, 

after his promise, along with the Premier of Saskatchewan 

chose to cause people to pay up to $1,000 and in some cases 

more than $1,000 in prescription fee costs because of this 

changed prescription drug program that they introduced. Now I 

say, Mr. Speaker, there is not much more that needs to be said 

about this dishonest Bill, how dishonest this Bill is, and why 

this Minister of Finance and this Premier would bring it 

forward. 

 

You know, it doesn’t end here. That’s the real cruelty of it all. It 

doesn’t end just here in Saskatchewan. Across Canada people 

are concerned as well about dishonesty and about increasing 

taxes while they are getting fewer benefits from their 

governments. 

 

(1915) 

 

Today we have in Canada, for example, a Prime Minister who 

is lower in the polls than ever any other prime minister before 

him — lower than any other government before. Why is that 

so? Well the people say they can’t trust the Prime Minister. And 

thankfully, maybe within a year or a little more, they will have 

a chance to say that at the ballot box — and it can’t be any too 

soon. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan I want to say that the 

government members are reflecting the same kind of attitude 

and temperament. The situation, in fact, is even worse. When 

you promise to do away with the tax, Mr. Speaker, and then 

turn around and make it even worse, that’s dishonest and that’s 

a betrayal. And that is why the  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2761 

 

 

Saskatchewan public cannot and will not trust this Conservative 

government and this Premier again. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this increase in the sales tax is not the only 

increase that we have introduced by this government in this 

session. It is only one of an endless list of tax increases. We 

have had, Mr. Speaker, a gas tax and a flat tax along with the 

increase in the sales tax. These have to be announced in the 

budget. The government can’t hide them; they have to be 

announced in the budget, and then legislation has to be brought 

into the House and debated and the public knows what’s going 

on, and that’s what we’re doing here today. But along with 

these tax increases which the government is obligated to make 

public and announce before it imposes them, this government 

has also increased hidden taxes in the form of government fees 

and licenses and other charges by more than 42 per cent since 

taking office. And when one talks about tax increase in any one 

Bill, you have to keep it in perspective and do it in the context 

of all of the tax increases so that it is clear then how big the tax 

load is. This increase of hidden taxes that I have mentioned has 

been 11 per cent in this year alone — an increase of nearly $17 

million. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, these massive tax increases are decided 

in secret by the cabinet or by the Minister of Finance along with 

his Premier. NO public statement is made and new charges 

simply imposed on those who have to pay it or individuals who 

have to pay it or organizations have to pay it or businesses who 

have to pay it, and they pay it — no fanfare, no announcement. 

It’s snuck in under the door and people don’t have any choice, 

no opportunity to debate. Now that’s another element of the tax 

increases which we have seen happening along with this 40 per 

cent increase in the education and health tax that is before us 

today. 

 

Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that these increases in fees and 

charges and licenses that the government has imposed are 

having some very damaging effect? They’re having damaging 

effect on the business community and, as a result, there are 

damaging effects one employment in Saskatchewan. This Bill 

asks this legislature, along with that, to approve an increase in 

the sales tax of 40 per cent. But when we consider any one tax 

Bill that has to be considered, as I have said in the context of 

the whole tax grab that’s imposed by this government. And so I 

want to point out some more of those examples. 

 

But before I do that, I want to say this, people can accept paying 

taxes. We all say, oh, we don’t like to pay taxes. But I think, out 

of fairness, people can accept paying taxes provided that they 

are fair taxes and that the services that they receive in return are 

adequate. 

 

And either way, Mr. Speaker, taxes do take money out of 

people’s pockets. Whether it is to pay for health care or whether 

it is to pay for education, they take money out of people’s 

pockets as individuals and as businesses. But while this 

education and health tax increase of 40 per cent, and while there 

is a reduction there as a result of consumer spending, people are 

getting nothing or very little more in return. The government is 

taking money out of the pockets of Saskatchewan’s small 

businesses with these hidden taxes as well as with this 

education and  

health tax increase. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, something that I think is self-evident — 

every dollar paid in increased education and health tax is a 

dollar less that families can spend in the shops and the stores 

and the car dealerships in Saskatchewan. It reduces business. 

 

Now the Department of Consumer Affairs is the other example 

that I refer to. Only one department which has increased some 

of its fees on businesses and co-operatives for registration by 

100 — and in some cases more than 100 — per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what’s the result of this kind of tax grab? 

Realistically let’s consider what this means. When you take 

these kinds of hundreds of millions of dollars of additional tax 

revenue or additional taxes out of the pockets of consumers 

who would ordinarily spend it in the economy, there are some 

serious effects. 

 

Here is another example. In 1986, there were 21 more 

bankruptcies in Saskatchewan than in 1985. And this figure 

represents the second highest bankruptcy rate record in Canada, 

dwarfing the Canadian percentage rate increase of 6.5 per cent. 

 

Those are the kind of implications that happen when you have a 

dishonest government that mismanages so badly that it has to 

then, or thinks it has to then, increase taxes on people by 40 per 

cent like we’re seeing in this particular tax Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — And the Minister of Social Services, time 

and time again will stand up in this House and blame somebody 

else in the most cruel and callous way; everybody else is to 

blame for this government. But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, it is 

clear and well-known that the reason why some of this is 

happening is because of the kind of gross mismanagement that 

has brought about the financial situation which this province is 

in today. 

 

You can’t have a strong economy if you reduce the amount of 

consumer spending in this kind of way. People can’t have a 

high standard of living if more and more of their income has to 

go to pay for the government’s mismanagement. Governments 

can’t expect people to continue to have confidence in the tax 

system when it continues to get more regressive and more 

unfair. 

 

What’s another result of this tax grab caused by this Premier’s 

mismanagement — this Premier who’s more interested in 

waving his arms and making irrelevant speeches and sounding 

like Howdy Doody so that no attention is paid to the 

management of this province? 

 

Well the other result of this, Mr. Speaker, is the growth in 

unemployment like we haven’t seen it grow in this province for 

a long time. The result of taking massive amounts of spending 

dollars out of the pockets of Saskatchewan people means fewer 

Saskatchewan people working. And it’s been the most 

devastating on our young people, Mr. Speaker. 

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2762 

 

 

Now isn’t it ironical that when we had a Premier who travelled 

this province and from podiums and on the television said that 

we will bring our families home, when we have had a Premier 

who says that, but when the results all come in we have fewer 

people under the age of 25 working in Saskatchewan today than 

we did in 1986 because there are no jobs for them. Because 

money that could have been spent in the places where they 

worked in the businesses of Saskatchewan has been taken by 

this government so that they can pay for the patronage that is 

rampant within this government, so that they can pay for the 

mismanagement such that even now they introduce in this 

House amendments to The Provincial Auditor Act so that they 

don’t have to provide information which the public ought to 

know. Information which they know that if they provide it, the 

public would rise up and demand that they do something about 

it. And it’s too bade that they may have to wait three years for 

an election in order to be able to express that point of view. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just like the provincial Tory promises turned out 

to be untrue, I’m afraid we’re seeing the same thing happening 

in Ottawa. We have had a debate in Ottawa about what may be 

the next phase of Tory taxation. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is this on the Bill? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, it is. Because, Mr. Speaker . . . The 

member from Weyburn asked if it’s on the Bill. Well I want to 

point out to you, Mr. Speaker, and this House, that tax increases 

which are unfair are common to Tory governments whether 

they are in Saskatchewan or whether they are in Ottawa. 

 

Now the people of this province clearly know, after this 

government was elected for a second term, that they cannot 

afford to elect a Conservative government in Ottawa for a 

second term, or the kind of taxes which these people have 

introduced here in Saskatchewan will be in for a second term. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now I talked about the deceit and the 

betrayal. Well here’s an example of how it works, Mr. Speaker. 

The Finance minister in Ottawa said that he was undecided 

when asked about the tax on food, that he was undecided and 

was not taking sides in the debate over whether a tax on food 

was going to be imposed. He said that in one breath. But then 

he warned the Commons that not taxing food will benefit the 

rich more than the poor. And he said that later on he said that 

it’s something that governments have to be open to and 

consider. 

 

So I say to the public of Saskatchewan, what Mr. Wilson says 

about not taxing food is not clear. And they have to ask 

themselves, will Mr. Wilson’s word be as good after the federal 

election, if there is a Conservative government, s the word of 

this government has been on the promises that they made not to 

increase the education and health tax — a promise which they 

broke and in which we now see instead an increase of 40 per 

cent on this tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tax increases in the budget this year  

penalize those who can least afford to pay. The 2 per cent 

increase in the sales tax, or the two percentage point which is a 

40 per cent increase, will hit low-income families hard since 

they spend a greater proportion of their total income compared 

to wealthier people who can afford to save money. 

 

The tax reduction . . . I know that the Minister of Finance will 

talk about the tax reductions which he has mentioned in his 

budget. Words, again, but those tax reductions for families with 

children and single parents and seniors will only have a 

marginal effect on the very poorest in society. This tax 

reduction scheme gives us another glimpse of this government’s 

penchant for flimflammery. The 330,000 poor people that this 

Minister of Finance claims will be helped by this should not be 

paying taxes in the first place, Mr. Speaker, because they can’t 

afford it. 

 

Second, any savings through this tax reduction will be 

swallowed up by the user fees, by the deterrents, and increased 

costs in the dental plan and the drug plan which this 

government has introduced. And they will be swallowed up by 

the increase in the education and health tax which we are 

debating here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the unfairness of the tax increase inflicted this 

year by the Premier and by the Minister of Finance is 

highlighted, once again, by this 40 per cent increase in the 

education and health tax. While the E&H tax is being increased, 

what do we see happening? Education has had massive 

cut-backs; health care services have been reduced and made 

more costly to individuals and families; and people will pay, in 

spite of that 40 per cent increase in E&H tax, and would get less 

in return. 

 

But it doesn’t end here. What makes it even worse is that along 

with this provincial tax increase, there has been a massive tax 

shift to the property owner, onto the backs of property 

taxpayers. All across this province the mill rates have increased. 

 

(1930) 

 

I give you an example of the city of Regina and only a portion 

of it. What this education and health tax has done in the city of 

Regina, it has increased the amount of education and health tax 

that the taxpayers of the city have to pay. In 1987 before the tax 

was announced, the city had estimated that it would spend 

$1.575 million education and health tax. With the increase in 

this tax announced by the Premier, the city of Regina has had to 

revise its estimate and it will not spend $2.205 million. That’s 

the kind of magnitudal increase and tax shift that this 

government has imposed on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s going to tax them more with education and health tax on 

most things that they buy, and it’s going to tax the 

municipalities for the things that they buy with an increase of 

40 per cent on the tax. The municipalities are going to then have 

to take it out of the property taxes and the mill rates would go 

up. And you see here, Mr. Speaker, a major shift of the tax load 

from the provincial government, where it can be more equitably 

distributed, to the municipal governments where their choices 

of taxation are very limited. 

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2763 

 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill to increase this education and health sales 

tax by 40 per cent increases the tax load on Saskatchewan 

families who are already hard pressed because of massive tax 

increases since 1982. Many of those families — and you will 

know some of them; every member of this House will know 

some of them — many of those families take less home pay 

today than they had five years ago — less home pay in 1987 

than they took home in 1982. And what’s the government’s 

response? They’re going to tax them some more with the 

increase in this tax. I say, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is the product 

of a dishonest political party and a dishonest government. 

 

They promised to eliminate the sales tax; they did it even in 

writing. Instead they increase it by 40 per cent. Now I say it 

takes a very high level of arrogance to do this, never before 

witnessed in Saskatchewan, never before. 

 

The government admits, the members opposite will admit any 

day that it did not tell people the truth and the facts about what 

their intentions were in taxation. And it acts, Mr. Speakers, it 

acts like truth and honesty in government is not relevant today. 

I find that extremely regrettable. I find it sorrowful. 

 

This Bill is brought forward by a government which took a 

$140 million surplus in 1982 — they inherited a surplus in 1982 

of $142 million — and through mismanagement, through waste 

and incompetence they blew it. They blew it away. And so the 

result in the end is an accumulated deficit of $3.4 billion, so 

says the Minister of Finance. It didn’t need to be, but it was 

there because this government made the wrong choices. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, comes at a time when consumer 

spending should be one of the tools to keep our economy 

moving instead of one of the tools to drag it down even more. 

But in this confused thinking of this Premier and this Minister 

of Finance, when they see unemployment increasing, when they 

see a net out-migration where more people are moving out of 

the province than are moving in, when they see unemployment 

growing amount young people, instead of trying to get the 

economy rolling and leaving expenditures out there, they 

increase the sales tax by 40 per cent and reduce consumer 

spending. It couldn’t come at a more inopportune time. Any 

time is inopportune because of the promises that these people 

made, but when we know the state of the economy today, it is 

so much worse. 

 

I cannot in good conscience support this kind of a Bill. I don’t 

know how anybody who is an elected member of an Assembly 

of the legislature could at this time support this kind of a Bill. I 

most of all, Mr. Speaker, do not understand how any of those 

members opposite who promised to do away with the sales tax 

can support a Bill now which would increase it by 40 per cent. 

 

I will not be supporting this Bill. I will be voting against it. I 

welcome members opposite to live by their promises and join 

me and my colleagues in doing the same. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I hadn’t planned  

on speaking on this particular Bill, but I’ve warmed up to the 

subject now that the member for Regina has said a few words 

on it and in view of some of the comments that I’ve heard from 

across the floor — most of them coming from the member for 

Weyburn — of a rather vacuous nature. 

 

However, when I stand to speak on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I 

think it’s important, if I’m to solidify the support of the 

members here in the House, to oppose this Draconian measure. 

These members who are younger than I am must have some 

historic background on which to base their decision in voting 

against this Draconian Bill that this government’s brought in, 

Bill 19. 

 

I have an interesting sense of déjà vu when I saw this Bill come 

forward. I said, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been here before; I’ve seen 

this before; I’ve seen this all happen before. And I recall back to 

1964 when the Liberal Party was elected to govern this 

province. That was the first time they had been elected for 26 

years. Now the people remembered the Liberal Party for a long 

time — 26 years before they’d give them a second chance. 

 

The Liberal Party was re-elected again in 1967, and, Mr. 

Speaker, that was the last time for a long time that the Liberal 

Party was elected. The first budget thereafter the re-election in 

1967, which was in early 1968, the infamous black Friday 

budget was brought forward. Every conceivable tax was raised, 

and new ones were invented, Mr. Speaker, and implemented. 

The subsequent defeat of that government was clear for all to 

see at that point in 1968, and consequently there were defeated 

in 1971 when they next had the courage to call an election in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Not to be outdone, this PC government, the present 

government, was elected in 1982, and that is the first time in 48 

years that the people of Saskatchewan had decided to give them 

a chance to govern. They remembered them so well from the 

time prior when they were in government. And I suggest once 

again, Mr. Speaker, this may be the last time that there were 

elected — 1986 — the last time for a long time. This 

government’s demise may even be more catastrophic than their 

Liberal brothers’ crash in 1971, the reason being, Mr. Speaker 

. . . And obviously the member from Weyburn is suffering from 

a lack of history, historical perspective, and this is his chance to 

get it for free. In 1971 the crash of the Liberal Party was such 

that they will unlikely get another chance to govern. Now I said 

that this particular party, the Conservative Party, is even more 

disorganized than the Liberal Party was. They’re lurching from 

one crisis to the next, they’re fuelled by empty rhetoric from 

their leader; and their new financial Messiah with his early 

Liberal training, well experienced in changing direction, now 

cries out: stay the course; put on the taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this scenario of the Conservative and Liberal 

parties’ last fling at office would be great stuff for an operatic 

comedy. I am sure Gilbert and Sullivan or an opera of that 

nature, an operetta of that nature, would do it up very well. 

Unfortunately, Saskatchewan people aren’t laughing. They’re 

not laughing. They are central to this great Conservative 

government experiment. They suffer the double effect of this 

budget that this government’s brought in, which contains 

among its  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2764 

 

 

provisions The Education and Health Tax Act, Bill 19. They 

suffer the double effect of cuts in services and increase in 

taxation, cuts in the prescription drug plan, cuts in the dental 

plan, cuts in the hospital services plan, cuts in property tax 

assistance, increases in fuel tax, a variety of fees increased, a 

variety of charges increased, a new flat tax, an increased new 

flat tax. 

 

Where does this all stop, Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

ultimate responsibility, where the buck stops, is front row centre 

to your right in this House. We call him the Premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan, and he is the responsible person. 

That’s where the responsibility lies. He is the person who 

guided all his members to promise doing away with the E&H 

tax, not increasing it by 40 per cent from what it was. He was 

the one that put the stamp of approval on their programs to tell 

the people of Saskatchewan that he would be doing away with 

taxes, cutting taxes, and they would be in financial heaven. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is how it is viewed by the people of 

Saskatchewan. How about the urban governments in 

Saskatchewan? I watched with interest while the member for 

Regina South introduced the mayor of Saskatoon, Mayor 

Wright, and Alderman Dayday in the gallery this afternoon, and 

I watched with even further interest as the lone Tory member 

for Saskatoon reintroduced him, or at least attempted to. And I 

only wish that they were here again, the mayor of Saskatoon 

and Alderman Dayday from Saskatoon, because I have sat with 

those two gentlemen on Saskatoon city council, and I watched 

the effect of this government’s action over a number of budgets. 

I wasn’t on their council when this most recent budget came 

down, but I imagine that the effect was rather dramatic. 

 

Now what does this do to urban government? — this fiscal 

policy of this government, part of which is Bill 19, the 

education and health tax increase. Well in the area of transit, for 

the city of Saskatoon alone, the cuts are $300,000. The city of 

Saskatoon had already increased their fares in anticipation of 

government increases. They’re either gong to have to raise fares 

again or trim services. 

 

(1945) 

 

Transit incentive grants cut, $700,000; fuel tax, $500,000 a year 

increase; sales tax, $1.5 million a year increase because of the 

actions of this government; E&H tax increases estimated, 

$120,000 — much of this to be added into the budget which 

was already established because the province of Saskatchewan, 

Minister of Finance and Premier, could not get their act together 

in time to bring in the budget as is usually done prior to the time 

when the municipal governments establish their mill rates. 

 

What is the city of Saskatoon going to do because of this 

serious financial position in which the Government of 

Saskatchewan has plunged them? Well they’re going to have to 

delay some important projects — the Lathey pool, the 8th Street 

circle, planting trees, roof repairs to Cosmo Civic Centre, 

upgrading Holliston and Senator James Gladstone Park. 

Thirty-eight projects will have to be delayed; 33 will go ahead, 

for a total of 71 projects, Mr.  

Speaker. The changes brought about by this government in its 

shotgun approach to financing is going to have a drastic effect 

on the budget of the city of Saskatoon. 

 

What has happened to the city’s finances? Well it’s quite 

serious. I have a page right out of the report of the city 

commissioner. It shows the provincial capital fund. This is 

better known as the PC fund, now defunct. The city was 

estimating, the city was estimating, Mr. Minister of Urban 

Affairs, the city was estimating $5.4 million this year in that 

particular PC fund. But instead of that, Mr. Speaker, they got 

slashed from 3.855 million, to zero. Slashed. What happened in 

the operating? Transit operating grant dropped from $987,000 

down to $710,000. What about the inter-municipal recreational 

grant? Dropped from $91,313 to zero. This is how this 

government, this is how the Premier’s fiscal irresponsibility is 

affecting the city of Saskatoon. Library operating grant, 

$475,925 — cut to $332,100. Overall, Mr. Speaker, cuts in 

funding from the province of Saskatchewan which they could 

normally anticipate, and did anticipate increasingly under a 

New Democratic government, cuts from $24.411 million to 

$20.980 million for total cuts of $3.431 million, just in one 

year, due to the fiscal irresponsibility of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The hon. member is giving an 

interesting speech; however, it’s a very wide ranging speech. It 

sounds something very, very close to what one would give on 

the budget debate. It would like the hon. member to please try 

to confine or relate his remarks to the E&H tax Bill before the 

House. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Well I think your point of order is well 

taken, Mr. Speaker. I got carried away by the goading from the 

Minister of Urban Affairs over there, who suggests everything 

is fine in Saskatchewan and in the municipalities. And I suggest 

to you, Mr. Speaker, had the mayor of Saskatoon and Alderman 

Dayday been in the gallery this evening, they would have been 

silently nodding their head in support of the comments I’m 

making here this evening. The city of Saskatoon will be sorely 

affected by the actions of this government. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan will be sorely affected by the 

actions of this government and its increases in taxes, fees, and 

changes, one of them which is The Education and Health Tax 

Act, increasing by 40 per cent — 40 per cent in one budget. 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, if it could be possible that Premier 

Ross Thatcher and finance minister Dave Steuart could be here, 

they would feel they would be absolute pikers compared to the 

Premier of this province and the Minister of Finance, who have 

deceived the people of Saskatchewan in the most recent election 

to an extent far greater than Premier Thatcher and finance 

minister Dave Steuart did at a previous time in this House. 

 

The wheel has gone right around again. We’ve seen the Liberals 

voted in to power after a long period out of power; they 

destroyed themselves by their irresponsible fiscal policies. This 

government, voted into office after over 50 years in the 

wilderness, is now destroying itself by its irresponsible fiscal 

policies. The problem is, the people of Saskatchewan have to 

suffer along with you. And the people of Saskatchewan will 

remember, they will remember the promises this government 

made in 1982  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2765 

 

 

and reinforced in 1986 about doing away with taxes, about 

doing away with E&H tax, where in fact they increased it 40 

per cent. 

 

Now I hope from this brief foray into the past, Mr. Speaker, that 

the members on this side who were in doubt about the 

seriousness of this Bill will reinforce themselves and be 

prepared to vote against this Bill. And I’m sure there will be 

some eagerness to have a standing vote and find out where all 

those government members that ran the ads in the election 

campaign, solemnly promising to do away with the E&H tax 

when in fact they’ve increased the E&H tax by 40 per cent — I 

want to see where they’re standing when the vote comes on this 

particular Bill. And I’ll look forward to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I certainly cannot support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is with a 

bit of hesitation that I enter into debate this evening. It will 

come as a pleasure to some, I’m sure, to note that laryngitis 

seems to be setting in. So, Mr. Speaker, this evening . . .  

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  

 

Mr. Hagel: — The member from Regina Wascana looks pretty 

excited, and I can understand that, Mr. Speaker, because just 

simply the fact that laryngitis is setting in means, Mr. Speaker, 

that I am going to have to stick to the cold, hard facts. We’ll cut 

the rhetoric today, and we’ll stick to the cold, hard facts in a 

review of the performance of many of the members opposite 

dealing with this education and health tax increase that they are 

proposing to the province of Saskatchewan, despite their 

promises to the contrary. 

 

And so we have before us, Mr. Speaker, as we stand in this 

House tonight, the issues of the credibility of the government. 

We have the issue of the credibility not only of the government 

but of the Premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — We have to ask ourselves: is the Premier and the 

members of the PC caucus a collection of people whom we can 

trust to keep their word? 

 

The issue as well, Mr. Speaker, is one of cut-backs and whether 

people are getting less for more. And the issue as well, Mr. 

Speaker, rests with whether this is a fair taxation system when 

governments make that cold and calculated decision. 

 

And I’d like to take a factual review of history, Mr. Speaker. I 

will be repeating some of the things that have been implied and 

said by some of my colleagues. But I think the people of 

Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan have a right to 

know what the members of the PC caucus committed 

themselves to when they asked for the trust of the people of 

Saskatchewan to represent them in the Legislative Assembly. 

And what did they say? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to refer first of all to a little  

item here called “pocket politics.” It says it’s a quick reference 

on PC policy for candidates in 1982, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

reference that I think no one can conclude anything other than it 

is a directive of the Premier, the man who is now the Premier of 

Saskatchewan. And what does Pocket Politics tell all the PC 

candidates in 1982? It says: 

 

Tell the people that a PC government would battle 

inflation by phasing out the provincial sales tax under the 

directive of the Premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let us take a review; let us take a look at 

what some of these folks have said in making their 

commitments in going to the people of Saskatchewan and 

saying, will you choose me. Will you choose me to be your 

representative in the Legislative Assembly? Will you take me at 

my word? And what did they say, Mr. Speaker/ Well I have 

here from the Battlefords Advertiser Post, from April 14, 1982, 

an ad that is sponsored by . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. The member may describe what is in the particular ad. 

He may not use it as a display or exhibit. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Okay, I won’t use it as a display. I’ll simply read 

it, Mr. Speaker. It says: “We’re voting PC for Myles Morin.” 

And what does Myles Morin say in this ad, Mr. Speaker? Mr. 

Myles Morin says he stands for a removal of E&H tax, the 

education and health tax. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the 

people in his constituency in The Battlefords understood what 

he stood for and they removed him. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we go on and we find here an ad published 

by Lloyd Hampton. It says: “Lloyd Hampton, Canora 

constituency.” And it’s a pamphlet, Mr. Speaker, and what does 

it say? It says: “PC policies for good government.” And what’s 

the third thing that’s listed, Mr. Speaker, in this ad of 1982? 

Lloyd Hampton says he promises that he will support the 

removal of the 5 per cent E&H tax — and his constituents 

removed him, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We move along and we take a look at an ad published in The 

Watrous Manitou in April of ‘82, an ad that has the picture and 

lists Louis Domotor, the member for Humboldt at that time. 

And what did the Premier direct Mr. Domotor to promise his 

constituents? He says here he’s going to eliminate the 5 per cent 

E&H tax over four years. And four years later, Mr. Speaker, his 

constituents eliminated him as their representative from the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here is a picture that your mother would be fond 

of, and out of respect for your position we’ll move along. And 

Mr. Speaker, I come to a pamphlet and it has the picture and the 

name Paul Meagher, Prince Albert, on the front. And it says: 

“PC policies for good government.” And what does he say, Mr. 

Speaker, in 1982? He says: “Remove the 5 per cent E&H tax.” 

And, Mr. Speaker, four years later the constituents of Prince 

Albert removed him. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Progressive Conservative Lakeview, Tim 

Embury is the picture in the pamphlet, and it says: 

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2766 

 

 

“The Progressive Conservative blueprint for economic common 

sense proposes to . . .” And what does he say? Item number 

seven: “Reduce the E&H tax by 1 per cent per year until it’s 

eliminated, and here we are five years later, Mr. Speaker, are 

we eliminating it 1 per cent per year? No we’re going up 2 per 

cent this year. And, Mr. Speaker, his constituents eliminated his 

representation and they transferred him to a consultant job with 

the provincial government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of Saskatchewan had some 

advice for Gordon Dirks as well. The Premier of Saskatchewan 

advised Gordon Dirks that he too should make a commitment to 

the people of Rosemont. And what did Gordon Dirks say? He 

said he’s in favour of sensible taxation, abolish the 5 per cent 

sale tax, and four years later his constituents abolished him 

from the Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, he too has been 

transferred to a consultant position with the provincial 

government. 

 

And here we have, Mr. Speaker, Paul Schoenhals for Saskatoon 

Sutherland, another pamphlet directed by the Premier to make a 

commitment to his constituents in Saskatoon Sutherland. And 

what did he say in this pamphlet in the 1982 campaign, Mr. 

Speaker? “PC policies for good government. Remove the 5 per 

cent E&H tax.” And people, Mr. Speaker, removed him as their 

representative and he’s now been transferred to a 

$100,000-a-year job with the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. And it’s kind of ironical, Mr. Speaker, down on 

the bottom of this pamphlet it says, “There’s so much more we 

can be.” And I say, ain’t that the truth. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we go on and we see here an ad that is put 

forth under the name of Jim Garner in the Wilkie constituency. 

Jim Garner, and he says, “We will completely remove the 5 per 

cent sales tax.” Mr. Speaker, four years later, people transferred 

him to the private sector, they transferred him to the private 

sector, and he too said, “There’s so much more that we can be.” 

 

(2000) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, along comes Paul Rousseau, Regina South, 

and what did the Premier, what did the Premier tell Paul 

Rousseau to tell his constituents in 1982? The Premier told Paul 

Rousseau to tell his constituents that he was promising to, and I 

quote, “Phase out the 5 per cent provincial sales tax.” And Mr. 

Speaker, the Premier phased out his representation in the 

Legislative Assembly and sent him off to England. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And who took his place? 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well the member from Regina South says, who 

took his place, who took his place? Mr. Speaker, it was the 

former member from Regina North who didn’t have the jam to 

go back to his constituents and snuck off into Paul Rousseau’s 

constituency because he didn’t believe the people of Regina 

North would re-elect him. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. And here we have an ad 

from Gordon Currie. It’s an important notice to all senior 

citizens, and this is an ad directed by the Premier of 

Saskatchewan. And what does he say? He says, “A  

Progressive Conservative government will phase out the 5 per 

cent sales on all other articles in addition to clothing.” And 

now, Mr. Speaker, I say, Gordon Currie is gone, but the sales 

tax is still here and it’s gone up to 7 per cent if this Bill is 

passed that is before the legislature tonight. 

 

Now we come along to Russ Sutor. In an ad that lists, “Sutor 

the better,” is says, for Regina North East. Fancy little phrase. 

And what did he say to the folks in 1982 in Regina North East? 

He said, “I would like the government to phase out the sales 

tax.” Well, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, he phased out his 

desire to represent the people of Regina North East a couple of 

years later, and after that, Mr. Speaker, they sent a member with 

a resounding commitment and a vote of support to come and 

represent them in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, those were a whole list of PC candidates 

who went to their constituents in 1982, and they said, this is the 

commitment I make for you, and since that time they have gone 

the way of history and they no longer sit in this Legislative 

Assembly. But are there some folks in this Assembly still who 

promised their constituents that their government would 

eliminate the sales tax? And the answer is yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let me take a look at some of these. I have before me a 

pamphlet, Mr. Speaker, a copy of a pamphlet, it says: “Elect 

Grant Schmidt, the Progressive alternative. There’s so much 

more we can be.” And what did this member say, Mr. Speaker, 

at the direction of the Premier of Saskatchewan, PC policies for 

good government? Remove the 5 per cent E&H tax. 

 

And I think the constituents of Melville will be watching, Mr. 

Speaker, to see how this member, how their member who sits in 

the Legislative Assembly now, will vote when it comes to a 

vote on increasing the E&H tax and not removing it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I see an ad here, it says: “Vote Bob Andrew. 

Re-elect Bob Andrew in Kindersley.” And this one is a little 

more wordy. It’s a little more wordy, Mr. Speaker. It says: 

 

Real programs for real people. Eliminate the 5 per cent 

sales tax on clothing and utility bills, (And then it goes on 

to say) This measure will be the first phase of a new PC 

government’s commitment to the complete elimination the 

sales tax in its first term of office and its commitment to 

ease the burden of inflation for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And he, too, Mr. Speaker, he, too, forewarned us of the fact that 

he wouldn’t be, he wouldn’t be planning to stick to his 

promises. And he give us the warning, because in the bottom he 

said, “there’s so much more we can be.” And he was correct, 

there is so much more that he can be. 

 

Well we’ve got the member from Melfort, the member who sits 

in this House, MR. Speaker. I have an ad that says: “Grant 

Hodgins — a Progressive Conservative government will phase 

out the sales tax.” He too was acting under the directive of the 

Premier of Saskatchewan. And the folks out in Melfort will be  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2767 

 

 

watching tonight, or whenever this Bill comes to a vote, they 

will be watching the member from Melfort and they will say — 

they will ask themselves, did you keep your 1982 promise to us 

that you put into writing, or are you one who is going to vote to 

not only not carry on with the sales tax, who is going to vote to 

increase it. And those constituents will be watching. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. I have an ad here that is 

sponsored by the member from Swift Current, the Minister of 

Energy. And it says: 

 

Pat Smith — a Progressive Conservative government has 

dedicated to phasing out provincial sales tax and reducing 

personal income tax by 10 per cent. 

 

Another directive by the Premier. And the people of Swift 

Current, Mr. Speaker, will be watching very carefully to see 

how their member votes, whether their member votes to 

increase the sales tax. 

 

This one says: “Vote Johnson. There’s so much more we can 

be.” And this one says, Mr. Speaker, that there is a commitment 

by this member to eliminate the sales tax, 5 per cent on clothing 

and utilities now, and the remainder in the first term of office. 

Well the first term of office, Mr. Speaker, has come and gone, 

the sales tax has stayed, and the government is now proposing 

to increase it. 

 

The member from Yorkton has an ad that says, “Lorne 

McLaren. Eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax on clothing and 

utility bills.” And he explains it, Mr. Speaker; he tells us how it 

will be done. He says: 

 

This measure will be the first phase of a new PC 

government’s commitment to the complete elimination of 

the sales tax in its first term of office and its commitment 

to ease the burden of inflation for Saskatchewan citizens 

. . . (and) There’s so much more we can be. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I wonder, I wonder what the member from 

Yorkton will do when the Premier directs him to vote in favour 

of this increase to the sales tax. 

 

“Morse Needs Martens,” is another ad of 1982. “Remove the 5 

per cent E&H tax.” And how will that member from Morse vote 

when we come to a vote, Mr. Speaker? 

 

There’s another one here from Lloyd Muller, a letter to 

constituents and it says . . . It’s signed, “Sincerely, Lloyd 

Muller.” It’s dated Wednesday, April 14, 1982, and under the 

topic of: “Savings to you in other areas,” he says, “By phasing 

out the provincial sales tax.” And how will the member from 

Shellbrook-Torch River vote when we come to a vote on this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker? And I wonder. 

 

I wonder how the subject of this ad that has a picture and it 

says, “Michael Hopfner, man of achievement.” I wonder how 

that representative who sits in this Legislative Assembly 

representing the constituency of Lloydminster, who said, “A 

Progressive Conservative government will phase out the sales 

tax,” I wonder how that member will vote when we come to a 

vote on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

And here’s one that says, “John Gerich, Redberry. Savings to 

you in other areas by phasing out the provincial sales tax.” Mr. 

Speaker, I wonder how the member from Redberry, whether he 

will keep his promises to his constituents when it comes to a 

vote. 

 

And last, last but not least, last but not least, Mr. Speaker, there 

is one here . . . I have an ad, it says simply, “Commitment,” and 

it has the face of the Premier of Saskatchewan. And what does 

it say? What does it say? It says, “Eliminate the 5 per cent sales 

tax on clothing and utility bills.” And then goes on to say: 

 

This measure will be the first phase of a new PC 

government’s commitment to the complete elimination of 

the sales tax in its first term of office and its commitment 

to ease the burden of inflation for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

From the words, words from the mouth of the Premier, of the 

Premier of Saskatchewan in 1982 saying that “We promise (A 

PC government promises) to eliminate the 5 per cent E&H tax.” 

 

And Tory candidate, after candidate, after candidate, after 

candidate repeated that commitment to their constituents. And 

their constituents sent them to this Legislative Assembly 

believing that they were good for their word, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well we’ll find out if they are good for their word because there 

is a Bill before us, there is a Bill before us that not only does 

not eliminate the E&H tax, we have a Bill before us in this 

Assembly that will increase the sales tax from 5 per cent to 7 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll find out, we will find out on 

record, for the constituents of all of these members, as to 

whether they intend to keep their promises to their constituents 

when we come to a vote. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, is this the only issue around the E&H tax 

increases before us now? And I say no. Because we also have to 

ask ourselves if ordinary Saskatchewan people are being asked 

to dig deep into their pockets and come up with another 2 cents 

on the dollar every time they buy a good in Saskatchewan. Is 

that because they’re getting increased services? Is this extra 2 

per cent addition to the sales tax going to result in improved 

dental care program for children? No. Is it going to result, Mr. 

Speaker, in improved social services for the poor of 

Saskatchewan? No. Is it going to result, Mr. Speaker, in 

increased spaces in universities and technical institutes? No. Is 

it going to result, Mr. Speaker, in reducing the waiting lists in 

hospitals across Saskatchewan? No, no. Is it going to result, Mr. 

Speaker, in improving our highways, upgrading our highways, 

and putting Saskatchewan people to work? No, no. 

 

And the list goes on. The list goes on, Mr. Speaker. The 

message is simple. The PC members say, we don’t keep our 

promises and we’ll give you less for more. Trust us, trust us — 

it’s only a matter of credibility. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are taxes that are certainly much more 

appropriate than sales taxes. Many would describe the sale tax 

as a regressive tax, Mr. Speaker, because it’s  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2768 

 

 

a tax that’s paid not on the basis to afford it, but on the basis of 

purchase, and a tax which tends, therefore, Mr. Speaker, to hit 

the poorest the hardest. Those who don’t have savings, those 

who spend all of their income to purchase goods and services, 

those are the ones who pay a greater proportion of their income 

on sales tax, and those are the ones who will be hit hardest by 

this Draconian measure, Mr. Speaker. Not only a violated 

promise but a difficult measure for people in Saskatchewan, 

which hits most those who can afford it the least. 

 

And there is one particular group, Mr. Speaker. In 1978 there 

was introduced to this House an amendment to the E&H tax 

Bill which provided an incentive to purchase a mobile home, 

understanding that owning a home is an important factor for 

Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan families, and that 

mobile homes provided a less expensive alternative. 

 

And in 1978, Mr. Speaker, there was introduced an amendment 

which provided for a rebate of half the sales tax to purchasers of 

mobile homes in Saskatchewan. And what this Bill does as 

well, Mr. Speaker, is not only increases, not only increases the 

sales tax from 5 to 7 per cent but for those people whose hope 

to have a home that they can own is found in the purchase of a 

mobile home, for those people, Mr. Speaker, they’re doubly hit. 

Because not only is the sales tax increased but the rebate is 

eliminated. And so, whereas the rest of Saskatchewan is 

experiencing an increase of 2 per cent for 5 to 7, purchasers of 

mobile homes, Mr. Speaker, by this Bill, will receive a sales tax 

increase of 4.5 per cent, from 2.5 per cent to 7. And that’s 

another implication to this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said when I began, laryngitis is setting 

in, and so I have restrained myself and struck strictly to the 

facts in this debate tonight. I want to simply wrap up, Mr. 

Speaker, by asking all members of this Assembly, and 

particularly those members of this Assembly who promised 

their constituents, when asking for the right to represent them in 

this Legislative Assembly, I ask those members of this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to stand up for their word, to stand 

good for their word, and when it comes to a vote on this Bill, to 

stand up and say no to this Bill and to say yes to their 

constituents and to say yes to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the member 

from Weyburn asks about the speech I’m going to give. If he’d 

pay attention and not interrupt, we’ll see what the member from 

The Battlefords has to say this evenings. I don’t want to unduly 

delay this House. We’ve been here for quite some time, Mr. 

Speaker, but I think that we have to mention a few words at 

least about the Progressive Conservative tax record in 

government in the province of Saskatchewan. And they’ve been 

a government who’ve said one thing at election time and done 

something totally different when it comes to their 

administration of government in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(2015) 

 

They certainly went around the province of Saskatchewan 

saying they disagreed with big government, and the government 

should not be the taskmaster of the people, and all other kinds 

of phrases describing an inaccurate description of the people 

who work for this fine province of Saskatchewan. And they did 

make massive cut-backs. We see many examples in the health 

care programs where they have cut and slashed programs, 

they’ve increased costs to senior citizens, they’ve put a burden 

on the sick of this province, and they certainly can’t be 

recognized for what they said during election campaigns in 

1982 and in 1986. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think the credibility of 

the government is all but shot. They will have a hard time 

telling people in the province the same line as they did in 1982 

and tried to reinforce in 1985. 

 

What we saw in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, was virtually a 

populist government from 1982 until 1986, whereby every time 

the public opinion polls made a shift, the members opposite 

changed their position to suit what the public opinion polls were 

saying. And then after 1986, when the government was 

re-elected — unfortunately, as many people in Saskatchewan 

say today — they became a very hard-line government and have 

not carried out many of the things they said, especially in the 

area of taxation. That’s what we’re debating here this evening, 

is the increase in the E&H tax, which has been an ever 

increasing burden under this government for the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And not only, Mr. Speaker, are people in the province 

questioning the credibility of the Progressive Conservative 

government in this province, they’re also wondering about the 

competence of the government whereby we find less and less 

programs that are delivered to the people of Saskatchewan at 

the same time as taxation measures are ever increasing on 

people within the province. 

 

In 1982, Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservatives, who are 

the current government in the province of Saskatchewan, they 

promised to eliminate and reduce a wide, wide range of taxes. 

Then in 1985 we saw the government introduce the flat tax. 

They called this an experimental measure and they imposed on 

the people of Saskatchewan a very unfair flat tax. I’ll go on to 

talk about that a little bit later. 

 

They also made another unprecedented move where they 

introduced a sales tax on used vehicles in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And they found that this was so unpopular, Mr. 

Speaker, through their polling and through the feedback they 

got from constituents, that after six months, even though they 

had introduced the tax in a budget, after six months they 

eliminated the tax. And they put a very, very heavy burden, I 

believe of . . . I stand to be corrected, but I believe the figure 

was something like about $8 million they collected from people 

in the province. And then they wanted to be popular so they 

removed the tax on used vehicles that’s in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And never before had there been a tax in the 

province of Saskatchewan where it was introduced in  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2769 

 

 

the budget, didn’t even run the full course of a budget year, and 

was eliminated because those members opposite wanted 

nothing more than to be popular with the people of the province 

so they could be re-elected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they also in 1985 eliminated the property 

improvement grant . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. The hon. member 

is treading, one might say, off the topic, which is An Act to 

amend The Education and Health Tax Act. I realize that hon. 

members do have a great deal to say. However, if we allow the 

debates to become too wide-ranging, then naturally we will be 

right off the topic, and in effect, the debate will be out of 

control. So I’ll ask the hon. members to please confine their 

remarks to the Act that we are discussing. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, for putting me 

right back on the specific point. I just wanted to give a little 

background as to taxation in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And although these items do not deal specifically with E&H 

tax, they certainly deal with taxation. And a case needs to be 

built for the tax load of people within the province of 

Saskatchewan, because people are telling me, and I’m sure 

they’re telling the members opposite . . . They wouldn’t be 

telling you this, Mr. Speaker, because you have to be 

non-partisan in the conducting of the rules and the fair debate of 

this legislature — but what people are saying is that they can’t 

afford to pay any more taxation. 

 

When it comes to the point where half you earn is paid in 

taxation measures, whether it be E&H tax or whether it be 

income tax or whether it be tax on cigarettes or alcohol or gas 

tax, Mr. Speaker, they can’t afford to pay more tax and 

maintain the standard of living that they’ve appreciated during 

many, many years in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I would have hoped, Mr. Speaker, you would have allowed 

me some leeway, as long as I stick within the realm of taxation, 

to debate this very, very important point. And the point is, is 

that taxes are being increased and there has to be reference 

made from time to time to other tax burden placed on the 

people to put the E&H tax in perspective as to the tax load that 

is burdening people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would want to look again at 1987 and our 

current year, where the flat tax which was very unfair has again 

been increased one percentage point and it’s staged in. And one 

of the reasons that that flat tax is so unfair is that it comes off on 

the net income, not the taxable income. So those that do have a 

few dollars to invest in tax shelters are able to do so before they 

actually have to pay the tax, and people who can’t afford those 

tax shelters, of course are hit with the full brunt of the flat tax. 

We would like to acknowledge here tonight that the government 

has placed a very heavy burden on people in the province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the E&H tax, again in 1987, in 

this current fiscal year, and on the point of the Bill precisely 

that we’re debating this evening, this government has raised the 

E&H tax by 40 per cent — 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. If any 

wage earner or business or  

corporation asked for an increase of 40 per cent in their profits 

in one year, this government would not hear about it. They’d 

pass legislation to stop that from happening. Yet in one swoop 

this provincial government under the leadership of the member 

from Estevan, from the Minister of Agriculture from Albert 

Street South, from the Premier of this province, this government 

is guided to increasing E&H tax by 40 per cent in one stroke, 

Mr. Minister. And members up on the other side of the House 

refuse to stand and justify the reasons they need to impose a 40 

per cent increase in one particular area of taxation. 

 

Of course that makes our sales tax in Saskatchewan 7 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker, 7 per cent tax — a great increase of 40 per cent. 

But 7 per cent rings true with 7 per cent, as well. Remember, 

Mr. Speaker, or the government should remember when they 

were going around the province saying they’d eliminate the tax 

on gasoline, or they deceived farmers within the province of 

Saskatchewan by saying, you’ll get your gasoline for 7 cents a 

litre less. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, farmers never did pay that tax on gasoline. 

The road tax was non-existent on farm fuel, and this 

government and the members opposite deceived the agricultural 

people, the farmers of Saskatchewan, by saying they would give 

them their gasoline for less. And of course we realize, Mr. 

Speaker, that that never did in fact happen. 

 

I would want to turn for a just a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to 

the reason why people in Saskatchewan are questioning the 

competence of the government. They’re questioning the 

credibility of a government in the province of Saskatchewan 

that has said one thing at election time and their actions portray 

something totally different throughout 1986 and 1987. 

 

We look, Mr. Speaker, at the bail-out of Pioneer Trust and the 

bungling of the Principal affair in the province of 

Saskatchewan, where this government does not stand behind the 

taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. We can look at the deal with 

Pocklington and Weyerhaeuser and Manalta Coal, the sale of 

the highways equipment. These are all reasons, Mr. Speaker, 

why they have to raise the E&H tax because they’ve sold off 

the resources and the assets of the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. They gave away $1.5 billion to the oil companies 

in the province of Saskatchewan, therefore they have to raise 

the E&H tax, Mr. Speaker, by 40 per cent. 

 

We look at . . . well the estimates range between 17 and $20 

million in government department advertising in the last year of 

Public Accounts that we’ve received. And that’s a whole other 

issue which I won’t go into because the debate is not on that. 

But I find it appalling that it’s been so long and we haven’t yet 

received the Public Accounts for the fiscal year ending 1986, 

March 31, 1986, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I see you pointing to me and I know that I shouldn’t be 

going on to some of the things that are so old and do in fact 

reveal the incompetence of this government to deal with the 

programs and the administration of the province of 

Saskatchewan. So I will deal with the subject of E&H tax here 

this evening. 

 

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2770 

 

 

One of the major reasons, Mr. Speaker, that the E&H tax has to 

be raised by 40 per cent, I believe — and some of the members 

opposite can refuse this — but I believe is because of the fact 

that they came into office in 1982 with a surplus in general 

revenue of $139 million. And the in 1982-83, Mr. Speaker, they 

forecast a deficit of $219 million. They came in and they made 

a little error; the actual deficit was $227 million. In 1983-84, 

their second fiscal year, they forecast a deficit of $316 million 

and they came in with an actual deficit of $331 million. 

 

Now I hope you can see I’m building my case, Mr. Speaker, as 

to why there has to be increased E&H tax in the province of 

Saskatchewan. In the third budget that was delivered, Mr. 

Speaker, the 1984-85 fiscal year, they came in with a deficit 

forecast of $267 million. Now the actual deficit, Mr. Speaker, 

was $379 million. Fourth budget, 1985-86, forecast deficit of 

$291 million. Whoops! Actual deficit, $584 million, Mr. 

Speaker, over half a million dollar deficit in one single fiscal 

year. 

 

Well the fifth budget, Mr. Speaker, 1986-87, they forecast a 

deficit of $389 million. And then, whoops, whoops, whoops, 

Mr. Speaker! The actual deficit was one thousand, two hundred 

and thirty-five million — a billion point two dollars-plus, in one 

single fiscal year. No wonder this government opposite has to 

raise E&H tax in the province of Saskatchewan, and it doesn’t 

matter how much they raise or reduce or adjust taxes, people 

have lost confidence in the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I look forward to the day, Mr. Speaker, where you have to 

rule over a vote that throws this government out of office before 

they can run the full five years of the mandate that they have 

under the constitution of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, in concert with the raise in the 

education and health tax from 5 per cent to 7 per cent — a 

whopping 40 per cent increase — they’ve had to cut urban 

capital grants, totally eliminate it. Education development funds 

cut by $20 million. School grants cut. Urban revenue sharing 

cut. Farm fuel rebate cut by more than 50 per cent. Technical 

institutes, savage cuts in the technical institutes. We’re blowing 

the brains out of this generation, Mr. Speaker, by the 

incompetence and the bungling of the government opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I would hope at least the back-bench 

members at some point could realize this, Mr. Speaker. They 

might as well go and join the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg because they certainly won’t be elected 

as a Progressive Conservative member in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(2030) 

 

Also in concert, Mr. Speaker, with the E&H tax is the cut in the 

youth employment programs in the province. Municipal 

governments were shocked this year, Mr. Speaker, to find that 

they no longer qualified for youth employment programs in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

And I’m sure that every member opposite heard from their 

municipal governments as to the appalling effect that that cut 

had on their summer programs for what municipalities relied on 

to carry out the programs. And this government is transferring 

that share of the deficit on to the backs of municipal people to 

make them collect tax to pay for the deficit that I outlined a few 

minutes ago. 

 

We’re talking this evening, Mr. Speaker, and you’ve pointed 

out to me already about education and health tax being raised 

by a whopping 40 per cents, Mr. Speaker. Well the health side 

of it, Mr. Speaker, I wonder, does that money all go into paying 

for health programs? Well if it did go into paying for health 

programs, many people in the province of Saskatchewan could 

understand that. But they doubt if it was, because in the area of 

health, $18 million less for health care this year in the health 

budget. Dental plan destroyed in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. The drug plan attacked. The poorest people in our 

society can’t afford to buy the drugs. 

 

And what’s the government’s answer? They send them out 

rapid transit envelopes to make sure they get their payment 

back to them quicker. People are still paying far, far more for 

their drugs, and when they see their health tax going up by 40 

per cent, they wonder why the programs are being cut to make 

them pay twice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They also wonder, Mr. Speaker, why the hospital waiting lists 

exceed 10,000 in Saskatoon. Why has the hearing aid plan been 

virtually cut? I had a constituent phone me the other day who 

said it would take so long to get his hearing aid that he might as 

well not even apply for the program. It was non-existent as far 

as he is concerned. Backed up a year, two years; can’t get a 

hearing aid any more; have to go to some private company — 

the great privatization policy of the government opposite so that 

they can pass on . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Why is the 

member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to make a 

point of order, please. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — State your point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have been listening 

to the hon. member from The Battlefords and I have found it 

extremely difficult to relate the hearing aid program to the Bill 

at hand. 

 

I think if you are listening closely, Mr. Speaker, you would see 

that the member has wandered to a great number of subjects. I 

think also, Mr. Speaker, if you were listening closely you would 

find that the member is not making sense. I would suggest to 

you, Mr. Speaker, that if the member is not going to make sense 

at least he should not make sense as it relates to the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member . . . the latter part of his 

remarks, of course, were not a point of order, and I’m sure he 

knows that. As far as the hon. members wandering from the 

topic, I think it’s agreed here that some hon. members  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2771 

 

 

have been drawing a rather long bow in their debates. And I 

suppose if they want to they can relate all kinds of tax increases 

or cuts that have occurred over umpteen years to this Bill, but 

I’m sure that that is not the intent of the debate. 

 

So I would just like to once more remind them that they can 

build a case; I’m not opposed to that. But try to be reasonable in 

your remarks so that we don’t cover a large, large spectrum, and 

as I said earlier, the debate simply deteriorates. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Oh, Mr. Speaker, I would never stray from 

the debate to abuse the rules of this House. I appreciate your 

rulings. I wonder though, I would ask the member from Melfort 

if it is not the E&H Bill that we’re debating this evening? And 

I’ve always stood to believe that the E in E&H tax stands for 

education, and the H in E&H tax stands for health. Is that right? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — And I notice the member from Melfort 

applauding, so that I know that even he understood my 

intervention in this debate here this evening, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think that as long as that tax is called E&H tax — education and 

health tax — then I think education and health, which have 

bother been decimated in the province of Saskatchewan, are 

eligible for debate under this particular Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, in the area of mental health, in 

the area of mental health, Mr. Speaker, there have been over 

100 positions cut in the province, over 50 of those positions in 

the constituency I represent in The Battlefords. People start to 

wonder, because of the increase of the 40 per cent in the 

education and health tax, how they can cut mental health 

programs like they have been in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. Community health services cut; patient care fund 

no longer exists; health capital fund no longer exists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to talk about education and health in this 

province, because if they’re raising money under this particular 

Bill for those programs, then we need to talk about them. It’s 

deceitful, it’s incompetent, it’s uncaring for people in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I question 

why the cost of living is rising faster in Saskatchewan than any 

other province in Canada. We lead the national polls. Another 

first by the Progressive Conservatives in the province of 

Saskatchewan — yet one other first, leading the province, 

world-class leaders in inflation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to also look at the promises of this 

government, what they’ve said during elections, to establish 

whether or not, Mr. Speaker, there’s credibility for the members 

opposite. 

An Hon. Member: — The Premier. That’s what we’re talking 

about. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, the Premier . . . My hon. colleague from 

Quill Lakes says it’s the Premier. Well certainly it’s the 

Premier. He leads the Executive Council; he’s the Premier of 

the province; he leads the caucus over there; he sets the agenda 

for everything that happens in this province; and it rests with no 

one else other than the farmer from Albert Street South, Premier 

. . . I can’t say the name — Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well let’s through some of the ads. What did they say at 

election time? This is an election ad, Mr. Speaker, and I won’t 

display it. They say in this ad from the former member from 

The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, “Removal of the gasoline tax.” 

And it was removed, Mr. Speaker. The road tax was removed, 

but it was brought in again with a vengeance on people in the 

province of Saskatchewan. That’s why there’s credibility lost; 

that’s why people question the competence of this government, 

Mr. Speaker. We now have over 28 cents a gallon tax on 

gasoline that was less than that before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What else did they say besides removal of the gasoline tax? 

They said, “10 per cent less provincial income tax.” We know 

that it’s gone up, Mr. Speaker. It’s gone up by the flat tax, the 

unfair flat tax imposed on people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, more unfair on those that can’t afford tax 

shelters than those that can afford them. 

 

And finally, right to the point of what we’re dealing with this 

evening, Mr. Speaker, removal of E&H tax. Well, removal of 

E&H tax — a 40 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker, is hardly 

removal of the E&H tax in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And then there’s a member you used to have, Mr. Speaker, on 

the government side, Lloyd Hampton. Well he’s departed, so I 

won’t even keep that one file. I’ll put that in the garbage bin 

beside my desk. 

 

Oh, the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. Yes, he’s here 

this evening, acknowledged by some members as an expert on 

the constitution, Mr. Speaker, but certainly people in his riding 

are questioning competence, credibility, and why cut-backs in 

the province of Saskatchewan. People write to him on a daily 

basis, I would imagine., Mr. Speaker, saying, why are you 

doing this after you promised at election them . . . They provide 

. . . And I’m quoting from an article. I don’t want to display it, 

Mr. Speaker, because that’s not within the rules of this House, 

but I’ll certainly quote from this article here. 

 

It’s an election ad by the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster. It says, “Provide 10 per cent reduction in 

provincial income tax.” Is that true? “Phase out the sales tax.” Is 

that true? “Freeze utility rates.” Is that true? “Establish Public 

Utilities Review Commission.” Does that still exist? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s why people are questioning this government’s 

competence and this government’s credibility in the province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to file all these in the garbage 

can, but I will this one because the member will not be here  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2772 

 

 

after the next election, so we’ll just put it right in there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, there’s the former member from 

Humboldt, Louis Domotor. And he made the same promises, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This member we won’t talk about. Who have we got here? Oh, 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether I can do this and I won’t 

reveal to anyone who it is, but it’s authorized by Last 

Mountain-Touchwood Progressive Conservative Association 

and it’s got a picture of their candidate in the corner. And the 

promises are to eliminate the gas tax, revitalize and improve 

health care, eliminate 5 per cent sales tax . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Really? 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Yes, really. Freeze public utility and 

insurance rates, improve the quality of rural life. Yes. We’ll file 

that because we can’t talk about that individual, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here’s another member from Prince Albert. We don’t want to 

talk about that one either. Oh, here we have one, Mr. Speaker. 

This is the member from Redberry, whip of the Progressive 

Conservative Party that keeps those members in the House. And 

I regret the day when the member from Redberry isn’t able to 

be here to keep a full vote quorum in the House because they’ll 

fall the day that he leaves, Mr. Speaker. They won’t have 

enough members to carry the vote. You know that some of the 

votes have been very close, Mr. Speaker. And if that whip falls 

apart for one . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member is off the topic. It has 

nothing to do with the E&H tax Act and I ask him to get back 

on topic. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well it does, Mr. Speaker, have some . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Are you challenging my ruling? 

The actions of the whip of this House have nothing to do with 

the debate under question, I remind you of that. I want no more 

discussion. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well I wouldn’t want to discuss that, Mr. 

Speaker. But most of the Bills, Mr. Speaker, that come through 

the legislature, at some point ultimately have either a voice vote 

or they have a vote that stands where members of this House 

are counted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only reference that I was making to the 

Government Whip is that the Government Whip’s job is to get 

their members on the government side into the House to vote. If 

he doesn’t do that for this particular . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member is walking a 

very fine line. I believe he knows it, and I think in the best 

interests of this House that he get back on the topic. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well the member from Redberry, Mr. 

Speaker . . . I have an election ad here from the Shellbrook 

Chronicle. He says in here, “Real savings for real people.  

Savings to you in other areas.” And they go to make some other 

statements here but he says, “. . . by phasing out the provincial 

sales tax.” 

 

(2045) 

 

And now I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that’s the same as the 

E&H tax. The “E” stands for education and the “H” stands for 

health tax in the province of Saskatchewan. Well did they phase 

it out? And I would say that if we had a vote on this Bill and 

that same member didn’t have all these members present, you’d 

lose the vote and the government would fall. People in 

Saskatchewan look forward to that day and I hope that the 

member from Redberry continues to do the fine job that he’s 

doing in this legislature by, even though thinly sometimes, 

having all their members there. 

 

I’m going to keep that one, Mr. Speaker. There’s the member 

from Lakeview, the Tim Embury who used to be in 

government. I’ll file that one in the garbage can, Mr. Speaker, 

because he isn’t here any more — made the same promise, 

though. And, here’s one from Gordon Dirks. “Abolish the 5 per 

cent sales tax.” 

 

Was there a Bill, I’d asked my fellow colleagues, was there a 

Bill to eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax? Reduce personal 

income tax by 10 per cent. Was there a Bill to reduce personal 

income tax by 10 per cent? Eliminate gasoline tax. Did they 

eliminate the gasoline tax? Well, yes they did but they brought 

it back, even stronger than before. 

 

And here’s one by the esteemed Deputy Speaker of the House, 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Shellbrook-Torch River, again an 

election ad from a paper. “They’re going to have savings to you 

in other areas (speaking to the people of the province) by 

phasing out the provincial sales tax,” Mr. Speaker. Yes, 

increased it by 40 per cent. That’s certainly on the topic, and 

I’m going to keep that one because that member’s going to be 

around for a year or so. 

 

Member from Saskatoon Sutherland, Paul Schoenhals, got his 

reward. He won’t be back. We’ll file that one in the garbage can 

too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here’s one by the member from Wilkie, the member who 

was betrayed by his own government. What does he say? They 

will completely remove the 5 per cent sales tax, Mr. Speaker. 

And just as a side note, the Crow rate must remain. One of the 

few that I saw, I’m going to keep that one, Mr. Speaker, keep 

that on file because I haven’t seen that before. Most of their 

members wouldn’t admit to that. 

 

Here’s the member from . . . Is it Saltcoats? Walter Johnson, is 

that Saltcoats? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Saltcoats, yes. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — The member from Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker. 

Again they’re going to reduce gasoline prices by 40 cents a 

gallon; reduce provincial income tax by 10 per cent. The 

Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker, says they did that when I referred 

to reducing the gasoline prices. So they did do that, Mr. 

Speaker. They did do that, but the  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2773 

 

 

reintroduced it with a vengeance. 

 

So what would the people of Saskatchewan have to believe, Mr. 

Speaker, other than that the members opposite are liars and 

cheats. You know, there is no other . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 

ask the hon. member from Meadow Lake to please be quiet. 

The hon. member from The Battlefords has just uttered an 

unparliamentary remark. I ask him to withdraw the remark and 

apologize. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well I will withdraw that. I got caught up in 

the heat of the debate, Mr. Speaker. I would say that half the 

members opposite are not liars and cheats. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. I think the hon. member should rise, withdraw 

the remarks, apologize in no uncertain terms, without 

equivocation, and without saying half are not and half are; just 

completely withdraw your remarks and apologize. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I completely withdraw my remarks and 

apologize, and I do now beg leave to adjourn this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mrs. Smith that Bill No. 21 — An Act to 

amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 1983 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I hope I have a little more luck 

this evening in abiding by the rules of the House, and I certainly 

will intend to do so in my short address on the changes to The 

Mineral Taxation Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the minister, the hon. minister gave second 

reading to this Bill, I unfortunately was absent from the House, 

but our hon. leader, the member from Regina Elphinstone, 

made a few comments on this Bill. I intend also to make my 

comments rather brief this evening, and point out a few things, 

reiterate a few things that the hon. member from Regina 

Elphinstone made the other day, and to add a few comments of 

my own. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, increases the mineral rights taxes that 

are owed by those people who have the right to those taxes. 

And in her address to the House on second reading, the minister 

indicated that most of those freehold tax rights were held by 

large corporations. That is in fact true, Mr. Speaker; however 

the portion of the tax that is payable by individuals is not an 

insignificant amount, and I’d like to draw that to the attention of 

the members of this House. 

 

If this Bill had not been introduced, Mr. Speaker, the total taxes 

collected under The Mineral Taxation Act would have been 

around $3.3 million. The government anticipates of bringing in 

an additional 2.2 million or a total of $5.5 million. As she 

indicated in her second reading, Mr. Speaker, about 70 per cent 

of that is paid by large corporations. In other words, 

approximately $3.85 million is paid by large corporations. But 

as I said, not an  

insignificant amount paid by individuals — about $1.65 

million. 

 

Now that’s a fair amount of money, and had this Bill not been 

brought into the House, the individual farmers would have paid 

about $1 million. In other words there’s an increase of about 

$650,000 that individual farmers will have to pay. 

 

Now I’m not saying that this Bill is exorbitant in nature. I 

simply want to draw to the attention of the members on this side 

of the House, and the members opposite, that $650,000 at this 

time, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the farming situation out 

there and the hard financial pressure that farmers are under, 

maybe $650,000 may be a significant amount and may be just a 

straw that will break the camel’s back for some of those 

farmers. So $650,000 is, I think, still a fair amount of money. 

 

That is one of the points that I wanted to bring up. The other, 

Mr. Speaker, is again as the minister indicated. The first 32,000 

acres of mineral rights that a farmer has are exempt at the 

present time, but the same thing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Yes, I agree with that. That’s been in existence when we were 

the government and fortunately you people didn’t change that, 

and that was very fortunate. 

 

But there is some concern, Mr. Speaker, as the member from 

Regina Elphinstone pointed out, that they now will also exempt 

farms that will be incorporated. In other words, corporation 

farms, agriculture corporation farms will also now have that 

exemption; per se, Mr. Speaker, I am not opposed to that. But 

we know that sometimes people incorporate in order to take 

advantage of the law, and I’m not sure that the government has 

clearly thought this one through. And I will certainly again, 

when it comes to Committee of the Whole, question the 

minister on this particular matter. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition I think pointed this out very 

clearly, that a farmer who could own, let’s say, 10,000 acres of 

mineral rights, could certainly divide this up, incorporate 

himself into three different companies, and avoid paying any 

tax at all. And I’m sure that this was not the intent of the Bill 

and that the government will probably bring in some 

amendment — at least I hope they will bring in some 

amendment — or, at least, make some clarification of this when 

we get to the committee of the whole. And so I want to make 

sure that this is clear to the government so that we don’t have to 

haggle over this when we get to committee of the whole. 

 

The other thing, and a very valid point that again was made by 

the Leader of the Opposition, is that the definition of an 

incorporated farm or an agricultural corporation should not be 

in regulations but should be put into the Bill. Now that can be 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . amendment brought in by the 

minister, and that would not be a difficult thing to do, and 

incorporate right into the Bill what the definition of an 

agricultural corporation would be. And we’d ask the minister to 

please do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, this will be an increase of about 

$2.2 million, and 660,000 of that will be paid by  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2774 

 

 

individual farmers. That, as I again indicated, I have some 

concern about that, and I am not so certain at this particular 

time when the farmers are in desperate financial situation that 

the timing of the Bill is that appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those few words, I will leave the Bill go 

through. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 15 — An Act 

to amend The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund 

Act, 1985 by now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

large majority of this Bill is of a housekeeping nature. We’ll be 

supporting the Bill in principle. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, that we have one concern about the 

Bill itself and that is with respect to section 10 which gives the 

Minister of Education the power to pass regulations on such 

matters, such as the total amount of financial assistance that 

may be provided for students and the terms and conditions 

under which such financial assistance might be provided, 

without any reference to cabinet, Mr. Speaker. We don’t think 

that that’s a good policy measure. We don’t think that the 

Minister of Education should have the power to pass regulations 

himself without taking those regulations to cabinet, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll be moving an amendment in committee of the 

whole to rectify that problem, and I hope that members opposite 

will support that amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, that while this Bill, itself, is not 

contentious, with the exception of the section that I mentioned, 

the regulations that it will permit the Minister of Education to 

adopt are highly contentious. I think we’ve seen an example of 

that this summer, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Education 

and the cabinet made a decision to say to the students of this 

province, after promising to them in the last provincial election 

campaign that they would make post-secondary education more 

accessible, introducing a policy this summer, Mr. Speaker, that 

for students who were eligible for a bursary last year, if they 

were eligible for a loan of $80 a week, this year, twelve months 

later, have to be eligible for a loan of $180 a week instead of 

$80 a week, Mr. Speaker, before being eligible for a bursary. 

 

The result of that policy, Mr. Speaker, has been that a student 

in, shall we say, studying at Wascana or Kelsey Institution or 

STI (Saskatchewan Technical Institute) or NIT (Northern 

Institute of Technology) in Prince Albert, in a 38-week program 

of study, now has to borrow $6,840, Mr. Speaker, before they 

are eligible for a penny of that to be forgiven. And a student at 

the University of Saskatchewan or the University of Regina in a 

33-week program now has to borrow $5,940 this year, in 

comparison with $2,640 last year, before they are eligible for a 

penny of that loan to be forgiven. 

 

That’s the kind of regressive policy, Mr. Speaker, that I  

fear the Minister of Education will continue to try to implement 

by way of these regulations, Mr. Speaker, that he now proposes, 

Mr. Speaker, to be able to implement unilaterally instead of by 

way of cabinet order. 

 

And we on this side of the House object to that policy, the 

regressive policy of student aid that the minister has 

implemented. While this Bill is of a housekeeping nature and 

we support it in principle, we’ll be looking to change section 10 

in committee of the whole. 

 

With that I conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(2100) 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 27 — An Act to 

amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m grateful for the 

opportunity to speak to this Bill this evening and to give voice 

to the concerns of countless people from the Sutherland 

constituency, people that I know personally have great concerns 

about this flat tax Bill, that consider this flat tax a 

fundamentally unfair tax, an unfair tax on their income. 

 

And some would . . . have even suggested to me that the 

Minister of Finance wasn’t thinking when he put this tax on, 

that he fundamentally couldn’t have known what he was doing. 

He wouldn’t have deliberately, couldn’t have deliberately 

perpetrated such a grossly unfair tax — a tax that is so 

prejudicially fair to people on high incomes and so patently 

unfair to people on low incomes or with average incomes. And 

I’m talking of people with incomes of 30 or $35,000 for whom 

this flat tax is very, very unfair — ordinary working people. 

 

This flat tax illustrates perfectly, Mr. Speaker, the very mind 

and heart of PC policy, the very mind and heart of our Premier 

in terms of the unfairness that it perpetrates. This flat tax gives 

tax breaks to the rich and those who are at the top of the 

economy, while it’s a tax take from those who are at the bottom 

or the middle of the economy. 

 

And I want to explain very briefly with reference to the 1986 

general tax form precisely how this works. Most people are 

familiar with the income tax form. The first page really doesn’t 

come into play where there is a declaration or calculation of 

total income. So when we come to the second form . . . second 

page of the income tax form, the calculation of taxable income, 

this is the critical area of the form for the flat tax because the 

flat tax is predicated on net income. 

 

Now deductions from net income can be claimed by 

high-income earners. People who have high incomes, have 

disposable incomes, and who can afford to invest in frontier oil 

exploration or film and video development, these are precisely 

the people who can avoid paying the flat tax by making these 

kinds of investments. People who can invest in registered 

retirement savings plans and take  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2775 

 

 

full advantage of that kind of tax savings will also benefit from 

this flat tax. People who can make full contributions to pension 

plans will benefit immensely from this flat tax. People who can 

invest money in stocks and bonds, who can pay management 

fees, who can pay accounting fees, who can afford investment 

counselling, can deduct those fees. People who can afford 

safety deposit boxes . . . All these categories of high income 

people who can salt their money away in investments can avoid 

paying flat tax on that income. These are all deductible under 

the flat tax. They all establish net income. 

 

Now the principle on which this flat tax rises or falls, and the 

principle on which it really fails Saskatchewan people is that 

the same time that people with high incomes that can afford to 

make investments — say a single young lawyer who has a high 

income of 50 or $70,000 and can afford to make an investment, 

who doesn’t have to support a family, who doesn’t have to pay 

for an education for children — this individual can reap the 

benefits of the tax savings; while at the same time this flat tax 

hits those with large families, the elderly, and those with high 

medical expenses because net income is calculated before these 

personal exemptions come into play, before medical 

exemptions or expenses are declared, and before expenses for 

the elderly are declared. 

 

But what is also grossly unfair is that when it comes to 

charitable contributions, people who contribute to the public 

welfare, to their church or their charity, are actually penalized 

by virtue of this flat tax, while people who have large incomes 

and can invest it in their own personal income plans and for 

their own personal security, escape paying this flat tax. So this 

is just fundamentally unfair. 

 

Far from catching high-income earners, as the Minister of 

Finance would have us believe, this flat tax goes after and 

attacks ordinary Saskatchewan people, families. This is just a 

fundamentally unfair tax that is unacceptable to the people of 

Sutherland, I know, in canvassing and talking with them, and to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the question is: if this flat tax is so fundamentally unfair, 

why would the Minister of Finance deliberately perpetrate such 

an unfair tax in the first place in 1985, and why would he revisit 

it now and perpetrate such an unfair tax, to add to it by half a 

percentage point for this year? Because the minister wasn’t 

thinking? No, I believe exactly the opposite. 

 

There’s another explanation, a fundamentally different 

explanation. And that is, that the Minister of Finance was 

thinking when he perpetrated this flat tax; that he did know 

exactly what he was doing when he initiated it and again when 

he increased it in this last budget; and that in deliberately 

deciding to implement the flat tax in the way he did, the 

Minister of Finance was acting fundamentally immorally, 

giving the tax breaks to the friends, his friends who are in the 

investment community, people with high incomes, to 

accountants and lawyers, bankers, investment counsellors, who 

know the ropes, who can avoid paying income tax — and 

sticking it to ordinary Saskatchewan people, slapping a flat tax 

on them which they can’t avoid if they have large families. 

They can’t  

deduct their children or their sick or their elderly that they 

support; they can’t deduct their contributions to churches and 

charities. Fundamentally immoral. 

 

Could it really be that the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, 

then, the Minister of Finance, is really so unthinking as people 

suggest? I hardly think so. 

 

Now some would say that the Premier and his PC government 

certainly must have not planned on this flat tax increase, 

especially after the outcry after it was introduced in 1985; that 

they certainly in running in the 1986 election would not 

deliberately have thought or calculated to raise the flat tax still 

further. 

 

In 1982 the Premier promised to eliminate the sales tax, to 

reduce income tax. But did he do it? No, he was dishonest with 

the Saskatchewan people. 

 

In 1985 the Premier introduced a new PC flat tax, the used car 

sales tax, and he betrayed Saskatchewan people. And so what 

do we have in 1986 with this flat tax? In the election was there 

any talk of a tax increase? None whatsoever, not a whisper of it. 

And yet what do we get in this budget of June from the Minister 

of Finance and the Premier, the PC party? Another PC flat tax 

increase, another PC tax increase with respect to the sales tax, 

from 5 per cent to 7 per cent, and a new PC gas tax at 7 cents a 

litre. 

 

This after they had declared that there would never be a gas tax 

for Saskatchewan people to pay again — a fundamental 

betrayal of Saskatchewan people. Grossly unfair. A 

double-cross, fundamentally immoral, I say. At the same time 

the government introduces a flat tax, it gives one and a half 

billion dollar tax breaks to the big oil companies in their first 

term of government. If that isn’t immoral, I don’t know what is. 

 

And now with this second term, what do we have? The 

government giving away $248 million to the Weyerhaeuser 

corporation at a time when it slaps yet more flat tax on 

Saskatchewan people. Not a penny received from the 

Weyerhaeuser sale to the people of Saskatchewan, not a penny 

to be received in the years ahead. Yet at the same time, 

Saskatchewan people paying out hundreds and hundreds of 

dollars in ordinary families — each family — in flat tax. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether a good measure of this 

flat tax isn’t going to pay for patronage appointments like Paul 

Schoenhals and George Hill. We know it went to 

Weyerhaeuser. We know it went to Peter Pocklington. Poor 

Peter Pocklington who can get $10 million from the 

Saskatchewan treasury, and Saskatchewan people can’t even get 

a tax break from the Minister of Finance and his Premier. Yes, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, PC mismanagement always means PC tax 

increases. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the people of Saskatchewan 

that few things this Devine PC government have done in the last 

five years illustrates . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ve asked members 

many times not to refer to other members by  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2776 

 

 

name, rather by position or constituency. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — That was a slip of the tongue, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Few things that the Premier of this province has done, 

few things that this PC government have done in the last five 

years illustrate so clearly their fundamental unfairness as this 

flat tax, the immorality of this flat tax. I say it is nothing short 

of scandalous that the rich are allowed to salt away their 

thousands, their thousands in registered retirement savings 

plans and investment plans for frontier oil exploration; that they 

are allowed to deduct their investment counselling expenses 

before their net income is calculated; and at the very same time 

ordinary working people are not, under this flat tax, allowed to 

deduct their charitable and church contributions. I say they are 

being slapped in the fact with an unfair PC flat tax, as part of 

the largest tax increases in this province’s history. 

 

And now this increase in the flat tax that we saw in the June 

budget is positively obscene — that this PC government comes 

along before this legislature now to amend the flat tax 

legislation, not to deal with the unfairness and the injustice and 

the immorality of this tax, but rather to perpetuate the injustice. 

That adds insult to injury already afflicted, and it’s 

fundamentally inexcusable. It’s dishonest; it betrays the 

promises that they made to the people of Saskatchewan, and it 

indicates that this PC government and that this Premier is not 

only fiscally bankrupt but morally bankrupt as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: — How else can we explain it? How else can it 

be explained? Eighteen million less in the budget for health 

care; a cut of 100 people from the Department of Health; cuts in 

dental care; cuts in the drug program; increases in the waiting 

lists at hospitals. At the same time, we get a flat tax — an unfair 

flat tax. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have great respect for the Prairie 

Messenger, published in Muenster, Saskatchewan. And when 

the flat tax was first introduced back in the budget of 1985, in 

April of 1985, there was an editorial that appeared in the 

Prairie Messenger, and this editorial noted, and I quote: 

 

The flat tax is not quite as flat as it first appears. By no 

means have all unfair tax shelters been removed. Hefty 

deductions can still be made before declaration of one’s 

net income . . . 

 

(2115) 

 

Which is exactly what I was trying to explain. It goes on, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to say that: 

 

Hefty deductions can still be made before declaration of 

one’s net income — deductions few farmers or $30,000 

wager earners are in a position to make. 

 

I want to continue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Prairie Messenger 

editorial continues: 

 

What is the rationale behind allowing deductions  

for frontier oil exploration or multi-unit residential 

buildings, while not allowing deductions for gifts to SCIS, 

which is the Saskatchewan Council for International 

Co-operation, or to churches in Saskatchewan. Surely the 

churches, feeding so many of Saskatchewan’s hungry, 

should be worth something in cold, economic terms. 

 

And the editorial continues: 

 

The most significant factor in the income tax reform which 

Mr. Andrews has introduced is not that the rich will finally 

begin paying at least the minimum amount; it is that the 

lower middle-class will begin to pay a larger share. And 

that includes an endangered species, the small family 

farmer. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this flat tax introduced and 

perpetuated now in this budget from last June from the Minister 

of Finance purports to help the agricultural sector. And yet with 

this increase in taxation for lower-income people — and we’re 

talking now about farm people with depressed grain prices, 

they’re certainly going to have lower incomes this yea r- this 

flat tax goes a long way to perpetuate the unfair tax burden for 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Over the last five years this PC government has rolled up 

successive deficit budgets. Each and every year they have been 

in power we see yet another and a greater deficit budget. And 

now with this flat tax increase they ask the good people of 

Saskatchewan to bail them out. And I wager, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that it won’t be long before we’ll have the Minister of 

Finance announcing that the flat tax which was announced in 

June at 1.5 per cent for half of the year will now go to 2 per cent 

for next year because it will be a whole year. So we’ll see yet a 

further perpetration of this unfairness. And that’s something 

that the Minister of Finance has yet to deny when asked very 

directly about. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a flat tax to bail out the 

incompetence and the mismanagement of this government and 

its Premier — $1.5 billion lost in tax revenue — lost in tax 

revenue when the concessions are made to the oil companies, 

when the give-aways are made to the oil companies by the 

Premier and his cabinet in the first three years of his 

government. And what do we get now in return? Increases in 

the flat tax. We’ve seen it in June, and we’ll see it shortly for 

next yea r- a further increase. 

 

Money given to Weyerhaeuser, money given to Peter 

Pocklington, but no help for Saskatchewan people, for farm 

people who are hurting with low commodity prices when it 

comes to the tax system. And that’s why this flat tax is an unfair 

tax. An astute government, a caring government, a competent 

government would be looking for ways to make taxation fairer. 

A PC government, a Progressive Conservative government 

doesn’t do that. This PC government is unfair; it is dishonest 

with Saskatchewan people; it lies to them at election time . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the 

member from Saskatoon Sutherland to withdraw that last 

statement. It’s unparliamentary language and I would ask  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2777 

 

 

him to apologize to the House. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I retract that last remark, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I’m advised that I should have said that this 

government misleads . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ve asked the member to 

apologize to the House. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I apologize to the House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

All I can say, and by way of conclusion is that this PC 

government is fundamentally unfair. It deceives Saskatchewan 

people, and more than that, with this flat tax we have proof of 

its fundamental immorality. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 

permitting me the opportunity to enter this debate, although I 

suggest that I am using that word debate, in this case, rather 

loosely, to say the least. 

 

This could hardly be called a debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

have been waiting and waiting for some member opposite to 

enter this discussion, and they are not rising in their seat. I say 

to myself, why will they not enter this debate? Why will they 

not stand in this House and defend these massive tax increases 

on the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Why is it, when Saskatchewan people are seeing their drug 

plan, at best, altered . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Gutted. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Some suggest gutted. When they see their 

dental plan decimated, when they see their roads falling to 

pieces and their parks being sold, why is it that members 

opposite, then, will not stand and explain to the people of 

Saskatchewan why, therefore, they should be paying more? 

 

These Bills that we are now debating are asking, clearly, the 

people of Saskatchewan to pay more, while at the same time 

they’re receiving much less. So I ask: why are members 

opposite ashamed to speak? Why are they ashamed to stand in 

this House and explain and defend what they’re doing? And I 

suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s because there is no defence 

and there is no justification and this tax grab is nothing but the 

sign of a desperate government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in one of those dusty old books that 

preachers like to keep on the book shelf, one of those books of 

old proverbs and little old verses, I discovered a small verse. 

While it’s not dated, I take it that it’s a very old verse, and yet it 

seems to me to be as appropriate today and as appropriate to 

this government as when first the verse was coined in some 

other Tory regime. I would like members present here to listen 

to this verse carefully. It reads: 

 

“Taxes are equal, is a dogma which I’ll prove at once” 

(proclaimed) a Tory boor, 

“(Why) taxes hardly press upon the rich, 

and likewise press hardly on the poor!” 

 

I’ll just say that again, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

“Taxes are equal, is a dogma which I’ll prove at once” 

exclaimed a Tory boor, 

“(Why) taxes hardly press upon the rich, 

and likewise press hardly on the poor!” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are here debating An Act to amend 

The Income Tax Act, an Act that will raise the flat tax on 

Saskatchewan people. And it’s an indication again, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the governments on the right never really change. 

Once in power, and especially given a second term, they turn. 

They turn on the average person; they turn on working people; 

they turn on small farmers. They tax and they tax and they tax 

with one hand, and with the other hand they continue the 

hand-outs and the give-aways to their friends. Some things 

never change. 

 

And while this is going on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they suggest 

that the whole process is fair and just and equal. Listen to what 

the Minister of Finance said as he introduced this Bill 27, which 

from personal income tax in this province will take well over 

another $100 million from Saskatchewan people. The Minister 

of Finance said, and I quote: 

 

Our government introduced the flat tax because it is a fair 

and efficient tax. And we have chosen to continue it for 

these reasons. 

 

Well, it’s efficient all right. It’s efficient at taking money out of 

the pocket-books and the bank accounts of Saskatchewan 

people, but it’s anything but fair — anything but fair! 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the total of the tax increases contained in this 

budget, contained in the Bills we are now looking at, including 

this Bill 27, this government is extracting another $200 million 

— more than $200 million — from the people of Saskatchewan. 

That’s through income taxes, the taxes being raised by this Bill 

in addition to the extra taxes on tobacco, the sales tax, the E&H 

tax that we debated earlier here tonight, the gas taxes. They’re 

forcing up property taxes by cuts to municipal governments, 

higher licence fees across the board — taxes, taxes, taxes — 

while at the same time cutting services to people. The people of 

Saskatchewan are being asked to pay more and receive less, and 

they suggest that that’s fair. 

 

Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people in my constituency 

say it’s unfair. They’re saying it in Moose Jaw; they’re saying it 

in Regina; they’re saying it in Saskatoon; they’re saying it in 

Davidson; they’re saying it in Estevan; they’re saying it across 

the province. It’s unfair! It’s unfair! The truth of the old verse 

remains the same: taxes, these “taxes hardly press upon the 

rich,” but they “press hardly on the poor.” 

 

Now I find the figures provided to us and to the people of this 

province by the Minister of Finance in terms of his  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2778 

 

 

estimates of tax revenue for this current year to be very 

interesting. I find these figures very interesting. I’m going to 

compare for this House, Mr. Speaker, four taxes that come 

under the category of provincial taxes. 

 

The first estimate revenue — I’m comparing estimated revenues 

for last year and then the estimated revenues for this year. 

While many of us have little faith in the minister’s estimates, 

I’ll give him credit tonight, and we’ll just look at his estimated 

figures. 

 

For corporation capital tax, the estimated revenue in 1986-87, 

the past fiscal year, was $55,900,000. The estimated revenue 

from corporate capital tax in this current year is $51,900,000. 

It’s down $4 million. 

 

Corporate income tax — the Minister of Finance’s own 

estimated revenues — in 1986-87 he estimated from corporate 

income tax we would receive $162,400,000. His estimated 

revenues from corporate income tax in this budget year — $130 

million; $30,400,000 less. A total of $34,400,000 less in 

corporate taxes. 

 

Now let’s look at individual income tax, the taxes affected by 

the Bill we are now discussing. In 1986-87 the Minister of 

Finance predicted that from individual income tax we would 

receive revenues of $698,800,000. In this budget y ear he 

predicts we will raise from individual income tax $751,500,000. 

That’s a $52 million increase. A $52 million increase for 

people. 

 

Let’s look at sales taxes, the taxes also borne by average and 

ordinary Saskatchewan people and families. The estimated 

revenue in 1986-87 from sales taxes — $386 million. The 

estimated revenue in 1987-88 — $467,300,000. An $81 million 

increase. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bottom line on these projected revenues from 

provincial taxes is that this government, this Premier, this 

Minister of Finance, and this government is taking well over 

$200 million in additional tax moneys from the people of 

Saskatchewan. Over $200 million. At the same time, taxation 

from the corporate sector is decreasing by $34 million. Some 

things don’t change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I ask, is it fair? I ask, is it fair 

when you consider how Saskatchewan families and 

Saskatchewan households are struggling these days to balance 

their own budgets. Is it fair then that this government through 

this flat tax should be further taxing them when this government 

can’t balance its budget? Is it fair to take $200 million out of 

our provincial economy, out of the earnings of working people 

in this province; take another $200 million out of the hands of 

Saskatchewan business people; take another $200 million out of 

the hands of the family farmers in Saskatchewan? Well this 

government seems to do nothing to address its own 

mismanagement. I ask members present, is that fair? Is that 

fair? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask, is it fair? While this government is  

going about cutting services, while it has decimated the dental 

plan, while it has attacked the drug plan, while our roads are in 

bits, and our parks are being sold, and funding is cut to culture 

and sport and recreation, is it fair, then, that this government 

should ask for more from the people of Saskatchewan? I ask 

members present, is that fair? 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, is there any wonder that a tax revolt is 

brewing in this province? People are being taxed to death and 

they’re saying, we can’t take any more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there are options, there are many 

options — options that this government didn’t even consider. 

Mr. Speaker, the other evening in this House we listened as my 

colleague from Moose Jaw very eloquently described the 

numbers of people in this province who today are receiving 

social assistance simply because they can’t find a job. They’re 

receiving social assistance because they can’t find work in this 

province. They’re employable people, but they’re without jobs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it takes a Ph.D. in Economics 

to figure out that these folks are now receiving from the 

provincial treasury rather than contributing to the provincial 

treasury. Mr. Speaker, provide those people with meaningful 

employment, stimulate the economy, provide a decent job 

strategy, and many of these people will be working, will be — 

rather than taking from the provincial treasury — will be 

contributing to the provincial treasury. That seems to me to 

make good sense. 

 

But do we have a job strategy in this province? Do we have a 

plan? What we have, Mr. Speaker, is one plan, a plan to cut 

services, increase taxes, and continue the give-aways to the 

friends of this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, how many other options has this 

government overlooked before taxing again the people of 

Saskatchewan? Well, they’ve gone about substantially cutting 

health care, legal aid, municipal funding, funding to sport and 

culture. But have they cut funding to their own political staffs? 

Have they cut anything from their self-serving advertising 

budgets? Have they cut from their lavish personal expenditures 

and trips on government aircraft? Have they cut a thing from 

those luxurious trade offices overseas? Have they done one 

single thing to get a grip on their own mismanagement? Not a 

thing. Their one answer is cut services and increase taxes on 

Saskatchewan people, and then they try to make the people of 

this province believe it’s fair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill 27, this amendment to The Income Tax 

Act that will raise the unfair flat tax in Saskatchewan, will take 

money directly from the pocket-books and from the bank 

accounts of Saskatchewan people. Now some members 

opposite may not know what it’s like — or perhaps they’ve 

forgotten; maybe they never knew what it’s like — to try and 

raise a family when your income is very limited. Perhaps 

they’ve forgotten what it’s like to  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2779 

 

 

keep a household going on a small farm when the price of grain 

today is effectively no more than it was in the Depression. 

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, they have forgotten. Perhaps some of 

them never knew what it’s like to try and keep an old car on the 

road and pay a mortgage and send the kids off to school in the 

fall. Perhaps they don’t know what it’s like to farm on a small 

farm where you can’t afford new machinery and you go from 

repair to repair to repair to try and get a crop off. Perhaps, they 

forget, or they never knew. Perhaps they don’t know what it’s 

like to go year after year with 0 per cent increase in your salary 

while everything else goes up and up and up and up. 

 

Every tax that you levy on the people of this province is another 

attack on limited household budgets; it’s another attack on the 

pocket-books and the bank accounts of Saskatchewan people. 

Every dollar that you take from Saskatchewan people is a dollar 

less that they have to spend on a pair of running shoes for their 

kids; it’s one dollar less for a family holiday; it’s one dollar less 

for a tractor tire; it’s one dollar less for a day at the park with 

your kids; it’s one dollar less that you have to donate to your 

church or your community club; or one dollar less that you have 

to support a child in the Third World. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Premier and this government seem to believe 

that the wallets, the pocket-books, and the bank accounts of 

Saskatchewan people are bottomless; that at whim they can just 

reach there to solve their own mismanagement. Mr. speaker, I 

submit, the only thing that has truly been open for business 

since 1982 in this province are the wallets and the pocket-books 

of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — And you’ve taken the hard-earned money from 

Saskatchewan people and you’ve squandered it. You’ve run up 

a deficit, and now you’re cutting our health care and our 

education and so much else. And this Premier, and this Minister 

of Finance, and this government says it’s fair, says it’s fair. I 

say it’s unfair, and I say this government has lost the right to 

take one more dollar from Saskatchewan people, to increase 

taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I listened with some interest a 

week ago, or a little more, to a small business man from a small 

community in Saskatchewan. I listened to him address a group 

of 125 people who had gathered, and their common concern 

was health care in this province. I can’t quote him directly, but I 

paraphrase what he said, and this is fairly accurate to what he 

said. He said to that group of people, if the government came to 

me tomorrow and said we’re going to charge you another 

$1,000 in taxes, he said, I wouldn’t mind if I could be 

guaranteed that every one of that $1,000 would go directly to 

health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think in some ways his comment is typical of 

Saskatchewan people. Saskatchewan people will accept and 

understand the need of taxation if, when they place in the hands 

of government their hard earned dollars, they can be confident 

that the government will spend it wisely; that the government 

will be responsible  

with the money; if they are confident that that money is going 

to provide care for the sick and care for the elderly and 

education for the young . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — . . . if they have some confidence that their tax 

money is going to provide better roads and parks and facilities 

for the people of this province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I tell you, the people of my constituency and 

across this province no longer have the confidence in this 

government. Mr. Speaker, that’s why I will be voting against 

this Bill and against every Bill that proposes a tax increase on 

Saskatchewan people, because Saskatchewan people don’t want 

their hard-earned money to go to patronage; they don’t want it 

to go to waste; they don’t want it to go to pay the salaries of 

every defeated PC candidate who happens to come into this 

building looking for a job. They don’t want to see their 

hard-earned dollars going to pay off the bond dealers and the 

banks in New York City and Tokyo; they don’t want to see 

their hard earned dollars going into the hands of out-of-province 

corporate friends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the people of this province no longer 

want to see their hard-earned dollars put in the hands of this 

Premier, this Minister of Finance, and this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So on this tax Bill 27, I will be voting with the 

will of Saskatchewan people. I’ll be voting against this massive 

tax grab. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, I say to this House, and 

I say to the people of Saskatchewan, the truth of the old verse 

remains: 

 

Taxes are equal . . . 

Proclaims the Tory boor, 

Taxes hardly press upon the rich, 

And likewise press hardly upon the poor! 

 

And some things don’t change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I waited a moment 

before getting to my feet to see if any of the back-benchers from 

the government side opposite who have been lolling around in 

their chairs all evening were going to stand up to defend this 

Bill, the Bill to amend The Income Tax Act, which we’re 

talking about tonight. 

 

With my colleague, the member from Moose Jaw South, I share 

the concern that no one from the government side has the 

courage to stand up and defend an amendment to The Income 

Tax Act. We’ve heard already how many promises they made 

in the election campaign that they were going to reduce taxes, 

and with this Bill we very sadly see an increase in the taxes on 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I am sad to see the taxes go up. I’m sad because I know what a 

burden this means to the many people in Saskatchewan, 

particularly low and middle income  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2780 

 

 

people, many of whom I represent from the constituency of 

Saskatoon Centre. And I’m particularly sad that the people of 

Saskatchewan have been subjected to so much deceit from the 

government opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the last election campaign one of the 

platforms that I ran on was an elimination of the flat tax which 

was first introduced in 1985. So it’s with some sadness that I 

stand here today to address a Bill which is gong to increase that 

flat tax, because when I was going door to door campaigning in 

Saskatoon Centre and I spoke to people about this issue, we all 

agreed that 1 per cent flat tax across the board was an unfair flat 

tax, but that should it go up — and it would likely go up — it 

would become even more unfair. And I very sadly foresee that 

in the future we may be standing in this House — next yea r- 

looking at a 5 per cent increase across the board, and that is an 

even more unfair tax burden on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I note with interest in introducing this Bill that the Minister of 

Finance described it this way: our government introduced the 

flat tax because it is a fair and efficient tax. Frankly, I’m not 

surprised to hear the Minister of Finance say something like 

that, because his ability to twist language and to call something 

fair which is blatantly unfair has been proven time and again in 

this House. It reminds me of the brochure that he put out calling 

the gas tax a savings for Saskatchewan people. I commented on 

that already in the House; I refer to it again today as we look at 

the proposed increase in the flat tax, which is being called a fair 

and efficient tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s becoming blatantly clear that we cannot trust 

what the Minister of Finance is saying to the people of 

Saskatchewan. His credibility is really low, as is the credibility 

of the PC government opposite, and has been demonstrated 

many times tonight with the quotes from the brochures, the 

election brochures, and the promises of the members opposite 

who haven’t got the courage to stand up and speak to this Bill 

and defend their increases in the taxes. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s a shame. 

 

Ms. Smart: — It is a shame; it’s a shame because the people of 

Saskatchewan expected something different, and now they’re 

getting stuck with increases in taxes. 

 

(2145) 

 

The Minister of Finance has said he has to increase the flat tax 

to pay for the deficit — a deficit which, again, has been forecast 

to be a certain amount and has actually ended up to be 

something quite different. And just to go back a couple of years, 

in 1984-85, the budget deficit forecast was $267 million and 

actually ended up being $379 million. In 1985-86 he said it 

would be $291 million; it ended up being $584 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Whoops. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Whoops. Whoops. Very much so, a huge 

increase over what he said it would be. And now in 86-87, 

before the election forecasting a $389 million deficit, we find 

we may be looking at a $1.235 billion  

deficit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Whoops! 

 

Ms. Smart: — Whoops, indeed, a huge increase, a reflection of 

the kind of deception that this government has perpetrated on 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Minister of Finance who has introduced this Bill has no 

comprehension of what is a fair or an efficient tax. He has no 

comprehension of what is a deficit and where it might possibly 

be; and he has proven in this House that he can’t read a balance 

sheet. 

 

I refer to his comments on the balance sheet of Principal Trust. I 

make these comments in connection with this Act because of 

the comments he’s made in presenting it to us, and because it’s 

very important that we stand up and we express in this House 

our indignation and our rage at the way in which the people are 

being deceived. This government is losing it’s credibility, has 

no credibility as far as I’m concerned, and is practising deceit 

on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

“Fairness,” the Minister of Finance has said in Hansard on 

September 10 in speaking to this Act: 

 

Fairness in the tax system requires not only that taxpayers 

share the tax burden but also that they share it according to 

their ability to pay. 

 

And then he brings in a flat tax as an example of a tax that’s fair 

according to your ability to pay. Nothing could be further from 

the truth when you have a flat tax. A 1 per cent out of a low 

income is higher amount of money out of somebody’s actual 

money that they have to spend that 1 per cent out of a high 

income. Two per cent is worse. 

 

I took the opportunity to figure out what it will be if it goes up 

to 5 per cent, and I thought it was quite interesting. Because if 

you have a $20,000 net income, you’re looking at a tax of $82 a 

month if it goes to 5 per cent. At $20,000 net income, you only 

have $1,583 per month spending money. If you take a mortgage 

of $600 out of that, you’ll end up with just under a thousand 

dollars per month for everything else that you have to spend 

your money on — a thousand dollars a month. 

 

There are a lot of people in Saskatchewan who earn around 

$20,000 a month. None of the members opposite, I’m sure, 

have any idea of what it’s like to live on that kind of an income, 

because I would say with confidence that all of them are living 

on a lot more than that. But there are many people, the majority 

of people in Saskatchewan, who have only that much amount of 

money to raise a family and to have for their spending. And 

with the cost of housing being so high, the amount of money 

that people have for everything else is going down and down. If 

you had a $65,000 salary with a 5 per cent tax, you would be 

$270 a month out of your income, but your income would be 

$5,416 a month. And after you take out the tax, you will still 

have $5,146 for all of your expenses. You could, with that 

money, afford a mortgage of $1,000, and you would still have 

over $4,000 a month for all your other expenses. 

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2781 

 

 

That’s an example of why the flat tax is so unfair, why it puts 

such a high burden on people on low and middle income, and 

leaves people with high income with still a relatively large 

amount of money to cover the expenses that they have to meet 

from day to day and month to month. 

 

The flat tax is, as I’ve said, an unfair tax. It’s not a progressive 

tax. It’s anything but a flat tax. And it’s a tax that’s levied on 

net income after deductions, and many people have already 

pointed out that people with money are able to afford the tax 

deductions; people with a low income, a middle income, are not 

able to afford tax deductions, so they are taxed out of their basic 

income a lot higher than people on a high income. There are so 

many reasons why this tax, this flat tax, is unfair, and why it 

does not share the tax burden with people according to their 

ability to pay. It does exactly the opposite. 

 

And I have spoken out against this on the doorstep with people 

in Saskatoon Centre during the election campaign, and I 

certainly continue to speak out against it now. 

 

To give credit where it’s due, my colleague from Regina 

Victoria has pointed out that the flat tax has come to us from the 

flat earth society. I like that concept. The flat earth society — a 

group of people who still don’t know that the world is round; 

they don’t know and they don’t understand how people live in 

this province. They’re still hanging on to an obsolete idea and 

putting in a regressive tax, not a progressive tax. 

 

The flat tax has come from the flatterers of society, the PC 

government opposite. But that’s not surprising, Mr. Speaker, 

because the PC government opposite has, in a number of its 

other programs, constantly favoured people with money and 

provided benefits for those who are already wealthy — those 

who already have the money to pay for things — and still wants 

to enforce that regime of favouring people with money and 

leaving those with the low and middle income to bear the whole 

burden. 

 

In the Leader Post in April of 1985, the headline in an article 

said: 

 

Loopholes are available to allow rich taxpayers to dodge 

paying at least part of the 1 per cent flat tax proposed in 

the provincial budget. 

 

That was for the Finance Minister, Bob Andrew, in 1985. The 

same is true today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about how this government is 

constantly favouring the people with money and how this tax, 

the flat tax, is a burden on low and middle income people. And 

it’s particularly sad when we realize that Saskatchewan now has 

the highest cost of living in Canada. With the gas tax, with the 

new sales tax which has been discussed in detail this evening, 

and now with a sharp hike in the flat tax, the cost of living has 

gone up to the point where we are experiencing real hardship 

for people. 

 

In an editorial in the Star-Phoenix in August 21 of this year: 

The Government Fuels Inflation, are the headlines. 

Customarily rising rates of inflation, a company and overheated 

economy which is expanding too fast — but that explanation 

doesn’t fit the situation in Saskatchewan where the inflation rate 

jumped past the 6 per cent mark last month, in July of this year, 

giving this province the dubious distinction of having the 

highest cost of living in Canada. It seems safe to extrapolate 

from available information that the resulting inflation was, in 

the main, fuelled by government actions. 

 

For one thing, taxation increased substantially July 1. 

Taxing provisions from the spring federal budget became 

effective then, as did increases in provincial taxes, most 

specifically a sharp hike in the flat tax and imposition of 

new sales tax. 

 

It all amounts to a bad blow to the average citizen. Getting 

by in an inflationary economy is bad enough at the best of 

times, but when incomes stand a chance of at least keeping 

pace with rising inflation rates and an economic climate 

such as the one now covering Saskatchewan, the income 

trend is going in the opposite direction. Astute government 

policy makers would be looking for ways to reduce the 

impact of taxation, which simply takes money out of the 

hands of consumers rather than adding to the problems of 

taxing more. 

 

Obviously what we have are not astute government policy 

makers. They’re not looking for ways to reduce the impact of 

taxation, they’re adding to it. They’re adding to it and making 

the cost of living go up for Saskatchewan people at the same 

time as the income trend is going in the opposite direction. 

 

Anyone who’s talked to the many sales people, the business 

people in Saskatoon and Regina, about the way their businesses 

are going now will realize that the income trend is going down, 

and they’re not experiencing the sales and the progress that they 

used to experience. More and more people are being thrown out 

of work, more and more people have less income. There’s a 

spiralling sense of loss of income and of burden on people with 

low and middle income that’s getting harder and harder for 

people to bear. 

 

In July 22, ’87, in the Star-Phoenix, the editorial said this: 

 

Canadians in increasing numbers are expressing anger and 

frustration with the neo-Conservative style of governing 

they see in Ottawa and some provincial capitals. The tax 

burden on middle income earners is growing by leaps and 

bounds, particularly in Saskatchewan, while services are 

shrinking and, in the case of the federal government, the 

talk is all of tax reform. 

 

But it’s empty talk, and it’s certainly been empty talk from the 

PC government about reducing the taxes in this province when 

we see what’s happening now with the increase in the education 

and health tax, the sales taxes, and now, this amendment to the 

Income Tax Act. 

 

It’s empty talk, it’s deceit, it’s a reflection of incompetence, and 

as the editorial says: “There is just too  

  



 

September 22, 1987 

 

2782 

 

 

much of a gap between the message from government and what 

the vast majority of taxpayers know to be true from their own 

lives.” Too much of a gap from the message of the government 

to what people know is the reality in their own lives; and I 

know from talking to the people in Saskatoon Centre that that 

gap is growing. I know they’re concerned about this increase in 

the flat tax. I’m very concerned about the flat tax going up 

further and further because it’s a regressive tax; it’s a 

burdensome tax; it is in no way fair and equitable. 

 

I’m sure that my other colleagues have lots to say about this 

topic, even if the back-benchers on the government side haven’t 

got the courage to stand up and defend this Act. Stand up in this 

House and tell the people of Saskatchewan why you’re doing 

this to them, why you think it’s a good idea as a PC government 

to increase a regressive tax, and to burden the people who are 

on low and middle income. Stand up. 

 

I’d like to ask the Minister for Consumer Affairs, interested in 

consumer issues, someone who is supposed to be concerned 

about the high cost of living going up and what’s happening to 

the consumer index. Stand up and defend this legislation; tell 

the people why you’re doing it to them. I’m sure they’d like to 

know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it being close to 10 o’clock, I would like to beg 

leave to adjourn this debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:59 p.m. 

 


