













































July 20, 1987 Hansard


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

July 20, 1987 

 

1267 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Deputy Clerk: I beg to advise the Assembly that Mr. Speaker 

will not be present to open this sitting. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goodale: Yes, Mr. Speaker. I rise under rule 11 to present 

a petition. It is signed by nearly 600 petitioners from some 44 

Saskatchewan communities, many of them in my constituency 

of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

These petitioners are opposed to the elimination of the 

Saskatchewan dental plan for children, and they call upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to reinstate that plan as it 

previously existed, and to rehire the dismissed dental therapists 

and assistants. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Muller: It gives me a great deal of pleasure today to 

introduce three people in the Speaker’s gallery. One, of course, 

is no stranger to us, Craig James, who now is Chairman of 

Committees in the British Columbia Legislature, and with him 

is Glen Clark, the member for the Legislative Assembly from 

Vancouver East, and also James T. Rabbitt, who is the member 

from Yale-Lillooet. I got it right. I’d like all members to wish 

you a good stay in Regina and Saskatchewan, and I certainly 

hope you enjoy yourselves for the coming week. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to make an 

introduction today of a former member of this Legislative 

Assembly who came before me in representing the constituency 

of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg for the years 1975 until 1978, and I 

know all hon. members will want to join me in welcoming back 

to this Assembly as a visitor today, Mr. Roy Nelson from 

Glentworth, Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, 

and through you to the other members of the Legislative 

Assembly, some students that we have visiting in Regina today, 

actually as part of a summer studies program here. Seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery, some 24 students from grades 3 to 10 and 

they, Mr. Speaker, are taking a summer studies course. They’re 

gifted students at the Scholastica program at the University of 

Regina. 

 

These students are from all over southern Saskatchewan: 

Estevan, Gull Lake, Webb, Kincaid, Rockglen, Broadview, 

Lipton, Cupar, Fort Qu’Appelle, Vibank, several from Regina, 

one from Saskatoon, and a couple from Swan River, Manitoba, 

I’m led to believe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these gifted students represent our future 

leaders, our future scientists, our future engineers, doctors, 

nurses, and business men and the business women of the future. 

I will be meeting with them after question period for some 

photos and some refreshments. I would also like to point out to 

the members of the Assembly that they are accompanied by 

Rita Hlady and Margaret Lipp who’s special education here in 

the province of Saskatchewan. And I would ask all members to 

join with me in welcoming them to the legislature this 

afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Funding for Universities 

 

Mr. Prebble: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, during the budget debate 

in the Assembly on June 25, you made several statements about 

the importance of education, and on page 761 of Hansard you 

proclaimed: 

 

. . . education is going to be the key to the future in 

this province. 

 

Knowledge is what’s going to separate the winners 

from the losers. 

 

In light of that statement, Mr. Minister, how can your 

government justify creating a funding crisis at our universities 

which means that for the first time in the history of the 

University of Saskatchewan that university is going to be forced 

to turn away qualified students from the College of Arts and 

Science. Why would you doom these young people, many of 

whom have 70 per cent averages in graduating from grade 12, 

to be, in your words, “losers” in an age where knowledge is 

king? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: Mr. Speaker, our government, the 

essential question that the hon. member asks about is the 

question of accessibility - accessibility to our universities, our 

institutes, our post-secondary institutions. And certainly we are 

very much committed to ensuring that students do have access 

to post-secondary education institutions. 

 

If one looks at the enrolment numbers over the past several 

years, they have constantly risen. They have constantly gone 

upwards, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that’s a tribute to the 

system. As some would view that as a problem, I think it’s a 

tribute to the importance that people in Saskatchewan view 

post-secondary education, and that more and more of our young 

people are having the opportunity to attend post-secondary 

education institutions such as universities. 

 

Certainly the standards are being raised at the University of 

Saskatchewan from, I think 65 was the previous average that 

was required to enter first year Arts and Science, and that has 

now been raised. But as the member points out, it is not just 

good enough to talk. One must do something about yet 

increasing accessibility, and that’s 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1268 

 

exactly why, Mr. Speaker, we’re embarking on the new 

blueprint for the future for our post-secondary institutions. 

 

We’re going to have our regional colleges have the mandate to 

deliver first- and second-year Arts and Science, not just in 

Saskatoon and not just in Regina, Mr. Speaker, but across this 

entire province. And, Mr. Speaker, to me what we’re talking 

about here is province-wide accessibility for our young people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: Well, Mr. Minister, the demand for university 

services has been there from the students, but the funding hasn’t 

been there from your government. And we haven’t seen 

expansion in university services; we’ve seen a cut-back in 

extension services at the University of Saskatchewan and the 

University of Regina . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order. Order. Does the member have a 

question? When the Speaker is on his feet there is to be no 

talking in the House. I would ask the member from Quill Lakes 

to be quiet when the Speaker is on his feet. 

 

Mr. Prebble: Mr. Minister, my question to you is - and I ask 

you again: if it’s knowledge that will separate the winners from 

the losers, to use your words, how can you justify creating a 

situation in which, because of the underfunding that your 

government has provided to the universities, 160 qualified 

students are being turned away at the University of 

Saskatchewan, and another 350 are being forced to stand on a 

waiting list in which they may or may not get into that 

university? How can you justify that situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: Mr. Speaker, the hon. member questions 

our commitment to universities since we formed government in 

1982. And the facts are these, Mr. Speaker, and we are proud of 

these facts. 

 

For example, at the University of Regina our operating grant 

there is something in order of 40 million, capital 5.2. And what 

that means, Mr. Speaker, is we have spent more in one year 

than the NDP spent in their last six years of government. That’s 

commitment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And at the University of Saskatchewan, operating and capital 

grants to universities between ‘82 and ‘86 were the highest in 

Canada at a 38 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. And the share of 

the provincial budget directed to university funding, up by 20 

per cent versus a 30 per cent decrease when the NDP were in 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It seems to me that these numbers back up our claim that we are 

committed to university education, and we have been leaders 

across this country and we will continue to be leaders, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, when the New Democratic Party was in government 

there was never restriction on access to university education to 

young people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: Mr. Minister, my question to you is: the U of S 

has had to introduce enrolment quotas; tuition fees are up 10 per 

cent at our universities; you’ve cut back 1,100 spaces at our 

technical institutes; if, in an age when you claim knowledge is 

king and those who are denied access to education are going to 

be losers, why are you denying access to post-secondary 

education in this province? Why are you cutting back hundreds 

of opportunities for young people for spaces in our universities 

and in our technical institutes? Why are you undertaking such a 

policy, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hon. member is 

clearly at error here. The facts are with our government, when 

he made reference to the technical institutes about the number 

of spaces cut-back, the facts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is there are 

1,700 more spaces at institutes this year than there were when 

the NDP were in power, and that’s a fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: And it’s also a fact, Mr. Speaker, that for 

25 years in this province, for 25 years the University of 

Saskatchewan wanted to build an agriculture college, and for 25 

years they waited and they waited and they waited and, Mr. 

Speaker, under our Premier, and because farming is the 

backbone of this province, and because we are the centre of 

excellence across the world in agriculture, that new agriculture 

college is going to be built in this province at the University of 

Saskatchewan, adding to the many fine institutions already 

there. That’s commitment, Mr. Speaker, to the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Justice Minister’s Trip to Calgary 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct my question 

to the member for Kindersley, the Minister of Justice. Can the 

minister tell the Assembly whether he was in Calgary, Alberta 

during the weekend of June 20, 1987? Did he travel to and from 

Calgary by government aircraft? And if so, what government 

business was involved in this trip? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: I anticipated this question. I understand one 

of the people from the Leader-Post was posing the same 

question. 

 

The day in question I was in Calgary, I was meeting with an 

industry that is significantly interested in locating in 

Saskatchewan. It will be a significant industry in the province if 

all comes well. I was there . . . The hon. member from 

Saskatoon Nutana asks as Justice minister - I was there as the 

minister responsible for Economic Development and Trade, one 

that I do have. 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1269 

 

I indicated as well that, anticipating the next question, did I 

travel by government airplane? I did travel by government 

airplane. My original intentions were to travel up there 

privately. However, because the fact that, not Agribition, 

Mexibition, whatever it’s called - the Farm Progress Show was 

on, I was required to meet the evening before with the 

representative from Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union. 

 

I was also required to meet the next morning, Saturday 

morning, with the number three person from the Soviet Union, 

who is their equivalent to our Minister of Agriculture. As a 

result, and because of the requirement that I had to meet with 

that particular individual, I took the government airplane to 

Calgary on that particular time. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Did the 

minister’s wife and children accompany him on the government 

aircraft to and from Calgary? And if so, what was their role in 

the government business you were on on the weekend of June 

20? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: I was in . . . My wife and two of my 

children, I believe, accompanied me to Calgary. When I was in 

Calgary, I also attended to visit with my brother who happened 

to live there. I was making the trip to Calgary; they came along, 

as I understand that’s perfectly natural. The airplane was going 

and they can come with me. That’s been done many times in the 

past, and that was in fact done there. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

are you aware that the trip sheet, which is the official 

government document for billing purposes within the 

government, states that the purpose for this trip was to attend a 

wedding? Can you explain that, and can you tell us how this 

wedding qualifies as government business? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: That is absolutely not true. I had a meeting 

set up to deal with a company in Calgary. I intended to go 

earlier. As I indicated to you, I didn’t go earlier because of these 

particular situations. I had clearance to travel to Calgary. I made 

that very clear. I’m very above-board with that, and that’s how 

it unfolded. What the trip sheet says - I don’t know what the trip 

sheet says; I’ve never seen it. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. To the 

minister . . . I’ll take a new question, Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister in charge of the . . . Oh, pardon me, I will take a 

supplementary. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you had chartered an aircraft to fly yourself and 

family to and from Calgary, it would have cost about $2,500, 

not counting overtime. At a time when the Premier - your 

Premier - is telling everyone that every dollar counts, do you 

see that kind of expenditure as contrary to the government’s 

policy of restraint? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the hon. 

member in his initial question that had this situation been 

different, I would have taken a private automobile and driven to 

Calgary. The problem that we had was as follows: that the 

Soviets were in town, of which I had to have a dinner with them 

the night before, along with the 

Czechs, as well as entertaining the Soviets in the morning. 

 

Now the members opposite might now see that as important. I 

was instructed by the Deputy Premier that this particular 

individual, who is number three to Gorbachev in the Soviet 

Union, who is the largest purchaser of agricultural products in 

the province, and it was felt by government that it was 

imperative that I was there. The Deputy Premier was involved 

at the same time with the Czechs, and somebody had to deal 

with these particular people, and that’s exactly why the 

arrangements were as follows. 

 

So It’s not a question of me going to Calgary. The question was 

whether I stayed to deal with the Soviets. That was the decision 

that was taken, and I think it was the proper decision. 

 

Conditions Covering Use of Government Aircraft 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: New question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister 

in charge of the property management corporation. This is a 

new Crown corporation. It is responsible for the use of the 

government aircraft, the executive aircraft. Can the minister tell 

all Saskatchewan taxpayers whether he has changed the 

conditions which apply to the use of these aircraft since last 

October’s election? And if so, what are the changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: Mr. Speaker, certainly I’m the minister in 

charge of the property management corporation, and the 

government air . . . Well, if you’d like the answer, we’ll wait 

until you be quiet and we continue. And the government aircraft 

fall under that jurisdiction. The policy of use of the government 

aircraft by ministers is the same as it has been for some time. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister in charge of the property management corporation. 

What conditions do apply to the use of the aircraft, Mr. 

Minister? And who has to approve their use? Is it the individual 

minister, or the officials of the new Crown corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: As the Minister of Economic and Trade 

indicated to you, there are circumstances where things come up, 

such as the meeting with the representatives from 

Czechoslovakia, that requires a minister to change his plans, as 

was his case, and have to use the executive plane. He used his 

discretion there. And that’s a situation we do. The ministers are 

responsible for making the arrangements. I don’t okay all the 

flights, as he says. He didn’t see the flight sheet himself. But the 

minister made those arrangements and went on the flight on 

government business. And I don’t think that’s been any change 

in policy for a number of years. 

 

Disposal of Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park 

 

Mr. Calvert: Mr. Speaker, my question is to Minister of Parks, 

Recreation and Culture. And it deals with your government’s 

attempts to give away the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park, one of 

this province’s oldest and best-known tourist attractions. 

 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1270 

 

Within days of the announcement of your proposal, over 1,200 

Moose Jaw residents signed petitions in opposition to your 

proposal. You’ve justified giving up this facility to a private 

developer on the grounds that the park costs the province 

money, which parks tend to do. 

 

Can the minister tell the people of Saskatchewan how a private 

developer who has to make a profit will be able to get rid of the 

deficit without sharply increasing the gate fees or cutting the 

quality of the park? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hon. member is 

saying that we’ve already given something away. Number one, 

we’re giving nothing away. Number two, no offers have been 

made to anybody yet. 

 

Mr. Calvert: Is the minister aware that the 540 acres that 

comprise the park were donated many years ago by the J.R. 

Green family on the condition that they would be maintained as 

a wild animal park, as a public park. Have you, Mr. Minister, 

checked to make sure that you have the legal right to turn over 

donated property to private developers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government of 

the day, right now, sitting here, is very interested in seeing the 

Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park continue precisely in that role for 

generations into the future. But Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can’t 

condone in all conscience an expenditure - over-expenditure of 

some $450,000 a year to operate that park solely for the benefit 

of the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

We are looking to make the best deal possible so the park can 

continue in its current form, but we have to be fiscally 

responsible with the taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

Mr. Calvert: Mr. Deputy Speaker, final supplementary. I’ll ask 

the question very specifically: do you have the right to sell the 

Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Deputy Speaker, according to the 

media reports which I have seen, the hon. member himself is in 

favour of public participation in this venture. I don’t see why 

we’re arguing back and forward. We’re in favour; he’s in 

favour. 

 

Mr. Calvert: A new question, Mr. Speaker, again to the 

Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture. He will be aware 

that I have been misquoted in the media twice, twice when I 

suggested . . . when the media suggested that I thought there 

was some merit in the government proposal. And secondly, the 

media suggested that I said we should get rid of the monkeys. 

The only monkeys I said we should get rid of are members 

opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order. Does the member have a 

question? 

 

Mr. Calvert: My question, Mr. Minister . . . Does the minister 

not agree that much of the surrounding Wakamow river valley 

development in Moose Jaw was done on the assumption that the 

park would continue in its present form? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Mr. Deputy Speaker, in answer to the 

organ-grinder from Moose Jaw, I’d just like to say that I don’t 

really believe he was misquoted by the Moose Jaw 

Times-Herald; I think he got cracked over the knuckles by his 

caucus. 

 

Collection of Payments on Farm Production Loan  

Program 

 

Mr. Goodale: Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A question to 

the Premier in his capacity of Minister of Agriculture. I wonder 

if the Premier will confirm that the Government of 

Saskatchewan is now suing farmers in Saskatchewan to collect 

loan moneys under the $25 per acre production loan program. 

And if that is in fact the case, can the Premier tell us how many 

of these loans are now in default in total? How much money in 

total is involved, and how many specific legal actions have been 

commenced to date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I appreciate the 

hon. member giving me advanced notice of the question. I will 

get some of the information today and some of it I’ll bring back 

as soon as I have it. 

 

We have about $1.05 billion loaned out to 58,000 farmers; 97 to 

98 per cent of all the farmers have either paid back principal or 

interest, or have initiated discussions with the agriculture credit 

corporation. 

 

Less than one-half of 1 per cent of the farmers did not qualify 

for the production loan program, and there has been no legal 

action initiated to date against those who responded to billing 

statements or to follow-up letters or to those contacts that have 

been to date. There are one 1 per cent - and I will get the exact 

number in a subsequent date - about 1 per cent that are in 

default that we are pursuing additional action with right now, 

and I’ll provide that specific information as soon as I have it 

available. 

 

Mr. Goodale: Mr. Speaker, I thank the Premier for that 

information. Mr. Premier, last week your Minister of Justice 

told us in the House that all Saskatchewan legislation relating to 

farmer/creditor relationships was under review and might lead 

to new laws in the next short while. And I believe your 

government has also spoken of some new policy initiatives to 

grapple with the overall problem of farm debt burdens in 

Saskatchewan. I wonder if you would think it advisable to wait 

for those specific initiatives to be forthcoming, either on the 

legal framework or on the policy side of the matter, before 

pursuing farmers in the courts under the production loans 

program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: Well, Mr. Speaker, I can say a couple or 

three things. First of all, we fully expect the money that has 

been lent out to be paid back, and I’ve 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1271 

 

said that on several cases. Secondly, to ease the financial 

burden a one-year extension in principal was initiated so that 

the farmers could just respond in terms of interest. Similarly, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, additional protection is provided through 

the Farm Land Security Board, the Counselling and Assistance 

For Farmers program, and the Farm Debt Review Boards. 

 

Now when we put all those provisions together and as we 

review them, I can say that there will be some, some individuals 

in the province . . . I mean, I’m not sure, we’re now at 97 or 98 

per cent that have either paid, or talked to us, or are in the 

process, or a combination of things. But there may be a small 

percentage, and very small, that will not be able to and yet 

they’re expected to, because if everybody doesn’t pay, then 

nobody will want to pay. So we have to provide rules that are 

fair. We will treat them as fairly as possible. They have access 

to all other forms of assistance that are available throughout the 

province. And as we review any other modifications, I expect 

no matter what system we design - and we are looking at 

improving it all the time - that there will be some small 

percentage that will just not be able to participate in the long 

run, and we hope that is as small as possible. 

 

Mr. Goodale: Mr. Deputy Speaker, yes. Mr. Premier, to be fair 

and to recognize the severe financial distress that some farmers 

are in, will the government at least introduce legislation that 

would specifically render the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan subject to the Saskatchewan Exemptions Act, 

because court rulings earlier this year in Saskatchewan have 

found that the ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) is not bound by the normal reasonable 

requirements of The Exemptions Act that would apply to 

private sector lenders. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: Well, Mr. Speaker, the government 

generally and even departments, are not always confined to the 

same Acts and to the same rules and regulations that the private 

sector may be. For example, if we can provide a billion dollars 

at 6 per cent money, and provide that assistance when farmers 

need it, we’re quite prepared to do that, and it doesn’t fall 

within the same rules and regulations that maybe the credit 

union has to come up with an extra billion dollars. 

 

The same applies when we go to work - and I will have a 

ministerial statement that I’ll be sending across in a few 

moments - to put together a billion dollars or more for farmers, 

in terms of cash that is coming out, that has never happened 

before. That is unique; it’s apart from the rules and regulations 

that we normally see, and we’re glad to be able to do that. 

 

So I guess what I’m saying is that government often doesn’t fall 

within the same rules that maybe other financial institutions do, 

and I’m not so sure that it ever will totally comply. 

 

Closure of Pharmacy at Ile-a-la-Crosse 

 

Mr. Thompson: Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I direct 

my question to the Minister of Tourism and Small Business. 

And it concerns a threatened closure of the only pharmacy in 

the northern community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 

Last Friday, the Minister of Health assured the Assembly that 

the government was trying to find a way to keep this pharmacy 

open, since its closure would leave the regional hospital in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse without emergency drugs and also night stock. 

The 1985-86 Public Accounts show that your department, Mr. 

Minister, provided the owners of this pharmacy with $60,000 in 

northern economic development grants to open drug stores in 

three northern communities, include Ile-a-la-Crosse. My 

question to you, Mr. Minister, is: what conditions were placed 

on those grants, and if this company leaves Ile-a-la-Crosse, how 

much of that $60,000 will the taxpayers get back? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: Mr. Deputy Speaker, I remember very well 

when we were attempting to bring a drug store into Buffalo 

Narrows, when I was minister of Health, the strong support 

from the member that questioned asking if there were certain 

incentives and grants that could be used to bring this service 

into that part of Saskatchewan. Now it seems to me that he 

seems rather concerned about that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we heard the Minister of Health answer 

the other day in question period, there are ongoing negotiations 

and discussions that may bring a drug store into Ile-a-la-Crosse. 

The Health Department are piloting these. It may be that this 

government might put some incentives to bring a drug store into 

the town of Ile-a-la-Crosse, which would be an added health 

service to northern Saskatchewan, something that we support 

strongly. As to the terms and conditions of the grant that was 

given to the Phillips at Buffalo Narrows, I would have to take 

notice of that and report back to you, Mr. Member. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Accomplishments of Recent Agriculture Ministers 

Meeting 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to 

announce to this Assembly that at the recent Agriculture 

ministers meeting in Quebec City, that all ministers of 

Agriculture in Canada - provincial and the federal - agreed the 

deficiency payment should be paid to farmers in the 1987-88 

crop year. 

 

The unanimous consent and agreement, Mr. Speaker, is 

particularly important for the farmers in Saskatchewan. The 

position put forward by the western premiers for at least as 

much money as last year, that is a billion dollars, was supported 

by the ministers of Agriculture from all the provinces, and 

indeed, the federal government. 

 

Similarly, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the ministers 

also designed a new set of principles to be applied to future 

tripartite stabilization programs in Canada, and this is very 

significant at this time to ensure that Canada and all the 

provinces in Canada live up to our GATT (General Agreement 

on Tariffs and Trade), and our bilateral obligations and the 

OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and 

Development) principles to which we adhere. 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1272 

 

An interim operating tripartite mechanism is to be designed for 

all provinces by the end of November of 1987. So what we will 

have, Mr. Speaker, are new rules for the long run, in terms of 

dealing with our international partners, and we’ve agreed to 

those. And we will have operating rules in the interim to allow 

all the provinces to get on board. And I was very happy to be 

part and parcel of a consensus on both the deficiency payment 

and our international obligations as they apply to agriculture in 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Deputy Speaker, we on this side of 

the House welcome the statement by the Premier and welcome 

the support of the agricultural ministers for a payment-out to 

farmers in Canada, including western Canada. We note it’s 

called a deficiency payment. I don’t think too much turns on the 

words used so long as the amount is appropriate and the 

formula for payment-out is appropriate. 

 

We would hope that it would be somewhat more than last year. 

We recognize the problems faced by the federal government, 

wrestling with a major deficit. But we also recognize the fact 

that farmers have faced - grain farmers at least - have faced a 

substantial drop in market prices of the order of 20 per cent, and 

therefore any deficiency payment should be sufficient to make 

up that drop in market prices and pay out to farmers at least the 

amount that they received last year, over and above the drop in 

prices. 

 

And I hope that the Premier will press, therefore, his fellow 

premiers and his colleagues at Ottawa to provide a sum of 

money which will be significantly greater than the 

approximately $1 billion provided to Canadian farmers last 

year, in order to provide the same level of support, and to make 

up for the drop in market prices. 

 

We welcome the direction that the ministers of Agriculture took 

with respect to seeing that any payments-out are consistent with 

our general agreement on tariffs and trade obligations - our 

GATT obligations. We on this side of the House are strong 

supporters of multinational trade. We believe that the health of 

the world economy will not be strengthened by bilateral 

arrangements between groups and then setting up tariff walls 

around the group, but only be effective multinational treaties 

guaranteeing freer trade. 

 

We need a multinational solution, particularly for the problems 

now being faced by our grain farmers. And we therefore 

welcome the ministers of Agriculture moving in that direction. 

 

We believe that the problems have been created by the United 

States and by a Europe pursuing heavy subsidies in opposition 

to free competition, and we, accordingly, regret the policies 

pursued by the EEC (European Economic Community) and the 

United States, and welcome a multinational approach through 

GATT to solve the problems faced by our farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 23 - An Act to amend The Rural Municipality 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the hon. 

minister, I would move first reading of a Bill to amend The 

Rural Municipality Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 24 - An Act to amend The Controverted  

Municipal Elections Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: On behalf of the hon. minister, I move 

first reading of a Bill to amend The Controverted Municipal 

Elections Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Calvert: Before orders of the day, I would rise to table 

petitions that are signed by more than 1,200 residents from the 

city of Moose Jaw. These petitions are directed to the Premier. 

They object to the provincial government’s handling of the 

Wild Animal Park. And they call upon the provincial 

government to maintain the Wild Animal Park in the provincial 

park system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Constitution Amendment, 1987 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Speaker, I want to pick up on what I 

said in my opening remarks, and I will do so under three broad 

heads: the content of the resolution; the importance of 

constitutional change; and the process of constitutional change. 

 

I turn first to content. The part of the resolution that is most 

important in a political and public policy sense is the 

recognition of the role of Quebec in Canadian society. It is of 

paramount importance that the constitution of Canada have full 

legitimacy in Quebec as well as elsewhere in Canada. And here 

I speak not of black letter law, but of political reality - of what 

is in the hearts and minds of Canadians, in Quebec and outside 

Quebec. The resolution before us is a great stride forward in 

achieving this objective. 

 

I turn to the Senate. Earlier I said that the resolution embeds in 

cement our present Senate, a body which almost nobody 

supports or will defend. It converts is from a haven of federal 

patronage to a permanent haven of 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1273 

 

federal-provincial patronage. For the reasons I stated earlier, 

this is sad. I note that the Canadian Committee for Triple E 

Senate shares the same view. Speaking of the desirability of a 

Senate equally representative of all provinces, the chairman of 

that body, Mr. Brown, says this: 

 

This amendment (referring to the Meech Lake 

amendment, the resolution which is before us) virtually 

assures that they, the smaller provinces, will never get the 

changes in the Senate they seek. 

 

And chairman Brown is right. 

 

I turn to immigration. The provisions respecting immigration 

raise questions as yet unanswered. There can be little quarrel 

with federal-provincial agreements on immigration; indeed, 

they’ve existed for some time. There can be little quarrel with 

any province seeking a share of new immigrants. There will be 

grounds for serious objection if any agreement between the 

federal government and one province could serve to limit the 

total number of immigrants who might come to the other 

provinces. 

 

It has been suggested that this could be the result of an 

agreement along the lines of the Cullen-Couture agreements 

referred to in the Meech Lake accord, but not referred to in the 

resolution before us. I ask that a speaker on behalf of the 

government give a definitive statement on what is intended by 

the words in the resolution, as they relate to the earlier Meech 

Lake accord, and as they relate to this issue of immigration and 

the Cullen-Couture agreement. 

 

Supreme Court. The Supreme Court should be 

constitutionalized, and this resolution does it and that’s good. In 

my judgement this resolution is right when it provides for 

provincial participation in the appointment of Supreme Court 

judges; and wrong in the method it chooses. 

 

For at least one province the process is one almost 

indistinguishable from provincial appointment. This is unwise 

and could potentially erode the power of the federal 

government. All Canadians, but particularly Canadians who live 

in the smaller provinces, have a strong interest in the federal 

government retaining its power and authority. 

 

Certainly that’s the case for Saskatchewan. There can be few 

provinces who look at the federal government for more support, 

for its economy and for services delivered, than does the 

province of Saskatchewan. A Supreme Court which is tilted in 

favour of provincial power, as opposed to federal power, has 

real dangers for smaller provinces like Saskatchewan, and for 

provinces whose economy is based upon international trade, 

like Saskatchewan. 

 

I turn to the question of the entry of new provinces into Canada. 

The changes in the rules governing entry of the new provinces 

into our Confederation are unwise and unfair. The current 

constitution requires the consent of seven provinces, 

representing 50 per cent of the population, before a new 

territory can become a 

province. I’ve heard no arguments and see no evidence to 

suggest that any change from the current proposal is either 

necessary or desirable - since the resolution proposes a 

unanimity rule, i.e., that all provinces must agree before any 

new province comes into Confederation. Since this rule is much 

more stringent than that met by any province which has joined 

Canada since 1867, it seems unjust to apply this new and much 

more stringent rule to the Yukon and the Northwest Territories 

and to anyone else who might be seeking status as a province in 

Canada at some later time. 

 

I would hope that Saskatchewan would support any proposed 

amendment to the resolution before us to remove the unanimity 

rule which it imposes on the entry of new provinces - and here 

we think particularly of Yukon and the Northwest 

Territories - into the Canadian confederation. 

 

I turn now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to shared cost programs, and I 

will speak in the same breath with respect to the transfer of 

legislative jurisdiction from provincial governments to federal 

governments. That’s also referred to in the resolution. 

 

What Canada needs is a constitutional provision which allows 

the federal government to initiate shared cost programs in areas 

of provincial jurisdiction without allowing a major distortion of 

provincial priorities, or without the federal government setting 

rigid coast-to-coast standards. 

 

Canadians want national programs in areas now or formerly in 

provincial jurisdiction, and we have to decide how we’re going 

to achieve this. We have to decide whether we’re going to do 

this by transferring legislative jurisdiction from provincial 

governments to the federal government, or by having shared 

cost programs where the programs are paid for partly out of 

provincial taxes and partly out of federal taxes. There’s no 

question that the public supports such programs. Support for 

programs like the Canada Assistance Act, hospital insurance, 

medicare, the Canada Pension Plan, are overwhelming, and 

were strong, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when those programs were 

launched. 

 

As I indicated, we can achieve these results by a transfer of 

legislative jurisdiction as we did with the Canada Pension Plan, 

or we can achieve them by a shared cost program as we did 

with hospital insurance. I think it’s quite unlikely that we would 

have either a national pension plan along the lines of the 

Canada Pension Plans, or a national hospital insurance program, 

without federal initiative. Certainly they would have started in 

one province or another, as the medicare and hospital programs 

did, as we well know. But they would not have spread from 

coast to coast and taken on a national flavour without federal 

intervention. They would not have become what they are 

now - a mark of being Canadian and a source of pride for 

Canadians from coast to coast. 

 

Now there are apprehensions that the provisions of the 

resolution before us will make future initiatives along the lines 

of these shared cost programs less likely. And I think it is very 

possible that this will be the result. I hope not. At this stage of 

events, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think all we can 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1274 

 

say is that matters have been made more uncertain than they 

were before the proposals represented in the resolution before 

us were put forward. There is no question that whatever the 

impact of this resolution will be, it will be to make shared cost 

programs more difficult to bring into being - how much more 

difficult, we do not know - and we have imported, or will 

import, if this resolution is adopted all across Canada, an 

element of uncertainty. 

 

I turn now to what is not in the accord. There is widespread 

regret that the accord does not advance the objective of dealing 

with the constitutional aspirations of Canadians of native origin. 

Since I and my colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale played a 

particular role in seeing that the 1982 constitution protected 

treaty and aboriginal rights, and since it’s clear that future work 

was at that time indicated, I regret that the major constitutional 

change - the first one since 1982, the first major one - does not 

address this problem, doesn’t advance the objective of meeting 

the constitutional aspirations of Canadians of native origin. My 

colleagues will touch further on this matter during the debate, 

and I will not, therefore, deal with it at length. 

 

My colleagues, too, will raise other questions about what is not 

in the resolution before us, and the possible interpretations to be 

put on the absence of provisions dealing with, let us say, 

equality of men and women, and like matters. This will be 

further addressed by speakers from this side of the House. 

 

I said that I would deal with the resolution under three heads: 

content, importance, and process. I have touched on matters of 

content. I have not repeated a number of my remarks when I 

spoke immediately following the Premier’s introduction of the 

resolution, but I have touched upon matters of content which I 

think are important in the resolution. 

 

I turn now to the significance, the importance of the resolution 

before us. The importance of the resolution is that it will serve 

in a symbolic way to complete the constitutional discussions 

and negotiations which proceeded during the 1970s and 1980s, 

and culminated in the 1982 patriation of the constitution. There 

never was a legal requirement that all constitutional change be 

agreed to by the federal government and all ten provinces. Nor 

was there such a requirement based upon the conventions of the 

constitution. The Supreme Court made that clear. 

 

None the less, there was, and is, a strong belief that the consent 

of all provinces is desirable. Particularly is this true with respect 

to Quebec. Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a widely-held belief 

that in 1867 confederation was a deal, a compact between what 

became Quebec and what became Ontario, Canada East and 

Canada West, or alternatively between what became Quebec 

and Ontario and Nova Scotia and New Brunswick. This 

“Compact” theory of confederation is well embedded in the 

literature and in the consciousness of historians and 

constitutional lawyers, particularly in Quebec and Ontario. 

 

Now in a legal sense, it might not be true. In a political sense, it 

is at least partially true that confederation came 

into being because of a deal, and ought to be changed only as a 

result of a deal. For reasons historical and reasons practical, 

there’s a great deal to be said for getting the Government of 

Quebec to agree to patriation, and all that came with it, and all 

that followed it. 

 

Since, as I referred earlier in my remarks in this debate, part of 

the history of Canada might be characterized as relations 

between French speakers and English speakers in this country, 

it is important that when we make a major change in the 

structure, the legal structure of our country, that there be a 

measure of agreement, a significant measure of agreement, from 

both of those groups. Nobody should underestimate the 

potentially key importance of the symbolic act contained in this 

resolution. 

 

Now speaking of its significance, I think the other major thrust 

of the resolution is to make Canada a more decentralized 

federation. Insofar as this reflects social policy, there are some 

benefits and some detriments to that direction. We have to 

balance off the erosion of national standards and the national 

identity which flows from the decentralization of policy 

makers - decentralization of policy making, excuse me, Mr. 

Speaker. We have to balance that against the benefits of 

flexibility and innovation which flow from that 

decentralization. And there are, clearly, pluses and minuses. 

 

Insofar as economic policy is concerned, there are few pluses 

and many minuses. I am not suggesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that this resolution contains significant provisions which 

decentralize economic policy; that would only come about from 

subsequent decisions of the Supreme Court, which I would 

regret. 

 

Insofar as economic policy is concerned, the Canadian economy 

needs more cohesion and more unity, not less, if we are to 

compete in a world of vigorous economics. And moves to 

decentralization of policy in the economic sphere, as opposed to 

the administration of those policies, are moves in the wrong 

direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I turn to my third major head: process. From the 

foregoing, and from the Premier’s remarks, you will have 

concluded that the resolution is important, complex, and leaves 

many questions unanswered. 

 

From my discussion with interested members of the public, I 

conclude that the resolution and its implications are not 

understood by a large number of people, even of informed 

people in the community. In this regard I will quote almost 

verbatim from a paper circulated by Mr. Bill Brown, the 

chairman of the Canadian Committee for a Triple E Senate, and 

this is representative of many comments made by bodies who 

are concerned about the implications of the resolution before us. 

And I quote from Mr. Brown’s paper: 

 

It must be admitted that the process by which the accord 

was developed leaves a good deal to be desired. The 

process has all the characteristics of a back-room 

deal - secret arrangements, secretly arrived at, and then 

publicly announced as a fait accompli. Quite a contrast to 

Trudeau’s approach, 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1275 

 

which involved direct negotiations in front of TV cameras. 

Suspicions about how the accord was reached go far to 

explain the skepticism with which it is being greeted. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know that final agreements are 

unlikely to be arrived at in front of a TV camera. But the 

preliminary negotiations over a lengthy period of time, which 

preceded the 1982 accord, and the televised hearings of the 

parliamentary committee on the parliamentary resolution, 

served in the years 1979 and ‘80 and ‘81 to tell the public what 

the issues were, what the various approaches to them were, and 

what the implications of the proposed changes were. And that 

was important. It was important because Canadians had some 

idea of what was involved when we finally reached some sort of 

an agreement. All this has been lacking so far with respect to 

the Meech Lake accord, and I think this is a grave flaw. 

 

I believe, and believe strongly, that there should be public 

debate. There can be few more important matters affecting the 

future of a country than constitutional change. Nor can the 

public be expected to inform themselves on these somewhat 

arcane matters unless there is a conscious and sustained effort 

on the part of governments to make the public aware of the 

issues. Now that was done before. It is my submission, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it is not being done with respect to the Meech 

Lake accord. 

 

There are to be hearings, federal hearings in Ottawa, and 

hearings in Ontario and Manitoba and New Brunswick. There 

could well be other hearings or public debate. We’re likely to 

have quite a bit of conversation on this yet. Most legislatures 

will not deal with the resolution for many, many months. 

There’s a three-year period to deal with it, and there’s 

accordingly no rush in dealing with it. Many legislatures don’t 

even meet before next spring, and therefore will not turn to the 

resolution until then, and perhaps not until some time after then. 

 

(1500) 

 

There’s every indication that this is true with respect to the 

Manitoba legislature, which I believe is scheduled to meet next 

February or March, and this is true, as far as I’m aware, with 

respect to the Nova Scotia legislature and with respect to a 

number of others. 

 

There is no reason for the House to proceed to vote on the 

resolution in the next few days or weeks, and every reason why 

we should allow Saskatchewan people to have the benefit of 

public hearings and public debate here in this province and 

elsewhere before their representatives are asked to vote on this 

resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I propose 

public hearings in Saskatchewan. I don’t know why they’re not 

a good idea, and I will propose it formally in a moment. But 

even if there aren’t public hearings in Saskatchewan, even if an 

argument can be mounted for saying we don’t need public 

hearings in Saskatchewan, surely we ought to give the people of 

Saskatchewan an 

opportunity to participate in and respond to the public hearings 

being sponsored by the Government of Canada, so that they can 

have some better understanding of the issues before they give 

advice and, in some cases, instructions to their members as to 

how to deal with this resolution. 

 

As I recall a comment attributed to the Premier, he indicated 

that there was no point in having hearings in Saskatchewan 

because there would be hearings sponsored by the federal 

government at Ottawa. While I don’t agree with that argument, 

the argument is meaningless if we are going to act before the 

public hearings at Ottawa take place and before people will 

have some opportunity to hear the issues discussed and respond 

to them. 

 

It’s a hollow right indeed to say to Saskatchewan people, oh, 

you can hear what is being discussed at Ottawa; you can even 

go to Ottawa and make your representations, but it won’t have 

any effect in Saskatchewan because the matter’s already been 

dealt with there. That is no way to deal with the public on a 

matter as important as constitutional change and as difficult for 

the public to appreciate the issues involved, as are the terms of 

the resolution before us. 

 

Since there appears to be no pressing reason why Saskatchewan 

should vote on this matter many months before any legislature 

or parliament outside of Quebec has dealt with it, and since 

there’s every reason why we in this legislature should give our 

citizens and our constituents the benefit of hearings and debate 

here in this province and elsewhere before asking them how we 

should vote on this matter, I propose to move a motion, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

I move, seconded by my colleague, the member for Riversdale, 

as follows: 

 

that the paragraphing commencing with the words “now 

therefore” be deleted and the following be substituted 

therefore: 

 

And whereas the people of Saskatchewan should have an 

opportunity to participate in, ask questions at, and make 

submissions to public hearings established for that purpose 

by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now therefore, the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

resolves that a draft amendment to the Constitution of 

Canada, in accordance with the schedule hereto, be made 

the subject of public hearings in Saskatchewan, with the 

view to later consideration by this Assembly, the forum 

and arrangements for such public hearings to be 

determined by the Executive Council. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Minister of 

Justice I was pleased to participate, along with the Premier, in 

the negotiations leading up to this 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1276 

 

particular constitutional negotiation and leading up to this 

matter before the House today. 

 

I’m also pleased to have seconded the motion by the Premier: 

that this Assembly resolve to authorize the proposed 

amendment to the Constitution of Canada, tabled in this House 

on July 9, 1987. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the motion before this House, and 

before us, is not only a good motion but is the best possible 

motion that could have been obtained. And I say that, not 

because of its terms, but because of the process that led to this 

particular day. 

 

This resolution was negotiated by 11 first ministers representing 

11 equal partners in confederation. It represents a unanimous 

agreement about the fundamental nature of Canada that those 

11 partners have never in the past been able to achieve. 

 

In any difficult negotiation the best solution is that which all 

parties can adopt with honour, Mr. Speaker, and I believe that is 

the solution we have here today. It is not to suggest that the best 

means perfect. The constitution is by its very nature a complex 

and ambiguous document. It attempts to capture not only the 

essence of Canadian federalism but the fundamental rights and 

obligations of individual Canadians. 

 

It is not now and can never be perfect. And that in my view is 

simply the wrong measure to apply to a constitution. The 

constitution must find that middle ground, the consensus where 

the differing needs and agendas meet. It is a compromise which 

must balance various and many interests. It must create 

structures that enable us to deal with the changing and 

unpredictable challenges that we will face, not only today but in 

the decades to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment to the constitution that we propose 

is, in fact, that middle ground. It represents a fine balance 

between the aspirations of the province of Quebec and those 

other provinces and the federal government. It must be judged 

as an integral part in which all provisions are related. I would, 

with respect, suggest to those who would criticize details that 

they are, in fact, missing the point. Each part of this bargain 

depends on each other part. That is the process which unanimity 

has achieved. If we are to attempt to change any part, we risk 

destroying the entire structure. 

 

We cannot simply pick and choose when the process in which 

we are engaged involves 11 legislatures, each of which must 

authorize the amendment identical in detail. We must not miss 

this opportunity to conclude the business left unfinished in 

1982. We must move on to pressing challenges that we face as a 

nation with the full participation, not of nine provinces, Mr. 

Speaker, but of all ten provinces. 

 

I would also disagree with those who suggest the amendment is 

too ambiguous, that we don’t understand what it means. The 

constitution is not the solution and can never be the solution to 

all the problems that we face as a nation and we face as 

provinces. It is a framework that enables us to deal with those 

problems, whatever 

they might be. It is given its full meaning by the courts and by 

the manners in which governments and the people of Canada 

apply it to changing circumstances. This amendment creates 

such a framework, one which will enable Canadians, I believe, 

to meet the challenges that we face in the future. 

 

That is not to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we should not attempt 

to answer specific questions that have been raised by this 

Assembly, in particular by the Leader of the Opposition, both 

about the content and about the process that has been used to 

arrive at where we are today. Let me deal first of all, then, with 

the question of process. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition says that public hearings must be 

held to enable the people to understand the proposed 

amendment. Now this is the same leader who, to his credit, was 

involved in a constitutional process in 1981 and, I assume - I’m 

making the assumption - 1971. At that point in time, that same 

individual did not see it necessary that we held public hearings 

within our province with regards to a change to the constitution 

that, I would argue, is significantly more dramatic than what 

we’re seeing in this particular amendment today. We do not 

believe that public hearings are, in fact, necessary, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

This amendment has resulted from lengthy and delicate, very 

delicate, negotiations involving officials, ministers, and first 

ministers. Those negotiations have continued and, I think this is 

important to note, have continued a national debate that has 

been part of the national life of this country for decades. 

 

The Meech Lake accord has been publicly and widely debated 

for almost three months. The full text of that amendment has 

been the subject of significant public scrutiny. Mr. Speaker, it is 

our view that no real purpose would be served by delaying our 

approval of this resolution by requiring formal public debate. 

 

Public hearings, as I said, were not held in 1981 and 1982. The 

constitution does not call for such hearings. The opportunity 

and the responsibility for full debate on that particular issues 

does exist in this particular Assembly. Let us take that 

opportunity to discharge that responsibility. Each one of us in 

this House represents the interests of our constituents and 

represents the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. We are 

elected and sent here to deal with that particular matter and 

those particular matters. Clearly this is the debating forum of 

the province, and this is where this particular amendment 

should be debated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Secondly, the Leader of the Opposition would suggest that the 

recognition of Quebec as a distinct society implies that the rest 

of Canada somehow is a separate, distinct society. He suggested 

that we are instead, and should be, a country of several cultures. 

Mr. Speaker, that observation by the Leader of the Opposition 

we agree with. 

 

This amendment does not make it otherwise, Mr. Speaker. In 

fact, section 16 of the proposed amendment specifically saves 

those provisions in the constitution relating to aboriginal people 

and to the multicultural 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1277 

 

heritage of Canadians. And so the observation made by the 

Leader of the Opposition when he first moved this particular 

issue, I believe, is unfounded. 

 

Third, it has been suggested somehow that Senate reform will 

be more difficult now to achieve because of the change in the 

amending formula. Again, we do not agree with that, Mr. 

Speaker. Senate reform affects the basic political institutions of 

this country. It could never be achieved without a truly national 

consensus on that question. This amendment recognizes that 

fundamental fact. The Leader of the Opposition recognizes this 

principle as it relates to support to the unanimity principle of the 

Supreme Court of Canada - another basic and fundamental 

federal institution. 

 

Is it not true that therefore the Parliament of Canada is no less 

important as a federal institution and a fundamental institution 

in this country - that it should have the unanimity rule applied 

to it as well? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Senate reform has never occurred in this country 

because, I suggest, the political will to change the Senate has 

never existed. This amendment creates an ongoing mechanism 

and the debate may, for the first time in fact, generate that 

political will necessary to make those changes. It requires that 

an annual constitutional conference be held. The agenda for 

those constitutional conferences will include the question of 

Senate reform and the entrenchment of that question in the 

debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second point on Senate reform is this: that 

Senate reform cannot be considered in isolation from other 

things that this amendment does to central institutions. 

Provinces will have the right to participate (a) in the 

appointment of the Senate, and (b) in the appointment of the 

Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

They will be full partners, in two new entrenched institutions of 

federalism, and those are the annual first ministers’ conference, 

one, on the constitution; and two, on the economy and other 

matters. 

 

(1515) 

 

These particular changes significantly change, I would suggest, 

the nature of federalism within this country and cannot be 

looked in isolation from the proposed changes to the Senate and 

how that might be arrived at. 

 

The member from Cumberland has raised an issue privately to 

me with regards to whether or not these particular changes that 

relates to unanimous rules, as applies to the question of the 

aboriginal people, and the changes proposed by the aboriginal 

people to the native self-government. The member, as I 

understand the question that he posed is, does this change now 

mean that instead of seven provinces and 50 per cent rule, to get 

changes to aboriginal rights within this country it now must be 

unanimous consent. 

 

The view of the legal people on that question is that it does not 

change the situation from what it was prior to Meech Lake. For 

the member from Saskatoon Fairhaven, I would hope that he 

would take that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: Fairview. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: Fairview, that that to his particular person. 

 

Fourth, concern has been expressed by the Leader of the 

Opposition and the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that 

guarantees to Quebec of a fixed proportion of the total 

Canadian immigration will result in fewer immigrants to the 

rest of Canada. That is, that if Quebec cannot fill its quota, the 

overall number of immigrants to the rest of the country will 

have to be reduced to maintain the appropriate balance. This is 

what has been referred to as the “Grossman question.” 

 

This matter was first raised in the Ontario legislature by Larry 

Grossman, the Leader of the Opposition in the province of 

Ontario. I am advised by the people and the framers of this 

particular Meech Lake accord that the proposed amendment 

does not deal with the terms of the agreement to be negotiated 

between the federal government and the Government of 

Quebec. That agreement is addressed briefly in the political 

accord signed by the first ministers. The accord does not require 

an agreement with such results. The terms of that agreement are 

yet unknown and will doubtlessly take full account of the needs 

of all parts of Canada. 

 

For example, the specific problem raised by the Leader of the 

Opposition and the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg could 

be met by allocating separate but appropriately balanced quotas 

to Quebec and to the rest of Canada, leaving the responsibility 

to find acceptable immigrants to the appropriate jurisdiction. 

That would meet the terms of the accord and yet ensure that 

decisions taken in Quebec would not restrict immigration to the 

rest of Canada. 

 

Further, the federal government has, and shall retain, 

responsibility and authority to deal with the national standards 

and objectives relating to immigration. That authority will 

enable them to meet the changing national needs and concerns 

in this area. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition further raised the concern, as 

have some others, with regards to the federal spending power, 

and somehow this would reduce the power of the federal 

government to the point where we were in a dangerous situation 

with regards to federal spending power. 

 

I think that is not in fact the case. When we come and look at 

this situation, what we were talking about is powers held by 

provinces where the feeds can superimpose their power upon us 

or encroach upon our area. And I think that is something, that 

it’s my understanding of history, has always been a concern 

held by the provinces, that they do not wish to see this further 

erosion by the federal government into provincial areas. 

 

The question then further and finally maybe becomes this, is 

that . . . And the points raised by, and the concerns raised by the 

leading opponents to this particular amendment, which is 

Trudeau and Chretien and some of the people that played in the 

constitutional debate of 1981, they say somehow this is not their 

version of this 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1278 

 

country. But somehow we make a country that is no longer 

capable of being governed in an appropriate way. Somehow we 

make a country where the power at the central core of 

government is no longer adequate to properly govern us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that by changing the issue as it 

relates to federal spending power makes us a weaker province. I 

don’t believe the fact that we have a say now in how Senate 

reform will unfold, or who the Senator will be, is going to 

weaken us. I don’t believe it makes us weaker as a country if 

you have 11 first ministers meeting together because the 

constitution says they must meet together, as opposed to 

whether or not the particular Prime Minister of the day things 

it’s a good idea. 

 

In the most recent three to four years, or three years, perhaps 

we’ve had a situation where we tried to again bring back the 

question of co-operative federalism from the days of Trudeau, 

where he believed that somehow you could run the country 

from the centre and that that would give us good government, 

and that’s the proper way that we as a nation were founded. I 

don’t believe that. And this, Mr. Speaker, allows us, as small 

provinces, to be part of that process, to be a greater part of that 

process than we have in the past. 

 

I believe that with those, and the remarks by the Premier, the 

questions raised by the Leader of the Opposition, that I have 

tried to deal with them. We could debate this debate in this 

House endlessly. We could talk about the details of the 

resolution and whether or what might be the result upon people 

that come after us for ever and ever. I suggest that, quite 

frankly, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that serves no 

particular purpose. 

 

I believe that this deal is a good deal, and I believe we have the 

only possible deal that we could get in this particular situation. 

This particular resolution has been supported by all three parties 

at the national level, by all three leaders at the national level. It 

has been supported by governments of the ten provinces, 

representing four different political parties, able to sit down and 

come together for a resolve as to how this might come together. 

And those were delicate negotiations, and those were intense 

negotiations at many times. 

 

Should we, when that window of opportunity is there, not seize 

upon it, as members of this legislature, not seize upon it to bring 

Quebec into the constitution, to create a constitution that makes 

us stronger as a province, and thereby make us stronger as a 

nation? That’s what this debate is about today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is broad support in the political parties, and I 

suggest there is broad support in the public for this particular 

constitutional amendment. I would hope that we could see in 

this House a unanimous approval of this particular resolution. 

 

This particular issue should not, and is not, one would hope, to 

be divided along political grounds, and just because one is a 

member of one party, and one is a member of another party, 

somehow that the debate should be based upon that, as it so 

often is in this Assembly. 

I think each member should take seriously their job - that they 

were elected to come to this Assembly to look at things like the 

constitution when it comes - to make up their decision whether 

it’s a good thing or a bad thing. 

 

But let me say to the members of this Assembly on both sides 

of the House, if we seek to change this accord, if we seek to 

change the rules of this accord, what we risk is putting the 

accord off the rails - putting the accord off the rails, perhaps for 

another 10 years or 15 years or 20 years, so that we as a country 

continue then to battle between English Canada and French 

Canada, between Quebec and the other provinces. 

 

And I think the opportunity which was lost in 1981, or maybe 

was never even there in 1981, has now been captured. I think it 

would be a tragic mistake if we seek to impose our little rule 

change, or little clause change, into this accord, running the risk 

of derailing the whole thing, that we do not do a service to this 

legislature and we do not do a disservice to this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to vote 

for the resolution as proposed by the Premier. I would ask for 

the members of this side of the House to reject the amendment 

brought forward by the Leader of the Opposition. This is the 

debating forum. This is where it should be done. I would 

encourage all members to support the resolution advanced by 

the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have listened 

with interest to the remarks of the Attorney General, the 

Minister of Justice. He indicated, and I took down some notes 

in respect to his comments, that in dealing with the amendments 

to the constitution, that it’s complex document. It’s a complex 

subject matter, and that we can agree with. 

 

But he went on to indicate that there can be no change to what 

has been formulated by the Premier and the . . . by the Prime 

Minister and the premiers. But then he goes on to also say, 

which seems to me to be contradictory, is that this accord has 

broad public support. 

 

I say to him, if he is convinced that it has broad public support, 

that he should be willing to adopt what we have put forward 

here, to allow the people of Saskatchewan to be more fully 

appraised of the contents and the impact of the amendments to 

the constitution as set out in the Meech Lake accord. 

 

It seems to me that the minister can’t have it both ways - one, 

that there’s broad public support . . . And if that is so, what does 

he fear? Because obviously if it has broad public support, then 

there should be an understanding of the importance of having it 

proceed. On the other hand, he says that we can’t make any 

changes, but at the same time throughout Canada we see, at 

least in substance that various provinces are indeed having 

hearings, and that was indicated by the Leader of the 

Opposition that some of the provinces have committed 

themselves to public hearings. 

 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1279 

 

Is he saying to this Chamber here, in his self-righteous 

approach, that those provinces which realize the risk of 

destroying the whole by having any change, is he saying that 

those province are wrong in embarking on a process of 

hearings? There can be no other interpretation. 

 

And further, there’s a joint committee of the House of 

Commons and the Senate, which are in fact holding hearings in 

Ottawa with respect to any deficiencies, or at least allowing the 

public to have some input into the amendments of the 

constitution. 

 

So I say to him, other provinces have put forward public 

hearings. Ottawa in fact are having public hearings through the 

House of Commons and the joint House of Commons and the 

Senate committee. And so I say to him that certainly, if that’s 

the case in other provinces . . . Or is he telling us in fact that 

there is no real hearings; that it’s just a sham, that the public 

and interested people, even in the House of Commons, that 

there’s an agreement that there can be absolutely no change? Is 

that what he is telling us? 

 

That doesn’t seem to be the message we get from Ottawa or 

some of the provinces that are having hearings. And so I say to 

him that I think there’s nothing to fear, if in fact it’s defendable; 

if in fact there’s broad public support, then he has nothing to 

fear by having hearings here in Saskatchewan. And that’s what 

we are urging. I don’t think that governments should be 

self-indulging to the extent of making a valuation that the 

public should be excluded from something so important, and 

which will affect the country in such magnitude. 

 

And so what we are in fact, and as the Leader of the Opposition 

indicated, that what he wanted is some guarantee in respect to 

the process. It seems ludicrous that we wouldn’t have, as the 

other provinces, some form of hearing. It seems even more 

ludicrous that they are having hearings in Ottawa with the joint 

committee of the House of Commons and Senate, and we are 

not going to have any hearings. It just doesn’t seem to make any 

sense. And more importantly, it seems ludicrous that we would 

proceed before the hearings are completed in the House of 

Commons and the Senate committee that are having hearings in 

Ottawa. 

 

(1530) 

 

So I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I think the motion, as 

moved by the Leader of the Opposition, has indeed substantial 

merit. I think the people of Saskatchewan will welcome the 

opportunity, and I think that the people of Saskatchewan will 

support our proposal to have public hearings, at least an 

opportunity to put forward any concerns that they have. And 

certainly there will be some very substantive concerns that we 

will be raising from this side of the House. 

 

I want, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to say considerable more in respect 

this matter, and at this time I would beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 23 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, I was wondering whether you 

have reconsidered over the weekend to give us some answers to 

the estimates of Energy and Mines. That will be my first 

question to you. Have you reconsidered, and give us some 

answers to some of the questions I’ve asked you. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Mr. Chairman, Friday before adjourning, I 

believe, I had given a commitment to the hon. member 

opposite, Saskatoon South, upon their request that this be 

tabled. I had also indicated that parts of various agreements 

could not, and I gave the reason why. I had also said at that time 

that I would undertake to talk to the other parties to the 

agreement. And I have done that in directing the officials to 

contract both parties to the agreement to discuss the matter of 

the confidentiality clause and if, in fact, part of the agreement 

could be tabled. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, I wasn’t specifically referring to 

the NewGrade upgrader. I will leave that aside for now. I would 

assume that most of those agreements will be tabled, but I want 

to pursue that at another time. I want to give you a little more 

time to pursue that with the other parties because I don’t think 

you’ve done it in detail. 

 

My understanding of the agreements are that except for a very 

small portion of it where in the operating agreement, the 

agreements between two parties NewGrade and CCRL, where 

you have specific numbers as to the costs of the products and so 

on would jeopardize their competition with other 

companies - and I can fully appreciate that; I’m not so 

concerned about that - I think you can certainly take that out of 

the agreement and make the rest public. But I want to pursue 

that at a later date. 

 

I was talking more in general terms. I had asked you for 

information on various topics the other day. And I was 

wondering whether you would make those available to me 

today? I think I asked about a half a dozen questions. I can go 

through some of those for you, but I was wondering whether 

you had those available for me today? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Mr. Chairman, a review of the Hansard 

record indicated you had asked for three things, the first one 

being a comparison of the crude oil production. And it is here 

by royalty tax category for 1982 and 1986. And if I could have 

that sent to the hon. member from Saskatoon South. 

 

The other question that you asked, Mr. Member, was: what 

would happen if there had been no policy changes? We are still 

in the process of completing that. I do not have it for you this 

afternoon. And the third one that we could find on the record 

related to a NewGrade question. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: I had also asked: what were the concessions that 

had been given up by your government, 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1280 

 

the federal government, and the Alberta government? In general 

terms, I wonder if you could give me the concessions that were 

made to the oil industry insofar as Marcel Masse’s 350 million, 

PGRT (petroleum and gas revenue tax) being taken off; the 

Alberta government’s concessions to the oil industries; and 

your concessions to the oil industries? What dollar value would 

that amount to on the concessions that were given? 

 

And I don’t want it to the nearest 10 million; if you can give it 

to me to the nearest 100 million, I’ll be happy, because they 

amount into the billions. And I was wondering whether you’d 

give that to me . . . Certainly you must have had discussions 

with the federal government, and I know you’ve had discussion 

with the Alberta government. Can you tell me what those 

concessions amount to from 1982 to 1987? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: As I understand your question, and as it was 

put either Thursday or Friday in dealing with it, it was in the 

category of the question of what would happen if there had been 

no changes. And that’s what we are preparing the information 

. . . it’s a list of the policy changes, the incentives. I would not 

agree that these are concessions, but we are certainly going to 

provide you with a list of those policy changes. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, just so that we are very clear . . . 

and there were two specific questions; one relates purely to 

Saskatchewan. And what I wanted was, if you hadn’t made no 

policy changes in 1982 and had simply continued with the 

policies that were in existence at that time, and oil production 

had remained at the same rate of 9.3 million cubic metres per 

year - I believe that’s what the figure was - what would have 

been the revenues? Obviously there were price increases from 

1982 to 1985, and then the prices went down. What I wanted 

was: what were the revenues that you would have received from 

the oil production? That was one specific question. 

 

The other question was: what incentives - if you want to go 

with incentives rather than concessions - what incentives . . . 

What were the costs of the incentives to the oil industries by the 

three governments of Alberta, Saskatchewan, and the federal 

government because of program changes? You had the Western 

Accord, you had the PGRT, you had your own incentive 

programs. What were the concessions that were made? And 

surely in your discussions with the other two governments those 

figures must have come up somewhere along the line. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Yes, I understand. And we will be dealing 

with the two components that you have raised. As it relates to 

other governments, Alberta, the federal government, and I 

believe Manitoba should be included because they have, more 

or less, looked at the same kind of incentives that Saskatchewan 

has put into place, and Alberta. I will only be able to provide 

you with the information that is public from the other respective 

governments. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, if you do include Manitoba, I 

want you to carve out then the various components. And the 

reason I’m asking for that is because Manitoba’s will be so 

small. It has no bearing on 

them because of the little oil that they have. If you do include 

Manitoba, I don’t want later on not for us to get into an 

argument saying, well, that includes Manitoba. 

 

What I want specifically is the concessions that have been made 

over the last five years, and of what benefits we, as the people 

are the owners of that resource, have received from those 

benefits. And we hear from you, Madam Minister, constantly, 

that they amount in the billions of dollars - the benefits that we 

have received. I want to know: have we received billions of 

dollars benefit when we have made billions of dollars 

concessions? And I don’t know what those billions of dollars 

concessions are. But I do know that they amount in the billions 

because I have done some reading on it. But I don’t think I have 

all the information that I need. 

 

That’s what I want you to give me in the next few days. It 

shouldn’t be that difficult because I’m not asking you to do it 

within $1 million or even $10 million. You know, give me 

something that we can work on. And since you people don’t 

worry about whether you are, you know, a discrepancy of 5 or 

$600 million, or even a billion, I’m asking you to be within 

$100 million or so anyway. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I did ask you a question the other day, 

and I want to be very clear on this: would you tell me today 

what the price, U.S. . . . what is the U.S. well-head price today 

of conventional oil? You must have that, or your ministers must 

have it, or your officials must have that - conventional oil - and 

will you also give me today the well-head price of heavy oil? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Mr. Chairman, just to deal with the first part 

of the member’s statement, that information will come to you 

by jurisdiction, so we wouldn’t lump Manitoba into the other to 

perhaps confuse the issue. 

 

The price of conventional, and this is the West Texas 

intermediate at Cushing, Oklahoma where it’s sent, as of last 

Friday it was $22. We do not have the specific dollar figure. We 

would have to derive from that what heavy oil would be worth. 

 

(1545) 

 

An. Hon. Member: Approximately what is it today? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Maybe 15 in Chicago - maybe. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, having the well-head price, 

Texas well-head price being at $22, would you today then 

re-estimate your estimates of all value for 1987? What would 

your . . . you said it would be $309 million, I believe. What 

would you today say your value of the oil for 1987 would be? It 

must be considerably more. Obviously when you prepared your 

budget you did not consider $22 as the average price. So what 

are you now estimating as the value for oil for 1987? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: The figure that we are using on the budget is 

an estimated figure of $18.90. And I don’t think that I would 

redo that estimate, based on one or two or even a week with the 

price of $22, because we both know that it has been through a 

fairly good period of instability on that price. But no doubt it’s a 

positive signal, you 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1281 

 

know, that it has been a gradual incline. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: I don’t think any person with even elementary 

knowledge of the oil industry would have had to have a positive 

or an optimistic view when you are preparing your budget in 

beginning of June. No doubt about it. All the readings were 

from the financial world that the price of oil was going to go up. 

 

Why did you target it at $18 a barrel - 18.90 - when almost 

every economist that you talked to or read about was saying that 

the price of oil was going to increase, barring any intervention 

by OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries)? 

And that is . . . certainly no one can foresee that. But why target 

it at 18.90 when there was every indication to be optimistic? 

 

I know that you were way out last year on your estimates, but 

that’s another matter. I know why that was. There was a 

provincial election coming up and you had to take care of that. 

But the provincial election is gone. Why would you now not 

target it to the . . . more closely to what it probably will be over 

the year? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, I don’t agree 

that every economist has projected a very positive picture. 

There have been some that have said . . . There have been some 

that have very clearly said: don’t project, based on 22 or $25, 

because of the instability factor and the period of time that 

they’ve been through. 

 

That figure was based on the OPEC agreement. If that holds 

together, then obviously maybe our figure will be out. But 

given what they’ve been through the last year, I wouldn’t say 

that OPEC, for sure, is going to hold together. And I believe 

that most people take that view. 

 

You might also be interested to know that some other 

governments have taken a very, if I may use the word, small “c” 

conservative view in terms of looking at the price of oil, 

including the federal government. I believe they’ve projected 

for this year about $17. So not every one has been looking at it 

in a positive manner, knowing the instability factor that has 

been within the industry for now a period of time. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: I would challenge the minister to name me one 

economist that was pessimistic at the beginning of June. I don’t 

think you’re going to find very many. I’d like you to name 

those to me and give me the articles where they said that they 

were pessimistic at the beginning of June. I can well understand 

last fall, or last March, but certainly not by June when you were 

giving your estimates to the Minister of Finance. Obviously you 

would have to give them to the minister at that time because he 

said he couldn’t prepare the budget for March because there 

were too many unknowns. One of them, I assume, was the 

estimates of the Department of Energy. 

 

I would also say that it’s not unrealistic for the federal 

government to underestimate. I would, too, if I were the 

Minister of Finance. He’ll look much better at the end of the 

year when he’s got his deficit down if the price of oil goes up 

considerably. It’ll be less incentives that he would have to give 

to the oil industries and also the provincial governments. 

Now, Madam Minister, I still want to ask you: what yardstick 

did you use at the beginning of June? Surely you can’t go on 

OPEC. I mean, you have to assume that the OPEC agreement is 

going to hold. Because if you don’t, then you have absolutely 

no basis to even use 18.90. You have to assume the OPEC 

agreement will hold and that there are not going to be any major 

changes in the international field as far as energy is concerned. 

What basis did you use to base your price at 18.90? Give me the 

parameters that you used. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve already told the 

member that it was based on the OPEC agreement. And I, in 

answer to the member, can only ask him: who does he think sets 

the price in the world? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: I want to know what measure did you use? I mean, 

surely you can’t just say; well, okay, OPEC says it’s going to be 

at $18. Did you have no indication whatsoever? 

 

I mean you were very optimistic last December 23 when you 

put in your energy policy incentives to the oil companies. And 

at that time, I remind the minister, that you talked about 

$20-price oil. And you said if it went to $20 and you were 

optimistic that it would, that the policy would come off. 

 

My next question to you is: why have you not changed that 

policy, or are you contemplating of changing that incentive 

policy, which you said you would change at $20, and now oil is 

at $22. When are you contemplating making some changes to 

that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: When we were doing our budget, Mr. 

Chairman, much earlier than June - as the member would know, 

from being a cabinet minister back in the late ‘70s or early ‘80s, 

that a considerable amount of time goes into preparation of 

it - for Energy and Mines one of the factors obviously has to be 

forecasting, projecting, estimating, as most ministers of Finance 

will know. 

 

I think if there has to be something specific that the member can 

look at to understand that, he only has to go back to 1981, when 

the then minister of Finance, the hon. member from Regina 

North East, in his projections was certainly not under, but was 

so far over, over-estimating what was going to happen, whether 

it was potash, oil, or other factors, that that then became a very 

difficult proposition. 

 

In December when I announced the program - yes, it was with a 

degree of optimism, and I stated that. But the member only has 

to check some records to know that I also said “with caution.” 

And I added that caution because of the instability within the 

energy world-wide. We look at many forecasts and studies in 

putting this together. 

 

And certainly one of the factors is OPEC. And with the 

agreement that OPEC had, we had to lay out the question: will 

it hold? We don’t know for sure. We also knew that OPEC was 

looking at staying with the price of $18. That was the price that 

they wanted to reach and be able to maintain that without 

having another glut on the world 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1282 

 

market and forcing the price down much lower. And I believe 

that that answers the member’s question. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, with all due respect that does not 

answer my question. You haven’t given me any specifics at all. 

If you have some studies, would you be prepared to table those 

studies in the House, as to what the forecasts were? What tables 

did you . . . What studies did you use that showed you that 

$18.90 would be the average price for 1987? Could I have 

those? Would you table those studies or make those studies 

available to me? 

 

I say to the Madam Minister, with all due respect, that you 

could not not take OPEC into consideration, because you have 

no control over OPEC. If the OPEC agreement does not hold all 

your estimates would be out, and I don’t care what estimates 

you would put on it. So, I mean, you would have to assume that 

the OPEC agreement would hold. And I think that assumption 

we just have to say, all right, OPEC will stand; now, what will 

be the price? 

 

And what I want to have from you is: give me the studies that 

indicated that 18.90 would be the price, the average price for oil 

in 1987. Would you table those studies for me either today or 

tomorrow? If you don’t have them with you today, how about 

tomorrow? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would be glad to send 

the member the oil pricing forecasts that we have. 

 

In terms of OPEC, yes, we did assume that OPEC would hold, 

and if they were reaching a level, or trying to reach a level of 

$18.00 - and that’s where it was at - there’s also a transportation 

factor over and above that, and consequently that’s why the 

price is 18.90. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister . . . And is that true that that 

forecast was still your estimate on June 1 of this year? I know 

probably in March, yes, 18.90 . . . was that still the forecast that 

your officials were telling you on June 1 of this year? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Yes, Mr. Chairman, that’s what was in there, 

June 1, and that’s a price on average. I’ve related to you why 

we took that position. Certainly the price today gives us some 

reason for optimism, but I would not base something higher 

solely on one week or two weeks of a higher price. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, I can certainly appreciate the fact 

that you wouldn’t base it on one or two weeks. My point is 

simply this, that I think your government intentionally is 

underestimating the revenues that you will be receiving from oil 

this year, and you’re doing that because you want to re-establish 

the credibility of your government and the Minister of Finance. 

 

The Minister of Finance is saying that the deficit will be 577 

million, and by the end of next fiscal year, if the deficit is down 

to $400 million, then he hopes by that he can re-establish his 

credibility. And therefore I say that you have intentionally 

underestimated the revenues that you will be receiving for oil so 

that you can re-establish your credibility which you lost last 

year when you overestimated the revenues and underestimated 

the expenditures for the government. 

So, Madam Minister, I simply don’t agree with you that you 

didn’t have better estimates by June 1 which you could have 

informed the Minister of Finance. And as he told me earlier in 

the House when we had supplementary estimates, the budget 

did not go to the printers until about June 1, and I think that you 

would have had ample time to confer with the Minister of 

Finance in order to give him an up-to-date figure of the 

revenues that you expected to receive. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to very quickly, or just ask you another 

question, and that’s . . . and I want to get off of it then. I just . . . 

very simple question. I asked you the other day in the House, 

and we could have . . . maybe we misunderstood each other. I 

asked you at what price . . . Let me put it differently. What does 

the differential have to be between heavy and conventional oil 

for NewGrade to be viable? I’ve gone back to Hansard, and I 

want to know at what price, or what variance, do you . . . are 

you telling me that NewGrade can be viable? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Mr. Chairman, as I recall the discussion on 

Friday, it was on what makes a . . . what is the level of a 

successful project which, from my definition, included a return 

on its equity. For that to happen, the differential is seven 

dollars. If the project is simply to survive and pay its debts - just 

to pay its debt - then the differential was five dollars. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Okay, Madam Minister, that’s what I thought you 

had said to me. I want you to - before we meet again, 

Wednesday or Thursday - please check out with some other 

officials or third parties to the agreement as to whether or not 

those are the correct figures. I’m not saying that you don’t have 

the correct figures, but my understanding is that those are not 

the correct figures. And I will ask you the question again next 

time we meet as to whether or not those are the actual figures at 

which NewGrade will be viable. 

 

And I want to make it very clear. Break even. At what point 

will NewGrade break even? All right? And so . . . And at what 

point will NewGrade not be viable? Do I make myself clear, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Mr. Chairman, just in order to clarify the 

question, I guess I would like to know what rate of return that 

you would expect on equity? Or do you even consider that a 

factor? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, I would assume if NewGrade at 

least keeps going, it’s viable. Now I know if you are including a 

return on equity, I didn’t ask that. I didn’t ask that because then 

I will have to ask you what per cent do you expect to receive on 

your equity, and I’m not concerned about that. I want to know 

at what point will you shut it down, or will it shut down itself? 

So I want to know, what is the difference between heavy and 

conventional oil where the NewGrade upgrader will continue? 

And I don’t think that we have the right figures from you. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Well, Mr. Chairman, if the hon. 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1283 

 

member if looking for the debt return payment, it is $5. I’ve 

stated that before - $5 pays its debt. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Are you including interest on that debt? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Yes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: What rate of interest are you asking? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: 10 per cent. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, I will leave that because I’ll get 

back to that the next time we meet again. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I want to, before I forget, ask you some 

routine questions which I’m sure you have expected and I 

haven’t got to yet in the estimates. I want you to provide for me 

as soon as possible: 

 

1. The name, title, salary of each one of the Minister’s 
personal staff. I want to know if any of these people have 

received a change in the past 12 months in their wages, 

and if so, what were these changes? 

 

2. Do any of these people have a government care, or do 
they receive car allowances? 

 

3. I want to have all of the out-of-province travel in 1986 
by yourself, Madam Minister, and your staff. I would like 

to have the date, the destination, and the number of people 

on the trips, the purpose, and the total cost of those trips? 

 

4. I would like to have the total in-province ministerial air 
travel in 1986-87, and I’d like to have the same details as 

in number 3 above. 

 

5. In 1986, what costs did the department incur for: (a) 
polling that was done by your department; (b) advertising 

that you have been doing; (c) aircraft charter or lease; and 

(d) in each case of (a), (b), and (c) in number 5, I want the 

date, the purpose, the firm involved, and the cost? 

 

6. Specifically, did the agency do any business in 1986-87 
or to date in 1987-88, with Band City Aviation - Band 

City Aviation? I want the date, the purpose, and the costs. 

 

7. With respect to the government-wide efficiency 
productivity study being done by Coopers and Lybrand, 

did this agency incur any costs related to their study in 

1986-87, or thus far in 1987-88, and do you anticipate any 

costs for 1987-88, further on? 

 

8. I want the names, the positions, of any staff terminated 
since October 20, 1986; total severance payments paid out 

in 1986-87 and in 1987-88. Okay. I want the names, 

positions, of any staff terminated since October 20, 1986; 

total severance payments paid out in 1986-87 and in 

1987-88. 

 

9. total amount paid by the agency to the property 
management corporation. (And I know the minister in 

charge right now anticipated this question and walked over 

to you and gave you some instructions. But if I were you I 

wouldn’t listen to him and be open and give us the 

information.) I want the total amount paid by the agency to 

the property management corporation in 1986-87 and 

anticipated to be paid in 1987-88 for each year. For what 

purposes were these moneys paid? 

 

Well, Madam Minister, my first question to you is: do you have 

any exceptions to these? And what information can, or will, you 

provide me? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Mr. Chairman, I can supply the member 

with . . . His first question was dealing with ministerial office 

staff. That information I can send across now. I can give him 

the out-of-province travel, the purpose, destination, the number 

of personnel on trip, and the government costs. 

 

I do not have the in-province travel here, but we will endeavour 

to pull it together and send that to you. We will need some time 

in looking up, I believe it was chartered aircraft? 

 

An Hon. Member: Yes. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Okay. I will also need some time to pull 

together the names of terminations. And I believe the date was 

October 20, from October 20 on. And I will not be able to 

supply the information or any kind of a breakdown as it relates 

to Coopers & Lybrand because I don’t have that information. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, are you saying that you will 

provide me all the information except the number seven which 

is dealing with Coopers & Lybrand? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Yes, that’s true. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, why wouldn’t you be able to tell 

me either no, there’s been no expenditure by your department 

concerning Coopers & Lybrand, or what the government has 

assessed your department as it pertains to Coopers & Lybrand. 

Surely all departments must be assessed, or is it coming out of 

Crown management entirely, or where does it come out of? I 

don’t know where it comes out of, really. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Well, Mr. Chairman, the study is not 

completed at this time, and we have been assessed nothing. 

That is not to say that we may not in the future, but at this point 

in time we have received nothing. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Now, Madam Minister, I would expect that you 

hadn’t. But you must, in preparing your budget - your 

obviously, if you expected to use Coopers & Lybrand, you must 

have put in an estimate as to how much you were going to 

expend in that particular area or how much the Minister of 

Finance, through treasury board, assessed your department as to 

what would be expended for 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1284 

 

Coopers & Lybrand. There must be something in your 

department. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Well, Mr. Chairman, it would make it very 

difficult if the study has not been completed to know what’s 

going to be assessed. We have not provided anything 

specifically as an item in our budget, and we will just have to 

wait to see what comes out of it. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, my understanding is there is an 

expenditure of $500,000. Now surely the government must 

have put in an estimate somewhere. Are you telling me that 

nothing has been assessed against your budget as far as 

expenditures for Coopers & Lybrand are concerned? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: That’s correct, Mr. Chairman. We have 

received nothing to date. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: That’s not what I had asked - not what I had asked. 

I’d asked: were you not assessed anything. Okay, fine. You’re 

saying to me that you were not assessed anything in this fiscal 

year in your budget as it pertains to Coopers & Lybrand study. 

That’s correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: That’s correct, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, the 

other day we talked about the oil industry being an engine for 

economic growth, and you had indicated to me that . . . but I’m 

not sure whether you had indicated to me whether you agreed 

with the former minister of Energy and Mines, the one that still 

retains some credibility. I’m not talking about the member from 

Weyburn, but I was talking about the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland, and he often talked about the oil industry being the 

. . . I notice the member from Weyburn kind of enjoyed that 

one. 

 

Madam Minister, the former minister of Energy and Mines, the 

member from Saskatoon Sutherland, former member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland, often talked about the oil industry being 

the engines for economic growth. And until I get some of the 

other answers from you, I won’t be able to go into it in any 

detail. But what I want to say to you today is that that engine of 

growth simply hasn’t happened in Saskatchewan. And if you go 

to Statistics Canada, you will find that our economic growth is 

one of the lowest in all of Canada. 

 

Secondly - and that’s a fact Madam Minister - secondly, the 

out-migration of people from Saskatchewan has never been so 

great since the 1930s. And the 1930s, as you well remember, 

we had also a government of your persuasion, the Anderson 

government. And there was a great exodus at that time, but we 

had the Great Depression at that time. 

 

But I have before me not only Statistics Canada, which you 

wouldn’t accept the other day, I have before me Saskatchewan 

statistics - Saskatchewan statistics. And, Madam Minister, from 

January of this year to June of this year, the number of people 

leaving Saskatchewan was 7,565. All right. That was a 

total - 7,565. 

Now if you extend that for the year, then I really 

underestimated, because I said 12,000. You are looking at, I 

believe, somewhat around 15,000 people if the trend continues. 

 

So I’m asking the minister, how can you defend all the 

concessions and the incentives that you have given to the oil 

industry, on the basis that it is to be the energy for economic 

growth, and on two very basic economic indices, that is, growth 

in the . . . economic growth, and in keeping the people 

employed in this province, you have not succeeded, or the oil 

industry has not succeeded? 

 

Secondly, Madam Minister, would you also answer for me how 

you would - and you didn’t the other day - defend it, or at least 

make an explanation, when Jim Chase, a well-known person 

who supports free enterprise in this province, says that, as far as 

he recalls, the private sector simply does not pick up the slack 

that is created by withdrawal of public funds, and if a 

government goes on restraint and cuts programs and cuts jobs, 

the private industry is very reluctant - very reluctant - to pick up 

that slack, and he - and I think I paraphrase him correctly - said 

that, in his experience, have never done so. 

 

So would you tell the people of Saskatchewan how you defend 

giving up what I consider about $1.5 billion of incentive which 

your government could have used to spur the economy and 

create jobs here for our people? How do you defend your 

policies when, as I’ve indicated, they have simply not worked? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Well, Mr. Chairman, I recall our discussion 

quite well the other day. I would say to the member from 

Saskatoon South, first of all, he exaggerates the point that the 

oil field is an engine for growth for this province. It is one of 

them - one of them. 

 

We, on this side of the House, take the view that all our eggs 

shouldn’t be in one basket, as has happened in the past. And I 

hate to disappoint the member from Saskatoon South, but 1930 

was before my time, so I’m going to have a little bit of a 

difficult time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Really, really. Let 

me send you my glasses instead of my hearing-aid. 

 

Diversification, obviously when you are looking at resource 

development and industries as a whole, has to become a 

question to be addressed - diversification away from agriculture 

and diversification away from a totally based resource 

economy. I think we’ve had that in the past. 

 

We certainly saw the effects of that last year when so much of 

government revenue was dependent on our natural resources, 

whether it was wheat, whether it was oil, potash, uranium. 

When the world market took a dive on oil commodities, it did 

not leave us in a very healthy position, nor with a lot of 

flexibility in coping with the various problems that the province 

was facing. 

 

So in looking at it as one engine, not only an engine for growth 

in part, but also diversification, we take the perspective that in 

fact it has done its job. And I would ask 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1285 

 

you to go back and look at some of the figures. And I’m going 

to go over them again because I think in fact they are important. 

And while that activity does not happen in all communities in 

the province, this spin-off is certainly there, whether you live in 

Saskatoon or Regina or perhaps Moose Jaw or Prince Albert. 

 

We must disagree, Mr. Member, that, in fact, there has been $1 

billion lost or given away. That figure is totally inaccurate. I 

gave you the figure the other day that, in fact, since the policy 

change took place in ‘82-83, this province was, in effect, $340 

million ahead. I also took the time to send you the information 

that would have contained that point before estimates took 

place. 

 

Now let me give you some more figures. You say, in fact, that 

those jobs haven’t been there; it hasn’t happened. I want to take 

you back to the year 1981. And I can go back further if you 

want, but I’ll take that one, 1981. The direct and indirect jobs 

that were available with the energy industry, or more 

specifically the oil patch, at that time was 7,390. Now that’s 

direct and indirect. In 1982 it was 7,770; 1982, it went up to 

9,580; ‘84 it jumped by over 2,000; and in 1985 we had an 

all-time high of about 15,000. 1986, I’ve already informed you, 

we lost over 5,000 jobs and we stood to lose 5,000 more. 1986, 

the total employment was 9,160. Now that was in a disastrous 

year, and it is still almost 2,000 higher than the activity in 1981 

under the old policy. 1987, we are estimating about 10,250 for 

this year. We’ve done some projections that will take us, in the 

long run, back over the 15,000. So when you say that it, in 

effect, has not worked, hasn’t created the jobs nor the 

investment or the spin-offs, that is totally inaccurate. 

 

If you would like to see, firsthand - and in fact, you have saw 

firsthand, I believe you were at Richmound one day, on the 

west side of the province. 

 

An Hon. Member: I had a good time, too. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: It was a good time. But what it does for that 

community is what is important. The jobs that were created, the 

tax base for a very small rural community is added, and it is a 

diversification away from a traditional ranching and farming 

area. And I think you would agree that that is very positive. 

 

The spin-off to the province is of course, down the road, 

increased revenues. And on that particular location we also run 

into another positive factor, and that is the self-sufficiency 

within our gas industry within this province, because that, in 

effect, was gas wells that you were out to visit that day, and 

NCO (North Canadian Oils) and its gas production in 

Richmound. 

 

The number of wells that are capable of producing is an 

indication of the kind of activity that you are going to have, 

whether it’s indirect or direct. And I would ask you to review 

the figures that I gave to you the other day, and that, I believe 

you have also. The wells capable of producing in 1981 were 

11,072; 1982, they were 11,692; 1983, they jumped about a 

thousand, a little over 12,961; 1984 was a substantial increase 

with 15,004; 1985, 17,107. In 1986 we had 17,850 wells and 

that is an estimate figure, that is not an actual count yet. 

We are estimating in 1987, or forecasting, that there will be 

approximately 18,900 wells producing. 

 

Of course you know the standards by which the estimates take 

place on jobs; for every rig working there are a certain amount 

of jobs that take place, and with that, for every job direct there 

are also jobs indirect. 

 

So those are some of the figures that one can look at, besides 

going to the communities where the activity . . . I would ask 

you perhaps to go down to Weyburn or perhaps to Kindersley, 

which had a very rough 1986, and you will find that many of 

the oil service and supply people - the welders, the truckers, the 

water haulers - are in fact starting to pick up. And that’s a very 

positive sign that the program, the changes, have been effective. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, I conceded to you the other day, 

and I want to concede it again so that there’s no 

misunderstanding, that your policies certainly created some 

flurry in the oil industry. No one denies that. Where we differ, 

Madam Minister, is that you gave up too much for that little 

activity in the oil industry. 

 

And Madam Minister, I want to go back to you again . . . by the 

way, Madam Minister, I do want to apologize to you for, and to 

this House, for misleading . . . I read the wrong column on out 

migration. I was out by about 5,000. It was not 7,000, and I’m 

not surprised that the minister didn’t comment on it, but the 

actual out migration from January to June . . . and I think your 

officials spotted that when I had made the error. The actual out 

migration . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

And I want the member from Weyburn to hear this: the actual 

out migration from January to June of this year was 12,137. 

And now if that continues for the next six months, we will have 

an out migration of over 24,000 people. And this is, Madam 

Minister, Saskatchewan statistics that come out of your 

government, not out of the Government of Canada, which you 

didn’t want to believe the other day. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now, I also want to be fair that there’s been an in migration of 

7,000. Those were the figures that I was reading. We will be 

looking at a minimum of 10,000 people leaving this province 

because, Madam Minister, your policies of creating 

employment for our young people, and not providing the 

opportunities, for example, for education . . . or the present 

Minister of Education is shutting down technical schools and 

universities and doesn’t have the money which should be there 

from the energy sector, so he has to shut down our universities 

and our technical schools and our students. 

 

I met one of my former students - I met one of more former 

students on Friday night in downtown Saskatoon. I said, what 

are you doing for the summer? He said, well I’ve got a job; I’m 

hoping to get into Arts and Science. I said, what do you mean, 

hoping? I thought you had a pretty good average. Well, he says, 

I’ve got a 72 average, but I can’t get in; I’m on the waiting list. 

And I said, I don’t believe that. He said, yeah, you’ve got to 

have a 74 average now to get into Arts and Science. Well I 

immediately thought  

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1286 

 

of that, well if that had been the case, the Minister of Education 

would never have been able to go to university. 

 

But, Madam Minister, it is very clear from the evidence that 

there is, that your policies simply are not working in providing 

the economic activity in this province that we need. And what 

I’m saying to you is that the money that you have foregone 

because of concessions that you have given to the oil industry 

could have been used by the government to create that activity, 

not just in the oil industry sector of this province, but 

throughout the province of Saskatchewan. And not only would 

your economic activity and your gross domestic product have 

increased dramatically if you had put those incentives in 

throughout the province, but also you could have provided 

employment for our young people. 

 

Madam Minister, I don’t deny that there are spin-off effects. 

And everybody knows that for every job you create that there 

are going to be spin-off effects. But if you look at your own 

statistics on the bankruptcies that have taken place in this 

province over the last five years, and certainly over the last 18 

months, I am saying to you, Madam Minister, that your policy 

of making the oil industry the engine of economic growth 

simply has not worked. It has not worked. 

 

And if you are going to only listen, as the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster said the other day, listen to the oil industry, 

if you’re only going to listen to the oil industry, then what I am 

saying to you is that yes, you will give more concessions, more 

incentives, and you are not going to have sufficient revenues 

coming to the treasury in order to provide for the health care 

and the educational care that we need, and the social service 

care that we need in this province. If you give it all away to 

create activity, then you don’t have the revenues necessary to 

provide those programs. 

 

And I’m asking the minister now, two things. In light of the fact 

that oil is now at $22 a barrel, are you giving serious 

consideration to changing your policy if that price continues for 

the next month? Are you now willing to reconsider your policy 

as you stated last December 23 that you would do? Will you 

reconsider the policy and make sure that adequate revenues 

flow to the treasury in this province? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Mr. Chairman, the . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: Order, please. Order. The minister is trying to 

answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Thank you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

No, I don’t think the member from Regina North is very much 

of a help at all. The member from Saskatoon South . . . First of 

all, his basic premise is wrong from two points. You say that 

this is the engine of growth, and I’ve said to you that’s 

exaggerated. It is simply one within a lot of options that 

provinces have in looking at the industries that will be viable, 

that it can pick up on the resources that are there. 

 

One other premise that you’ve made is wrong, and that is that 

this has lost this province money. And I say that from 

a factual point of view in looking at the statistics: number one, 

it has actually made revenue - not lost - made. I’ve given you 

the figure of $340 million. And I stand by that. And let me 

explain some of the reasons why I do. 

 

First of all, you are not going to be able to judge an industry nor 

the success of government policy simply on revenue only. 

There must be some other factors. One of those factors are jobs. 

Another factor is investment. You’ve got a tax base - R.M. 

taxes plus other taxes that flow in. You’ve got the leases to 

farmers, permits, land sales - a variety of measures that 

determine whether those policies are working or not. 

 

You have also, my good friend, made the assumption that if no 

policies . . . if no change would have taken place in the policy, 

that there would have been no shut-in wells, and that you would 

have continued to drill the same number of wells. That is totally 

incorrect. Totally. If you believe that, then you do not know this 

province and its producing areas. Nor have you taken the time 

to seriously talk to such people like NCO (North Canadian Oils) 

who you travelled with to the opening of Richmound. You 

haven’t taken the time to look at, for example, even the media 

people that deal with the financial aspect of covering 

government policy. That assumption is wrong, totally wrong. 

 

Those wells . . . There would have been more wells shut in. And 

I will remind you that even with the policy change, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, there was still 3,000 wells shut in. And we collect no 

money on shut-in wells. None. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

You can set that royalty as high as you would like, but it isn’t 

going to do you a bit of good if the well is shut in. It doesn’t do 

you any good; it doesn’t do the province any good; obviously it 

doesn’t do the company any good; and it doesn’t do the R.M. 

any good either where they have a share in the tax base. 

 

So you have to look at some of those factors, and that’s why I 

say that your basic premise is wrong on this. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, I suppose we could go around 

and around on this. We’re certainly not going to agree, I 

assume. But, Madam Minister, it wasn’t me who coined the 

industry as an engine of economic growth. I want you to look at 

the estimates, and I read from the hon. Mr. Schoenhals. These 

are the estimates of May 9, 1985. The hon. Paul Schoenhals 

says the following: 

 

From the outset, all parties to the process shared a 

common objective. We said that a new energy policy for 

Canada must create an atmosphere in which the petroleum 

sector could act as an engine of economic growth. 

 

And Marcel Masse agreed, and I can get you the document 

where Marcel Masse agreed with the minister of Saskatchewan 

that the oil industry should become, and must be, the engine of 

economic growth. What I’m simply saying to you is that if 

you’re going to change your policies, because that is your prime 

objective, then certainly the oil industry will have you at their 

mercy; that if you will not change their policies, they will 

simply say, yes we’re going to go somewhere else. 

 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1287 

 

The problem, Madam Minister, is that you treat this energy as 

though there is unlimited amount of oil. We all know that 

conventional oil is very limited and if you, for example, don’t 

take care, you’re going to run out of conventional oil by the 

1990s or the mid-1990s. These again are not my figures. These 

are figures that come from your counterpart in Alberta. Mr. 

Webber has been quoted as saying that conventional oil will run 

out about the mid-90s, and that he is trying to convince the 

federal government that we need to start some projects on 

stream with heavy oil. 

 

What I’m saying to you is: if you’re going to give it away, if 

you’re going to make your policies and your royalties so 

generous that we get little return to the treasury, then I’m saying 

you’re doing a disservice to the people of Saskatchewan 

because, by the 1990s or the mid-90s, there won’t be any 

conventional oil left. What I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, 

if you work it out - if you had not changed the policies, either of 

1982 or of 1983, when you were the government; if you had not 

changed your policies of 1983, we still would have had about 

$300 million a year more if you had left those royalties in effect 

of 1983. Those are your own policies. 

 

But if you had left in effect the policies of 1982, when we were 

the government, I’m saying that you would have received an 

additional $1.5 billion, or thereabout. Not only that, Madam 

Minister, you would have had an additional 400 million barrels 

of oil in the ground which does not spoil, Madam Minister. And 

they, in times when oil prices are high, would have returned a 

very decent revenue to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the things, Madam Minister, that you did in your 

policies was simply changed the spacing, so that you didn’t 

have new exploratory wells. Many of the wells that came on 

production were infill wells. In other words, they simply drilled 

the wells closer together. They were pretty certain that oil 

would be there, and you gave them the incentives to drill for 

those wells. And all that the oil companies simply did was they 

drilled the wells on closer spacings, put the oil out at a faster 

rate, and we are short of the oil now, and we didn’t get the 

returns that we should have received. 

 

What I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, is that I think you 

did a disservice to the people on two accounts. You got rid of 

the oil of 400 million barrels, which you wouldn’t have had to. 

And secondly, you didn’t get the return that, for the people of 

Saskatchewan, that you should have received. And on . . . I 

don’t think that you can argue those points. They’re there for 

you to observe and for you to admit. 

 

Secondly, Madam Minister, as I pointed out before, if the oil 

industry didn’t become the engine of economic growth, you 

have a very sluggish economy. You had it for the last number of 

years - at least for two years now. The oil industry has not 

picked up that slack. The economic growth is either the worst or 

the second worst in all of Canada. 

 

People are leaving this province because you aren’t providing 

the jobs that are necessary. I indicated to you, if this continues 

we’ll have 24,000 people moving away 

from this province. And one of your commitments in 1982 was, 

and the Premier said, let’s bring the young people home. Now 

they’re leaving this province. They’re leaving this province at a 

rate that is unprecedented since the 1930’s. 

 

And what I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, is that if you 

continue with this policy in energy you will not provide the 

Minister of Finance or the Minister of Education with sufficient 

funds so that they can provide us and the people of 

Saskatchewan and our young people with good health care, 

good social services, and good educational care. 

 

(1645) 

 

I think there’s got to be a change in your policy. I want to ask 

the minister again: when are you going to, in the light of the 

present price of oil, when are you going to start initiating 

changes in your oil policy and your oil royalties which will take 

into effect the increase in the price of oil? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Mr. Chairman, just aside . . . The member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale has asked me what the Petroleum 

Club says these days. I want him to know that I wouldn’t know. 

Perhaps he’s not aware . . . However, I would have thought that 

maybe he is aware that women are not allowed into the 

Petroleum Club. Obviously, he hasn’t learned that yet. 

 

Mr. Member from Saskatoon South, I want to take you back to 

your opening quote. I believe you were quoting Paul 

Schoenhals when he had been minister. Is that correct? And you 

said, this is “the” engine of growth, which takes me back to 

what I said before. It is not “the” engine of growth, like it is 

one. It is one of many. It is simply an engine of growth. Okay. 

 

Let me comment on a few other points that you made. First of 

all, I want you to know that there were no threats levied in 1986 

when the price of oil went down. That doesn’t happen. What 

does happen is smaller companies like the service and supply 

companies within communities simply lay people off. Some of 

them go on UIC (Unemployment Insurance Commission); 

others leave the province, perhaps go back to Alberta if, in fact, 

they have been of the transient nature and following the rigs. 

You certainly see the rigs leave the province. But there’s no 

threats made, and I don’t know why you would say there are 

when there aren’t. 

 

You begin to see wells shut in. We know that from the field 

reports that come through Energy and Mines, and this happens 

to other industries, too, when times get tough. And it is perhaps 

one of the reasons why government, and its respective 

ministers, should know the people and the factors that impact 

within an industry. I think you, as a teacher, would agree with 

that - that the Minister of Education should be well aware of the 

various factors that keep a quality teaching force in this 

province. And I know that you would agree with that statement. 

 

The same thing is not . . . it’s not much different when it applies 

to an industry, regardless of what the industry may be. I’m well 

aware of Mr. Webber’s . . . the Hon. Neil 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1288 

 

Webber, Minister of Energy and Mines for Alberta, in his 

statement about the conventional oil. He is not the first person 

that has said we will run out of conventional oil by such and 

such a time. I believe there’s various studies around, including 

one through the National Energy Board, that would show that. 

 

All the more reason, Mr. Member, that we be very active in 

finding our reserves in this province, because our reserves are 

heavy oil. And one of the reasons that there is a good possibility 

of a very bright future for heavy oil is because we will, in fact, 

run out of conventional oil first. 

 

Now just looking at that argument by itself would tell you that 

you should be pro-active in terms of the development of the 

resource. Now the only way you know that you have the 

resource, or if there are, in fact, any reserves down there, is to 

drill a well. Reserves are based on your product, productivity. 

You don’t know what’s there until the actual well is drilled. I 

have to also remind you that Saskatchewan’s royalty rate, with 

the changes, remains the highest in North America, and it 

certainly doesn’t please every one. 

 

In essence, Mr. Deputy Chairman, when I compare this part of 

the energy policy, and I compare it to what was in place in the 

past, I can only say that this one works very well. The past one 

was very ineffective and costly, as the member well knows, 

because he was a cabinet minister of the government of the day, 

with a very ineffective costly program where people got pay in 

cash dollars to drill a well. That is not what happens in this 

program, and he knows that also. 

 

I think if he were to go back and look at the record of what 

actually took place under the old incentive program . . . and I 

don’t believe you called it concessions at that time; I believe it 

was put out as an incentive program. Now I’m not sure what the 

difference is between an incentive program in 1981 and why it 

should be termed anything different in 1987, unless it’s simply 

for political expediency, and perhaps that’s a consideration to 

take into account. 

 

Looking at the stats, Mr. Member . . . and you talk about the out 

migration, and you are saying it is because of the ineffective 

policy of energy of the government. Let me remind you, while 

you toss around figures on out migration, you should also talk 

about what has come into the province over the last five years, 

since 1982 the growth of the population. I think it also deserves 

to be reminded that we have the second, the second lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada, and yet you didn’t mention that. 

 

And in particular, Mr. Member, let’s take a look at the 

unemployment rate in Regina, 5.5. Now I think some of that is 

due to our energy policies that include the NewGrade and the 

Co-op upgrader. I mean, we’re going to see 2,000 people 

working out there at the peak period come October. 

 

And I remind you again, the unemployment rate in Regina 

today if 5.5. I think that’s a very healthy indication. And some 

of that can be contributed to the fact that the Co-op upgrader is 

being done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Madam Minister, you accuse me of leaving out 

some things, but so I could accuse you. Certainly the 

unemployment rate in Regina is 5.5. You didn’t mention the 

one in Saskatoon has been over 10 per cent and 11 per cent and 

12 per cent for the last two or three or four years. 

 

So we’ve got 10,000 people on the hospital waiting list because 

your government can’t provide sufficient funds for 

hospitalization. And I say that’s due, in some part, because you 

don’t get sufficient revenues from the energy sector. 

 

Madam Minister, you say that our policies weren’t effective 

from 1971 to 1981. I want to tell the minister, from 1971 to 

1981 this province didn’t experience one, not one, unbalanced 

budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: We had surpluses in each one of those years. 

Madam Minister, we gave you a surplus of $140 million when 

you formed the government. We gave you a surplus of $140 

million. You are handing the people of this province a 

cumulative deficit of $3.4 billion. 

 

Now you’re saying, Madam Minister, you’re saying that your 

programs have worked so effectively for the people of this 

province. If they have, why did you create a cumulative deficit 

of $3.4 billion if they were so effective? What I’m saying to 

you, Madam Minister, is that yes, you had a flurry in the oil 

industry, you’ve drilled more wells, you took out more oil, but 

your revenues that you received for them just simply weren’t 

sufficient. 

 

So I mean, Madam Minister, you can’t on the one hand say it’s 

been effective, and on the other hand say that, you know, we 

just didn’t get the revenues. And I’m telling you, Madam 

Minister, because of your policies, you lost $1.5 billion. And, 

Madam Minister . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: Lost? Gave away! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: Well, exactly. Gave it away to the oil industries. 

 

Madam Minister, from 1971 to 1981 we had one of the fastest 

economic activity, fastest growing economy in the country of 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: You can’t deny that. That’s true. I mean we had the 

lowest unemployment. When we left the government in 1982, 

the unemployment in Saskatchewan was about 4.7 or 4.8 per 

cent - 4.7 or 4.8 per cent; that’s what it was. And certainly the 

unemployment in Saskatoon wasn’t at 10 per cent. 

 

And in 1982 our people in Saskatoon and in the province of 

Saskatchewan didn’t have to worry, Madam Minister, that they 

couldn’t get into the College of Arts and Science. They didn’t 

have to worry, Madam Minister, that they didn’t have money 

available so that they could attend our 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1289 

 

post-secondary educations and technical school and the 

universities. Now our people can’t even attend some of the 

programs in Saskatoon because your Minister of Education says 

he can’t afford it, and he’s shut them down. 

 

What I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, is simply this: I think 

you need to change your program in the energy sector. And 

what you need to do, you’ve got to put some emphasis on 

revenues - you’ve got to put some emphasis on revenues. And I 

don’t think that you’ve done this over the last number of years. 

 

One of your first acts that you did when you formed the 

government, one of the first acts in the first two or three 

months, was to substantially reduce the royalties to the oil 

companies. And sure they applauded you. And certainly some 

of them came in. I don’t deny that. But what did you get in 

return? What did you get in return? Then you go and you give 

them a further incentive. You change the spacings. Whereas 

before they could drill one oil well on 80 acres, now you’ve 

said to them, hey, we would like to have more wells drilled, so 

we’ll give you an added incentive and you can drill now on 

every 40 acres. And naturally you had more wells drilled. 

 

But what you did was you pumped the oil out at a faster rate in 

known wells, in known discoveries. You didn’t have the 

exploratory wells to the extent that you should have had with 

the incentives that you gave to the oil companies. 

 

And what I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, is I think that 

you have to start looking at changing some of those policies, 

particularly now that the oil price has gone up to $22, over $22 

a barrel. Why aren’t you starting and looking at changing those 

policies so that more revenues will flow to the treasury, so that 

the Minister of Education and the Minister of Health can 

provide more moneys for education and for health? Why don’t 

you recommend that to the treasury board? 

 

You were very quick last December 23 to recommend changes 

to the oil royalties, and by your own admission, Madam 

Minister, you admitted that there was very little activity from 

December to April. Oil Week reports that there’s very little 

activity. So did your incentives work? I say no, they didn’t. 

 

Then along comes the federal Minister, Marcel Masse, and he 

puts in an incentive of 350 million for Alberta and 

Saskatchewan primarily. It went over to western provinces, I 

know, but most of it went to Alberta and Saskatchewan, and 

you estimated, madam Minister, you estimated that you would 

get about 100 to $150 million from 350 incentive program. If 

that is true, why then are you still saying that you will only drill 

approximately 1,100 or 1,200 or 1,300 wells this year? 

 

I’m saying to you, either your program didn’t work because you 

told us last December that you expected to drill an additional 

1,100 wells - Marcel Masse comes along with an incentive 

program of 350 million, you expect 100 to 150 million from 

that - and you’re still saying that you’re only going to drill 11, 

12, or 1,300 wells. Marcel Masse says that it should increase 

the 

activity considerably. 

 

I know, Madam Minister, that each well drilled in 

Saskatchewan costs, I believe, between 3 and 500,000. I believe 

that’s correct on the most part. Now if you take $150 million, 

you should have expected - if my calculations are correct, and I 

believe they are - you should have expected about 500 

additional wells. Why don’t we have those 500 additional 

wells? Either your policy didn’t work and you threw money 

down the drain, or the federal policy didn’t work and they threw 

money down the drain. 

 

Now you can’t have it both ways. Either you were wrong last 

December, or you should have said to the federal Minister of 

Energy; hey look it, keep your program. We don’t need it, 

because it’s not going to increase the activity in the oil fields. 

So what I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, is that either you 

threw the money away, or the federal government threw the 

money away. You can’t have it both ways. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, for next day will you please give me the 

answers to whether you were overestimating last December 

when you announced your program, or was Marcel Masse 

simply throwing away the money, the federal moneys, and had 

no effect in the oil field whatsoever? Okay? Would you provide 

that for me next time? Were you wrong, or was the federal 

minister wrong? 

 

Now why don’t we have estimates of 16, 17, or 1,800 wells? 

It’s a question I asked the other day; I did not get an answer to 

that. Yes. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Mr. Chairman, the member has not done his 

homework, and he is not making sense. And his argument of 

this give-away is just total nonsense. It has been from day one. 

And I can’t believe that he believes he has any kind of 

credibility standing there and doing it. But he does; he 

obviously believes that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we have the highest royalty rate in North 

America, with the changes. It is double the royalty rates in 

Alberta. Somehow the member thinks that you can tax 

somebody . . . And let me use him as an example, Mr. 

Chairman. His salary of, let’s say $30,000 a year, and he’s got a 

tax from income tax at that level of 30,000. If his salary all of a 

sudden drops to 15,000, does he expect the same level of 

taxation? Of course not. Of course not. That doesn’t even make 

sense. 

 

You know, I want to take him back to 1975. You had a land 

sale, Mr. Member. And you tell us we should be concerned 

about revenue. The member’s interested. 

 

Mr. Chairman: Order, please. Order. A question was asked; I 

would like the minister to have the opportunity to answer it. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: Mr. Chairman, if I can briefly tie up before 

supper. Mr. Chairman, we are concerned about revenues when 

we look at the policy. We are concerned with jobs. We on this 

side of the House know that it isn’t a simple matter of revenues. 

I don’t think that guy knows how to put a policy in that, in fact, 

takes into account 

  



 

July 20, 1987 

1290 

 

what makes revenue. People make revenue and people are jobs. 

It’s that simple, and he doesn’t understand it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:05 p.m. 


