













































September 15, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 15, 1987 

 

 

2567 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Science and Technology 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 15 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, 

I’d like to come back to the point we left off at which had to do 

with the increase in administrative staff for the Department of 

Science and Technology, the administrative program services. 

And you commented, as I understood it, that the increase from 

6.3 person years to 11.3 was a reflection of you ministerial staff 

moving into the administrative services of Science and 

Technology. Can you elaborate on what that means a little bit 

more in terms of the functioning of the department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I indicated 

earlier, in the past the Department of Science and Technology 

was included with a couple of other departments – Tourism and 

small industry and Economic Development of Trade – and for 

the current year that of course changed so that the Department 

of Science and Technology stands on its own. As a result it’s 

necessary to include the office staff in my office within the 

Department of Science and Technology, and I have a 

complement of five people, and they are included in this 

particular number that you see here. Where there was 6.3, the 

11.3 then, is indicative of the fact that my staff is also included 

in that figure. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — And so in a practical sense, what will that 

mean for the functioning of the department? These staff are 

located in Saskatoon? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No, the staff are working out of my 

office here in Regina. And as far as the responsibilities are 

concerned, they are responsibilities that are related to the office 

of the minister. It’s my understanding that there are certain 

basic services that are provided by each minister’s office and 

that’s in keeping in line with what other departments have. So 

they are located here; they work out of my office. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — This puzzles me a bit because what we then 

find with the remaining three areas of the departmental budget – 

government research, industrial development, and research 

co-ordination – we find that there is a shifting of staff there, 

particularly in industrial development. And I’m wondering what 

it means when we see, for example, in industrial development 

that the person-years allocated for that kind of work, for 

industrial development, have gone down, last year from five 

person-years, this year to two person-years. What kind of 

impact is that going to have on small technological firms here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, we do not see any 

cut-back as far as the services that are provided to clients in 

Saskatchewan. When you look at the two areas of governmental 

research and industrial development,  

they have now been combined into one department and we’ve 

had a staff decrease of two people. But as far as the services to 

the clients are concerned, they are still being provided in the 

same way that they have been in the past. And there is the 

overlap. We’ve got people that are involved with both of those 

areas, the governmental research and industrial development. 

So they’re now combined as one department. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well if they were combined as one 

department, that would reflect a total of seven staff. Last year 

the corresponding combination would have produced a total of 

nine staff, so we still have a reduction of two staff people in that 

area. I’m wondering what work isn’t going to be done that had 

previously been done in those two areas of government research 

and industrial development, now that you’re two people short 

over last year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, as I pointed out 

earlier, the Department of Science and Technology had a 25 per 

cent reduction in the budget in so far as moneys for program. 

But there was also the corresponding decrease as far as staff 

was concerned, so overall in the department there was a 

decrease in the staff of four people. And two of those people 

happened to be in that particular area of governmental research 

and industrial development. But as far as the services that are 

concerned, we’re simply carrying on the same services that we 

have, and I would point out too that even though we have many 

more companies in operation today that we’re involved with, 

we have to consider the fact that there has been a shift as far as 

the responsibilities that are concerned and the amount of service 

that these companies need. So I suppose we can look at it then 

as a matter of fewer people carrying out the same 

responsibilities. And I feel that we have a very efficient 

department, and to my knowledge we don’t have any problem 

with that. Contacts that I have on an ongoing basis with the 

industry, with the companies out there, is that there has been no 

change as far as the services as a result of any change in the 

number of people. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well that will remain to be seen. I have a 

very high regard for your departmental staff, some of whom are 

still with the department and some of whom have been cut from 

the department and that is my concern. I’ve heard very, very 

good reports in the field about staff working for the department, 

particularly in the area of industrial development. And I refer to 

one individual whose name is Mr. Harvey Dickson, who was an 

industrial development officer, and I received a number of 

reports from people in the high-tech community who had dealt 

with him who are very concerned that this individual had been 

let go. 

 

And I fail to see how you can continue to provide the same 

level of services when there are an increasing number of firms 

that are requesting assistance, potentially new firms looking to 

develop products, when you cut at the very core of industrial 

development, the ground floor of industrial development, on the 

street, dealing with nascent high-tech firms, and you simply 

have to have fewer people dealing with more firms. I just don’t 

see how that can possibly work at the same time, at the very 

same time, that we find a 42 per cent increase in the budget for  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2568 

 

the administrative portion of the department and almost a 50 per 

cent increase for the staffing of the administrative segment of 

the department. It seems like there are real constraints, fiscally, 

on you and your department, and this is the case that I had made 

earlier, that I think that the Premier here is to be held 

accountable for really tying your hands and the hands of your 

departmental staff. 

 

How can you meet, realistically, the needs of small 

Saskatchewan high-tech firms, when you don’t have industrial 

development officers on the street dealing with these people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly take 

exception to the fact that we . . . The hon. member is saying that 

we don’t, or we can’t really carry on some of these functions if 

we haven’t got men on the street, as such. I would point out to 

him that we still have seven individuals within those two areas 

of governmental research and industrial development who are 

picking up the responsibilities that were shared by some, such 

as Harvey Dickson. 

 

Harvey Dickson was an individual, and certainly a very credible 

individual, who was on a contract with the department, and his 

contract was not renewed after, I believe, June 6 of this current 

year, but that’s not to say that the services that he was providing 

are not being provided today. They are being provided by my 

department staff. 

 

We also have other services available to us and we’re making 

use of them through other departments and also through the 

Saskatchewan Research Council. And as time goes on, if the 

need arises that we have clients whom we feel that we can’t 

serve, we may at that point have to hire people on a short-term 

basis to meet those needs. 

 

I would point out as well, and I said this a little bit earlier, that 

you must recall that some of these companies that are now in 

the high-tech industry have been around for a while and are into 

the commercialization stage or into production. And they 

certainly don’t need the same type of support from my 

department that they did in the earlier stages. So we have to 

keep that in mind. 

 

A lot of them now, of course, are operating on their own. And 

the only assistance that we might have given to them was early 

consultation, and in some cases, of course, there may have been 

a grant provided as well. But for the most part now, they don’t 

need the same level of support from Science and Technology as 

they did in the past. But to this point, we have been able to 

serve all of the requests that we have had and there has been no 

one turned away. And so I feel that we’re meeting the need out 

there even though we have few people around doing it. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well this is certainly a concern of mine, and I 

hold it up to you as the minister to monitor because I think that 

in the people that I’ve talked to within the high-tech 

community, there’s been a very keen appreciation of the work 

of your industrial development people. 

 

And I would say, Mr. Minister, there’s not simply a case of  

dealing with firms that already exist. Certainly they are 

established and they’ve received assistance to help get them 

established. But if we’re talking about developing a high-tech 

community here and a scientific community here in 

Saskatchewan, hopefully you will pay attention to make sure 

that if this kind of development, industrial development, is 

being compromised, it isn’t being done by other departments, 

that you would take measures to put industrial development 

workers back on the ground to assist nascent firms. 

 

Do you presently have any plans in terms of contracting out to 

supply some of these services that had previously been done by 

industrial development officers such as Harvey Dickson? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would point out a 

couple of things in answering this question. The one major 

factor that you have to consider here is that our programs are 

operating on industry responses or requests. When we get 

requests from clients, that’s of course when we take action. And 

as I indicated, we’ve been able to meet all of those requests up 

until the present time. If in fact we find that as time goes on that 

there are requests where we need additional help, certainly we 

will have the resources that we will move towards contracting 

some of those out. 

 

I might also add that the very fact that the Premier of this 

province has put such a high emphasis on Science and 

Technology in appointing myself as a minister responsible only 

for one department, has also made it possible for me to be more 

directly involved with many of the companies in a direct way. 

 

And prior to the legislature going into session, and to a lesser 

extent since, I called on many of these companies and was able 

to discuss with them the type of operation that they had going, 

and also any of the concerns that they might have had with 

regard to the department and the services that were being 

provided. And of course we’ve been able to use this information 

to possibly change some of our policies and some of the things 

that we are doing to make sure that we are effective to the 

maximum. 

 

(1915) 

 

Also there’s been an opportunity for having meetings with 

different groups. There’s a very active association in Saskatoon 

for example, of the advanced-tech people, and I have been 

involved with them and have had several meetings with them. 

It’s given us an opportunity to find out more directly the needs 

of that particular group and also have played quite a role as far 

as the research facilities that we have. 

 

A question that you had asked earlier wondering about some of 

our plans and if in fact we did have a strategy as far as advanced 

technology is concerned, and we are meeting with industry, we 

are listening to them. We include the representatives from the 

research facilities and from the university. And as a matter of 

fact, the end of next week we will be pulling all of the players 

together that are involved in the biotechnology field, and we 

will be taking a look at what the situation is right now and 

laying out plans that we can follow in making sure that  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2569 

 

Saskatchewan continues with its leading role in this particular 

field. 

 

We also have a very active advisory board for the Department 

of Science and Technology, and this group will be meeting 

within the next 10 days, and we will be taking a look at the 

services that are being delivered and seeing where there are 

loopholes and where we have to make some changes. 

 

So these are things that have been possible because of the fact 

that I haven’t had some of the other responsibilities, and some 

of my staff, of course, are also very involved with this. It gives 

us an opportunity for much more direct contact, and that, I am 

sure, has helped out in so far as the operation of the department 

is concerned. 

 

So the services are being provided to the clients, and I would 

certainly entertain from you that if you know of any clients 

within the high-tech sector that have needs that are not being 

met or a service that they require, we would certainly appreciate 

hearing about it. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Continuing on the program services items in 

the estimates, I’m wondering about the figures provided for 

research co-ordination. I note that in this final area of 

departmental activity, there has been a decrease from four 

people assigned to research co-ordination last year, to two 

people this year, and at the same time we have an increase in 

funding for this activity. How can you explain that, where we 

have the staff for research co-ordination cut in half, and we 

have what would be a 48 per cent increase in funding for other 

expenses in conjunction with research co-ordination? Are we 

going to see more contracting out, or privatization of work, in 

this regard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would point 

out to the hon. member that, in talking about research 

co-ordination, that today we more properly call that, or identify 

it, as communications. And as far as the reduction is concerned, 

there was a shifting around within the department. For example, 

one of the people here with responsibility for computer 

operations was moved into one of the other areas, and I believe 

one secretarial position was also moved out of there. 

 

As far as the increase in expenses, the other expenses, are 

concerned, we look upon this particular department or division 

as having a great deal of responsibility. For one thing, I find it 

quite unsettling, the fact that we have a very active advanced 

technology sector in this particular province but we don’t have 

that awareness that this particular sector exists. I think in some 

cases you can probably find out more on the other side of the 

world – in other words, that people know that we’ve got some 

world-class facilities and people involved in advanced 

technology here in Saskatchewan, but many of the 

Saskatchewan people are not aware of that. So we put a heavy 

emphasis on this particular area and a lot of money has been 

allocated to that section because we feel that there’s a need to 

develop this awareness with the Saskatchewan people on the 

importance of advanced technology because it’s something that 

all of us are going to recognize sooner or later – that this is what 

is going to lead us into the 21st century and is also going to help 

to  

make our industries more competitive with those other 

industries around the world. 

 

At the same time, we utilize this area to produce materials that 

tell about the types of things that are happening in the high-tech 

field in Saskatchewan. We have just completed another tech 

transfer catalogue that has been very, very widely distributed. 

And this is one of the ways in which we can publicize the 

companies that we have here in Saskatchewan, and the types of 

services that are possible, and it’s been very well accepted. I 

know from talking to my staff that there have been many, many 

letters received, commending the department for the publication 

that has just been circulated. And we feel it’s important then 

that we get the message out as far as the companies are 

concerned because indirectly it’s going to help them, but also 

we have to do our job of educating the general public and 

making them aware of what this high-tech field is all about. So 

it is an area that I think, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is very, very 

essential if we’re going to continue to move ahead in this area 

and make sure that people understand what high tech is all 

about and the fact that Saskatchewan is playing a leadership 

role, not only in Canada but also for other parts of the world. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would say that you 

don’t have to propagandize Saskatchewan people with literature 

on high tech if the job itself is being done. I think that we have 

to say that you cannot substitute paper and public relations for 

people. And I say one of the . . . Your earlier remark that you 

are now the minister solely responsible for the department, and 

you have been out in the field with the high-tech community, 

that you are engaged in consultation, speaks well for you but 

don’t get sucked up in the trap that the Premier seems to be 

sucked up in. And don’t let him – I say to you – don’t let him 

suck you into that trap of propagandizing Saskatchewan people, 

because that’s precisely what we’ve seen by your predecessor 

and the Premier. And for my money I say, then, when it comes 

to communication services, you’d be far better served to put 

that increase of some $150,000, a virtual doubling of the 

communications budget, into human resources and people like 

industrial development officers, and let them do the work of 

communicating what the department is doing. And over the 

long run, you will get the credit that is due in far better fashion 

than engaging in public relations campaigns. That’s a very, very 

dangerous precedent, I think, and I just have very serious 

reservations about it and hold them out to you for what they’re 

worth, then. 

 

Along this line, I note that you want to communicate with 

Saskatchewan people what the department is doing and the 

good things that are happening with respect to high technology 

here in Saskatchewan that sometimes aren’t known. 

 

And I note that in the departmental annual report it talks about 

part of the mandate of the department being to engage in 

consultative processes with the public on policies and programs, 

and to review these, and to debate issues and priorities within 

the department as a matter of public policy. 

 

And yet to my knowledge, I’ve really seen very little of this 

kind of activity coming from your predecessors, and I’m  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2570 

 

wondering if you’re given any thought – or your departmental 

officials have given any thought – for a more public kind of 

consultation or sounding as to what the public would like to see 

happen in the high-tech community. So rather than just 

propagandize them and communicate the departmental vision of 

high tech with the public, how about the opposite – 

consultations with the public as to what their priorities and their 

visions and their hopes might be. Are there any plans in that 

regard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the 

member opposite has covered quite a wide range here. 

 

I would simply indicate again that we do have a very active 

advisory committee as far as Science and Technology is 

concerned, and they meet from time to time and they advise the 

department. We’ll be having another meeting, I believe, a week 

from next Monday, at which time we’ll be looking at strategies. 

 

But I would point out as well that you talk about propaganda as 

far as the Saskatchewan people are concerned, I think, though, 

that we have to look at the different groups of people within 

Saskatchewan, that we have to make sure that they have an 

understanding of what is happening here. 

 

I’d point out again about the tech transfer catalogue that we’ve 

published, two editions of that one now, and that of course is 

being circulated all around the world and has had an effect on 

attracting other technologies from other countries, in some 

cases where we might be able to become involved with joint 

ventures. We certainly don’t have all the technologies here. 

There are technologies in other countries of the world that we 

can benefit from, and I think that we’re finding that in 

something you mentioned earlier, that we now live in a global 

community. And we know more about what’s happening in 

some of the other countries, and countries are working more 

closely together. It’s possible now for joint ventures to take 

place between, say, Japan and companies here in Saskatchewan. 

But it’s quite possible, I believe, to think that some of this is 

coming about because of the information that we are 

circulating. 

 

Another thing you have to keep in mind is that a lot of the 

publications that we are putting out are information for clients, 

indicating to them what types of programs that we have. People 

who are sitting out there with an idea, who might be an 

entrepreneur or an inventor of some kind, we often get calls 

wondering what kind of service we can provide, what kind of 

programs do we provide for these people. Well if we don’t have 

the information available to give to them or if it isn’t out there 

in, for example, the resource centres for small business and 

places like this, these people don’t have ready access to it. And 

it’s surprising in fact that many people in Saskatchewan, in 

spite of what you’re saying, don’t have an understanding of the 

high-tech industry that exists in this province. 

 

One other area that I want to just mention briefly is the fact that 

we also have to ensure that we’re developing that awareness 

with our students in so far as opportunities that exist in the 

advanced technology field. That of course can include people 

who may be considering going to  

university and taking engineering or going into technical 

institutes or universities and taking computer science. We have 

to ensure that because of our growing industry that we’re going 

to have the people prepared within our institutions who are 

going to come out and work with these companies. 

 

So I think it’s important to get that information out. I’d like to 

see much more information going out in that particular area into 

our schools, making the students more aware of the 

opportunities that exist. Because we well know that there are a 

lot of jobs today that are no longer available or may not be 

available for too many more years because of the changing 

times. And technologies are going to be around for a long, long 

time, and we have to ensure that students have that 

understanding and are aware of the fact that they exist and then 

can make plans to go into them. 

 

So when we talk about publications, I don’t think that we want 

to talk about using it as a propaganda for the people of 

Saskatchewan. There’s a very definite purpose for putting out 

any of these publications. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I don’t think you quite got the 

drift of my question, so I’ll ask it a little more directly. In the 

‘85-86 annual report for your department, on page 5, you talk 

about the strategy for promoting advanced technological 

development. You talk about providing a full range of services. 

Part of that is, to quote: “evaluate public policy questions 

relating to advanced technology,” and also, I quote, “serve 

Saskatchewan people by promoting a dialogue on the 

implications and issues surrounding advanced technology.” 

 

I don’t know that I’ve seen that kind of public consultation 

taking place to date from your predecessors, and so I ask you 

again: do you have any plans of your own to engage in a public 

discussion of some of the very, very important issues facing 

Saskatchewan society, Canadian society, with respect to 

technological development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, there are 

many opportunities as far as public consultation is concerned, 

but for the most part I suppose that the consultation is with 

specific groups, but they represent the – what I would call – the 

public at large. 

 

I could talk about some specific groups, such as the engineers. 

There are a couple of different engineering groups – association 

of professional engineers. I’ve indicated earlier about the 

Saskatchewan Advanced Technology Management Association 

in Saskatoon. That represents a very wide sector as far as the 

business community is concerned. 

 

There’s the advisory board on science and technology. The 

representation on that board are from all over Saskatchewan and 

from quite a variety of walks of life. But probably the most 

significant is the board of trade, and the board of trade in each 

of Saskatoon and Regina have groups that are quite active as far 

as advanced technology is concerned and I have met with 

representatives from these groups – or the committees  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2571 

 

from these particular groups – on more than one occasion and I 

would think that the board of trade represents a fairly wide 

segment as far as the general public is concerned. I would point 

out as well that coming up, I believe in January, there is going 

to be a national conference on science and technology in 

Toronto and conferences such as this are open to people from 

the general public and they have an opportunity at that time, 

I’m sure, for input. 

 

It’s something that is being addressed but it’s something that we 

certainly have to continue to look at and there is, I’m sure, 

much more that can be done to make sure that people do have 

the input that you are suggesting. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, given the scope and 

importance and the social consequences of the kinds of issues 

that society faces with respect to science and technology, I think 

it’s important to give consideration to broadening the base of 

public participation outside just the small high-tech community, 

or the industrial associations, or the boards of trades. And so for 

example, I think I would encourage you to give consideration to 

getting a broader base and I think in that way you could make a 

real contribution to continue that unique Saskatchewan model 

for high-tech advancement if you can get that component in. 

Because given the kinds of things I’ve read about other 

programs, nowhere do we really find that kind of broad based 

building of public consensus as to what should be done with 

public funding in this area and I would encourage you to take a 

look at that. 

 

And in a related vein I would be curious to know what kinds of 

departmental review have taken place in the last year with 

respect to an issue such as technological change in the work 

place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would 

indicate that we have to consider the fact that when we talk 

about advanced technology, that for the most part, we’re talking 

about small businesses. In fact, of the 170-some-odd companies 

that we have in Saskatchewan at the present time, the majority 

of them are probably companies with fewer than 15 employees. 

 

Now many of these businesses, small businesses, are also 

involved with the chamber of commerce and, you know, again, 

they’re out there within the public at large. And I would think 

that probably there are opportunities in this way for input as to 

things that we might be doing a little bit differently. 

 

And as I said earlier, we meet with these groups from time to 

time, and we get the feedback from them. We might be meeting 

with groups, or we might be meeting with the companies. 

 

As far as the technological change in the work place, we know 

that there is a greater recognition of the need to change, and 

we’ve got to continue to work towards that. I think that 

probably the show that we had on in Saskatoon this past 

weekend and the meeting the minister was at in Yorkton 

yesterday gives a very good opportunity for people to see some 

of the opportunities that exist as far as high tech and other 

business areas are concerned. And I  

think that the response has shown that there is good deal of 

interest out there, and that’s good. That’s good for the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I would point out in one final statement here, that as far as 

the review that has been done, or is being done, our department, 

through the council of ministers, that has been set up within the 

last few months, are participating in a social impact study. 

That’s an impact study in so far as advanced technology has on 

society as a whole. And we’re involved with this study at the 

present time, and we expect that that will be completed around 

the middle part of February of 1988. And that should provide us 

some information that we can work on or work with in setting 

our direction as far as the department is concerned here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I might add that that’s only one committee that we’re 

involved with. There are other committees that are also at work 

from the council of ministers, and we’ll be able to draw on the 

information that is put together by the other committees as well. 

And that will, I think, be a more direct indication from the 

general public. They’ll have an opportunity for input and we’ll 

be sharing this information and we’ll be able to go on from 

there. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have, I guess I need to 

say, some reservations about relying simply on the new council 

of ministers to come through with a sounding of what 

Saskatchewan people are thinking. I think that’s your 

responsibility, and I would encourage you and your department 

to engage in your own independent reviews of what’s 

happening here in Saskatchewan so that you can make all the 

better contribution in the national forum. 

 

And I think, again, you have an opportunity to provide some 

leadership with your counterparts, in terms of getting a 

sounding for what Saskatchewan people are thinking about 

these issues. And when it comes to an issue like technological 

change, that doesn’t just affect small businesses, that affects 

people in all sorts of Saskatchewan work places. 

 

A technological change affects farmers, in a massive kind of 

way. And I think given the importance of the agricultural 

economy, you might make a contribution by taking a sounding 

of how technological change impacts on the work place in the 

farm community and some of the social changes that flow from 

this. 

 

We’ll wait to see what the national council has to say, but I note 

that in their policy agreement, they do commit themselves to 

consultation with all segments of the economy, not just the 

research community, not just the advanced technological 

community, but with the service-based segments of the 

economy, and labour as well. They don’t really mention farmers 

per se, but I think that here in Saskatchewan we might want to 

consider that kind of thing. 

 

Continuing on your comments that the bulk of Saskatchewan 

firms are, in fact . . . well we have to understand, you said, are 

very small businesses, when all is said and done. This concerns 

me when it comes to the kinds of financing that the department 

has put into contractual services. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2572 

 

I note that BDM Systems has received $760,000, and SED 

Systems received $997,000 – that figure alone accounts for 40 

per cent of the total values of contracts assigned by the 

department in this past year – 40 per cent for one firm. Then if 

we add the BDM Systems, the 760, and the SED Systems with 

the 997, we get $1,757,000 worth of contracts from your 

department – 71 per cent of the total contracts let going to two 

firms. 

 

Now there may be a compelling logic for that, but I note that 

that leaves only 29 per cent of your funding available for 48 

other firms that are listed as receiving grants. And this isn’t to 

mention the other firms that aren’t listed in the annual report 

that didn’t receive grants or funding from your department. And 

so I point this out. 

 

We have a problem, a potential problem unless you can provide 

a reasonable explanation for this. We have a situation where 71 

per cent of the contractual funding is going to two big players, 

and 29 per cent is going to 48 per cent of the other firms that are 

funded; not to mention other firms that don’t even qualify for 

government funding or haven’t approached the government for 

funding. Do you have any comments on that kind of balance? 

Do you hope to correct that kind of balance? Was that an 

anomaly? Could you provide some perspective on that for me? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, while it’s 

true that we have two companies that have received a fair bit of 

money, I would point out again, as I indicated earlier, that most 

of the companies that we have in Saskatchewan are quite small, 

fewer than 15 employees. They’re growing firms. And as a 

result, for the most part, the grants that they request are very 

small in size. 

 

As far as BDM is concerned, that’s a very active firm dealing in 

pharmacy systems and hospitals. This was a joint venture with 

City Hospital in Saskatoon and a private firm, along with the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I think that’s one of the points that makes our science and 

technology or our advanced technology so successful in this 

province, that we have been able to move and share the risk 

with companies like BDM, and also pool resources with other 

players, like in this case, City Hospital. But for now, this 

company, I’m not just sure what their sales are for the current 

year, but I know that they’re very, very active. Their sales 

amount to several millions of dollars; they’re selling their 

programs in countries pretty well all over the world. 

 

As far as SED is concerned, $997,000 is a large amount of 

money; there’s no doubt about that. But SED on the other hand 

is the largest firm that we have in this province and are growing 

really, as far as their revenues are concerned, by leaps and 

bounds. I believe, for example, that their total revenues this 

current year is something in the neighbourhood of 25 million, 

and I think are going to nearly double in the next year. But 

that’s a company as well that is employing, I think now they’re 

up to about 425 employees. And some of these, of course, are 

longer  

term contracts too that we have with them. So we’re getting 

good return on any money that we have given to companies 

such as BDM or SED. 

 

SED, as you know, is going to be very involved with the 

Canadian space program over the next four to five years. And 

the moneys that are going to be generated by their particular 

activity are going to be large and it’s going to provide many 

jobs for Saskatchewan people, and that’s of course what we’re 

all about. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Do you, Mr. Minister, feel that these figures 

that I just was talking about – 71 per cent to only two firms, 29 

per cent to the other 48 firms – do you feel there is a sense in 

which that is skewed and that you would like to try to achieve a 

little bit more of a balance? Do you anticipate this repeating 

itself? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well I’m sure that each year we’re 

going to have this type of a balance and that there will be some 

of the larger companies that will be getting the larger amounts 

of money, similar to what you’re got here. 

 

I would point out that since the department was formed that 80 

firms have received commitments of assistance covering 127 

projects and totalling a little over $6 million. So we’ve been 

able to assist many, many companies – 80 different firms, but 

with a 127 different projects. So because of the make-up of our 

advanced technology sector in this province, I am sure that 

you’re going to see this same type of thing occur. 

 

On the other hand, I’m not aware of any companies, large or 

small, that were not able to get the type of assistance that they 

requested from the department over the last three or four years. 

So we apparently are meeting the needs as they’ve arisen. And 

so there will be that discrepancy. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well this concerns me a bit, quite frankly, 

Mr. Minister. It seems to me, as you say, that SED Systems is 

now a very big player here in the province, and in fact, in terms 

of the country in aerospace development, it’s very profitable 

now, by your own admission. And it concerns me, then, that the 

department might continue to give inordinate consideration to 

the large established high rollers in the technological 

community, the high employers. 

 

Certainly you have a responsibility there, but I would argue you 

have at least as much responsibility to the nascent, the 

struggling, the small firms, those that aren’t even born yet, in 

embryonic stage. And I think that’s where you can make your 

real contribution in terms of technological development. And I 

urge you not to do that, to fund the big players at the expense of 

the smaller players or those that aren’t even formed yet but are 

trying to get grouped and to form, and look to you for funding. 

 

SED Systems, I would argue now, not just because of what 

you’ve said but also because of its connections to Fleet 

Aerospace, ought to have the ability to stand on its own two feet 

more than it has. Fleet is going to be investing a lot of money 

into SED Systems. You yourself argued that that was the case 

and that that was only properly the case  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2573 

 

back on December 18 when we talked about this issue. And so 

I’d urge you to give due consideration to that and to not tie the 

hands of the smaller Saskatchewan firms, to sacrifice them to 

the giants of the high-tech community. 

 

Cut the apron strings to some of the bigger firms. Open up the 

funding for some of the smaller, struggling firms, and I think 

the base of technological development across the province will 

likely be at least as strong as it is funding the high rollers. 

 

I’d just like to ask a very brief question as to who is on the 

advisory committee that you’ve mentioned. If you could just . . . 

You don’t have to supply those names now, but I just request 

that you would forward those to me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chairman, we have 

that list and we’ll see that you get a copy of it. 

 

I would point out, in answer to one of your comments, that in so 

far as SED is concerned and the take-over by Fleet Aerospace, 

they have not received any money from the Department of 

Science and Technology since that take-over has occurred. And 

I’m sure that because of the nature of the business and the 

success that they’re having at this time, that in all probability 

the requests for funds from SED may well diminish as time 

goes on. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well that’s much more encouraging. I’m glad 

to hear you say that. 

 

I’d like to turn now to some questions concerning research and 

development in the province. I noted in the Speech from the 

Throne this past December that your government announced its 

intention, quote: 

 

. . . to harness the competitive excellence and international 

reputation that are the hallmark of the Saskatchewan 

grains . . . 

 

Excuse me here: 

 

. . . my Government intends to harness the competitive 

excellence and international reputation that are the 

hallmark of the Saskatchewan grains, biotechnology, 

potash and uranium industries to pursue the establishment 

of research institutes associated with these industries in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m wondering if the minister could tell me what the status of 

these research institutes is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would point 

out, in answer to the question, that in so far as the research 

institutes are concerned, we are very actively involved right 

now in discussing the biotechnological institute, and I would 

hope that it will not be too much longer before we can have an 

announcement in regard to that. 

 

We’re also very involved with the communications field, and 

because that’s at the discussion stage, and because of the fact 

that it’s a very competitive field, I don’t feel that at this time 

that I can give you too much more information on that one. 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I won’t ask you about the 

communications field; I didn’t ask you about the 

communications field. I’m really not concerned about that right 

now. I’m concerned about what was announced in the Speech 

from the Throne, by your government, that a grains institute 

would be established, that a biotechnology institute would be 

established, that a potash institute would be established, that a 

uranium institute would be established. And can you give me an 

indication of the status of the grains institute, the potash 

institute, and the uranium institute? 

 

You’ve given me a vague answer about the biotechnology 

institute. It’s been almost – what? – nine months since the 

Speech from the Throne. Presumably the government was 

thinking about these things before it’s announced them in the 

Speech from the Throne. I think it’s time to have some 

substance to flesh out these announcements. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I 

would point out to the member opposite that the main ones that 

my department is involved in right now is the biotechnological 

area and communications. In so far as the grains, the potash, the 

uranium, those of course come under other departments, but it’s 

my understanding that they’re being discussed as they relate to 

the western diversification fund and the possibility of getting 

something going through that channel – but grain, potash, 

uranium, are in other departments. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, as Minister of Science 

and Technology I think you could bring a very good perspective 

to bear if we’re talking about research institutes in these areas. I 

can scarcely envision how your government would be dealing 

with a grains institute, or a potash or uranium institute, and you 

as Minister of Science and Technology would not be involved, 

given the critical importance of these segments of the economy. 

Certainly other departments are involved but where does the . . . 

Why is it then that the Department of Science and Technology 

isn’t involved? How can that be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I didn’t 

indicate that we weren’t involved. We are involved with the 

discussions but we’re not going to be involved as far as the 

funding of them is concerned. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Good. That’s fair. I don’t expect you to be 

involved in the funding. Can you give me a status report, then, 

if you are in fact involved in the discussion of these institutes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I can’t give 

you anything further than that at this point. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Ah, Mr. Minister. This is what I said in the 

very beginning, that we have a verbal commitment to science 

and technology. And you do as good a job as Executive Council 

and the Premier allow you to do. And I don’t fault you for that. 

I fault the Premier for that. And that was my point as I opened 

these remarks. 

 

Because based on what you haven’t said here and based on 

what you have said here about these institutes, basically they’re 

paper fluff, puffery from the Speech from  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2574 

 

the Throne. And in fact, the Minister of Science and 

Technology can’t give any status report. I think that speaks for 

itself. We can only assume then that there are no plans unless 

you can give some kind of perspective or comment as to the 

shape of these institutes and what they will mean for the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would 

simply reiterate what I said earlier, that we’re involved as far as 

the discussions are concerned. There will be another meeting 

held before very long. But at this point I’m not prepared to 

divulge the status of these particular institutes and I’m sure that 

at an appropriate time in the near future there will be an 

announcement. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Who is responsible for the grains institute in 

your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The obvious answer, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, is the fact that the grains research is under the 

Department of Agriculture; potash and uranium are under 

Energy and Mines. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you. That’s more than we knew about 

these institutes before. And I guess it’s another case of just 

having to wait. It’s already been a year that we’ve waited to 

learn what these institutes are about. It’s a year that we’ve 

waited to see what the $50 million for high-tech assistance to 

Saskatchewan firms are about – another initiative talked about 

in the election and the Speech from the Throne. We’ll just have 

to wait and see, seems to be the stance when it comes to the 

Premier’s commitments to science and technology. 

 

Mr. Minister, I note from the survey results on the scientific 

activities of the Government of Saskatchewan that at the 

University of Saskatchewan, government expenditures for 

research and development for all sciences was down in ’85-86 

from 5.756 million to 4.332 million. I’m wondering if you can 

comment on that, particularly since this level of expenditure is 

below ’82-83 levels of expenditure for research and 

development in all sciences at the U of S. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I think it’s 

one thing for the member opposite to talk about the impatience 

that he has with regard to some of these institutes getting going 

and saying that it’s been nearly a year since they were 

announced. I think the unfortunate part is the fact that he 

doesn’t talk about all of the successes that we have in this 

province. If we take a look at the companies and the successes 

that they’re having in areas like telecommunications or space 

technology or robotics, medical research, instrumentation – 

many new things, exciting things, that are happening across the 

province, providing not only many jobs but also providing a 

tremendous amount of revenue for the province. Some of these 

things take time to pull together, and we can’t have them all as 

soon as we’d like sometimes, but let’s be sure that we look at 

the positive things that are happening. 

 

I indicated the fact that we started out about five years ago 

where we had only about 39 companies involved, where  

today we’ve got over 170. We had probably in the 

neighbourhood of 1,700 people employed in advanced 

technology five years ago, where today that’s nearing 3,000. 

But something that’s maybe even more significant, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, is the fact that the revenues from these companies 

have grown from around $81 million in 1982 to over $500 

million for the current year, and the possibilities exist that 

before too long – before very long – it will be in excess of $1 

billion. 

 

So there are a lot of positive things that are going on out there. 

So while the member opposite might feel that some of these 

other things should be happening a little bit faster, let’s not 

overlook the importance of all of those companies that are out 

there, very active and turning out new products and new 

processes for doing things, whether it’s in the field of 

agriculture or if it’s in the field of telecommunications or space 

technology, whatever the case might be. 

 

In so far as the expenditures at the University of Saskatchewan 

and why some of those have been reduced, I think that we have 

to consider the fact that sometimes there’s a change in emphasis 

as far as the moneys that are being expended. What about 

mentioning the fact that this government has made the 

commitment to building a new college of agriculture which 

will, of course, house all kinds of research facilities that will be 

utilized in the area of agriculture which is primary to this 

province. Why don’t you talk about that as well? 

 

Even though we may not be as involved with science and tech, 

up until this year . . . Well for the current year we have still 

funded offices of research at both the University of Regina and 

the University of Saskatchewan. That was a term arrangement 

which is now completed. We might be down in some of those 

areas but consider moneys that are going forward from other 

areas of government; and a good example, of course, is the 

agricultural college. 

 

We still continue to fund research chairs at both universities. 

And also there is money that is being expended as far as 

research into programming, I suppose, if you will, at the 

institutes of science and technology. So there sometimes has to 

be a change. We have to make sure that we are meeting the 

needs of today, and because the needs were one thing five years 

ago doesn’t mean that they’re the same today, and there’s no 

area where it’s changing faster than in the area of research and 

development. So we have to try and keep pace with the times 

and provide the programs that are geared to meet today’s needs. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, that’s precisely my concern and 

that’s why I raised the issue, because unless we’re funding 

research and development in the university community, we 

aren’t going to have research and development taking place 

across the rest of the province. 

 

It has been said that students are to the spread of high 

technology as mosquitoes are to the spread of malaria. It means 

that there’s simply no substitute for funding research and 

development work in the university community, and that’s a 

disturbing trajectory that I pick up from the statistical 

information compiled by your department. And it’s not just 

with respect to the university. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2575 

 

I do give credit to you. The same table indicates that funding is 

up for hospitals and health organizations and that’s only as it 

should be. Thank God, with the kinds of cut-backs we’ve had in 

health care, that you’ve managed to keep funding for hospitals’ 

and health organizations’ own research and development work 

up. 

 

But then when I . . . I can also give credit where credit is due, in 

terms of funding being up quite dramatically from some $4 

million to $6 million at the Saskatchewan Research Council. 

And that’s a positive development. But it’s down in other 

sectors. And if we, if we add the total up, we note that in 

‘85-86, less was spent on research and development activities 

by the Government of Saskatchewan in all sciences than in the 

previous year, ‘84-85 – only marginally, I’ll admit to that, but I 

raise it as a disturbing trend. 

 

And I urge you to fight tooth and nail with your cabinet 

colleagues, and with the Premier himself, to arrest these kinds 

of dangerous trajectories which are really a reversal of the kinds 

of increases that have occurred over the last decade. We now 

see a reversal of that trajectory and that, I think, is very 

disturbing. 

 

You mentioned that your department had done some funding in 

the area of agriculture, you believed, at the two universities. 

Yes, I’ve noted also that that was the case. That in terms of the 

objectives of Science and Technology departmental 

expenditures for all sciences, the objectives, that there’s really 

been a massive consolidation by the department to the point 

where funding now is provided, if we’re looking at the global 

arenas which the department funds – projects. For the general 

advancement of science, that’s one arena. The only other arena 

is manufacturing for ’85-86. 

 

Gone from the previous year is any funding for energy 

conservation, for fossil fuels, for renewable resources and other 

energy and fuel research. Gone is agricultural research from the 

departmental budget. And I simply ask you, why is it that the 

departmental expenditures on all sciences have been 

consolidated into two arenas – the general advancement of 

science, which has declined in funding, and the enormous 

inflation of figures for manufacturing. It’s table 14 on the 

survey results. I should have mentioned that earlier to you. 

 

So we have a situation where three-quarters of the total of all 

government expenditure by the Department of Science and 

Technology go to the manufacturing segment of the economy. 

And I wonder if you could comment on that, why you’ve 

abandoned these other areas. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the 

member’s question, there’s no doubt that there have been some 

cut-backs by other departments. And when you consider the 

economic situation that we have right now where you know full 

well what effect it has had on my department as far as some of 

the cut-backs, 25 per cent cut-back as far as moneys available 

for program – we certainly know that most other departments 

have been affected to some degree as well. And that obviously 

is going to have an impact on the amount of money that’s 

available for research. But it’s a matter of taking fewer  

dollars and spreading it around to get the maximum impact 

from it. 

 

I would indicate though that some of the areas that you have 

raised concerns about when you talk about fossil fuels research 

and a resource technology, that we have the Saskatchewan 

Research Council that is very involved in doing research in 

those particular areas. And there’s no doubt about it that when 

you have one agency involved in providing that kind of service, 

that we certainly cannot afford to have duplication. So simply 

because we are maybe not involved in it doesn’t mean that 

somebody else isn’t doing it, but there is no doubt that other 

departments, as I said, have been affected, and there is not as 

much money being spent on research this year. 

 

I would point out as well that a good deal of the funds, as far as 

research and universities is concerned, is from the federal 

government – and I’m sure that you’re well aware of that – and 

as I understand it, that the research funding is up 23 per cent as 

far as the federal government is concerned, so that has a very 

definite spill-over to universities that we have here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well I’m certainly aware that the federal 

government is involved in research spending, too. I think the 

arena for our immediate concern is provincial funding, of 

course. And my concern is that the department . . . it’s not just 

the Department of Science and Technology alone that seems to 

be pulling away from the funding for these other sectors. I 

noted from the same tables found in the ‘85-86 survey results of 

scientific activities, that the decreases in funding for areas like 

agriculture and energy have in fact not been picked up from 

these statistical tables, and from what I’ve been able to 

determine, by the Department of Agriculture or the Department 

of Energy. 

 

(2015) 

 

Neither can we look to other government departments, the 

aggregate of government spending in these areas, for increased 

spending to pick up that slack. 

 

So we have a situation in which the Department of Science and 

Technology is spending less for agricultural and energy 

research and development; we have the departments of 

Agriculture and Energy themselves spending less; and we have 

the aggregate of all government spending in these areas down 

from what it was in ’84-86. And these are very dangerous 

trajectories – that’s simply my point – given the importance of 

these arenas for the provincial economy. 

 

I’d like to take a bit of time and to talk about what’s happening 

at the University of Saskatchewan, since that’s such a vital 

institution for the research community and the scientific 

community in the province. You will know, of course, that 

high-tech communities tend to gravitate and build around 

metropolitan areas that have one principal characteristic, and 

that is a strong post-secondary system. Without that kind of 

strong educational system, you simply can’t have a high-tech 

community. That was the case in Silicone Valley, the building 

around Palo Alto and Stanford University; that was the case in 

large measure with the  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2576 

 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard in the 

north-east. It’s the case in Eastern Canada with the University 

of Ottawa and Carleton, and the Kannata high-tech firms. 

 

But can you tell me, Mr. Minister, when we don’t just have 

cut-backs from the Department of Science and Technology or 

the Department of Agriculture or the aggregate of government 

spending for research and development, but at the same time we 

have massive cut-backs in funding for the University of 

Saskatchewan, how can we possibly hope to sustain and 

stimulate high-technological development here in Saskatchewan 

when we’re starving our post-secondary educational system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to point 

out to the hon. member a couple of things. 

 

We’ve been very involved with the offices of university 

research at both Regina and the University of Saskatchewan as 

I’ve indicated, and I know that the positive impact that this has 

had at the University of Saskatchewan alone is that over the 

period, that their funds have increased over $30 million, as far 

as research coming into the university is concerned. Now the 

understanding of course was that this was a three-year program 

that we participated in. That time has now expired but I think 

the ideas that the office can now stand by itself and that there 

will still be a very strong effort put forward to attract those 

badly needed, as you say, research funds. 

 

In looking at some of the tables, in talking about some of the 

expenditures that there have been as far as research is concerned 

over the years, I would point out to you that for 1983-84 that 

the total expenditures were in the neighbourhood just a little 

over $54 million. This is by all departments and agencies. In 

’84-85 it was in excess of $61 million; ’85-86 was in excess of 

$76 million. So you’re talking about decreases, and yet the 

information that I have here would show that the total research 

expenditures by the various departments and agencies in the 

province have indeed been increasing each year. 

 

And I think the information that I have here is that for the 

current year, that we would be looking at total expenditures in 

the neighbourhood of over $90 million. So in that period of 

time, Mr. Chairman, from ’83-84 up until the current year, 

we’ve seen expenditures going from $54 million to an estimate 

for this current year of over $90 million. So there’s still a very 

strong commitment by the government in so far as research is 

concerned. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well I’m open to be corrected, and I would 

very much appreciate it if you have that kind of information. I 

don’t want to be misinformed, and if you can supply that kind 

of information to set me straight, I would certainly welcome 

that. 

 

Quite frankly, I found it a bit surprising that funding was down. 

I would like to believe that you’re right, that funding is up. I say 

this because I’ve read a number of reports, such as the report 

put out by the association of professional engineers, which 

expresses great concern  

about the lack of adequate funding at our two universities here 

in Saskatchewan. Are you aware of that report, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No, we’re not. We’d appreciate it if 

you could send us a copy over. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I don’t have a copy that I can share with you 

right now, but I certainly will give you a copy. 

 

I’ll just summarize the results then. The Canadian Engineering 

Accreditation Board has formally advised both the U of S and 

the U of R engineering programs, and I quote from a 

Star-Phoenix article of July 4, 1987: 

 

. . . that the Canadian Engineering Accreditation Board has 

advised both the Saskatoon and Regina university 

engineering programs that standards are declining and that 

continued decline at the current rate will place their 

programs below minimum levels required for accreditation 

in as little as four to eight years. 

 

The report from the engineers goes on to say essentially that 

engineers are the principal implementors of technology, and we 

can ill afford not to fund our university communities; 

particularly in this instance, the engineering segment. 

 

And I would go on and quote another study. Is the minister 

aware of the Canadian Manufacturers’ Association study, “The 

importance of post-secondary education – keeping Canada 

competitive”? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, we are aware of that 

study. We don’t have it here with us, but I would like to pick up 

on something that you were indicating with regard to a report 

back in July with regard to the College of Engineering at the 

University of Saskatchewan. And I believe that this was a 

concern that was raised and addressed during the estimates of 

the Department of Education. But I’m sure the member 

opposite is well aware of the fact that university spending in 

this province has increased dramatically over the term of this 

government. And having served on the board of governors for 

four years, I can assure you that as far as the allocation of funds 

to the various colleges, are at the discretion of the 

administration. 

 

Certainly we would all like to have more money to spend in 

various areas, and I’m sure that each college on the campus at 

the University of Saskatchewan would like to have more funds. 

But the fact of the matter is that there’s only so much money to 

go around, and the people have to do the best that they can with 

what they’ve got, the same as the rest of us do. 

 

Engineering, undoubtedly, is a very, very important sector as 

far as advanced technology is concerned. And we must ensure 

that there is as much money as possible made available to that 

particular college and the types of research that go on there. But 

there has been a commitment by this government to provide 

additional funds for post-secondary education, and the 

University of Saskatchewan certainly has been the beneficiary 

of those increased funds. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2577 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Now I don’t want to get into arguing 

educational funding. Rather than do that, I guess what I’d like 

to do, Mr. Minister, is encourage you to fight with your 

colleagues tooth and nail, and I know that you have educational 

interests and experience working within the educational 

community and with the board of governors in the university. 

All the more reason for you to be the individual to stand with 

the Minister of Education and fight against further erosion of 

our educational standards at the U of S. It’s very, very 

revealing, when I read a report by The Canadian Manufacturers’ 

Association put out in March of this year, that it points out the 

other importance, the critical importance of government 

funding for post-secondary education, and goes on to talk about 

the kinds of liaison that needs to be developed between the 

academic community and the industrial community. And I think 

that . . . I’d urge you and your departmental staff if you haven’t 

had a look at this, I think you could glean some good initiatives 

for the departmental agenda in the months ahead. 

 

Just touching base for a moment with respect to a different 

aspect of the university community, one of the summary 

suggestions coming out of the National Science and 

Technology Policy Forum in Winnipeg in June of last year was: 

 

That universities and colleges should play a larger role in 

diffusing innovation and technology. Student exchange 

programs were cited as a useful diffusion mechanism. 

Students are to technology as mosquitoes are to malaria, as 

one participant put it. 

 

I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, have you or the department 

looked at ways of keying in on this critical suggestion made at 

the policy conference, looked at ways of using students for 

technological diffusion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would thank the 

member opposite for his suggestions in so far as the type of 

collaboration he’s suggesting and consultation. And I, in fact, 

think that at some point in the near future, it would probably be 

a good idea to bring, if you will, a group of people from the 

general public together and discuss some of the concerns that 

they may have as far as high tech is concerned, I would also 

point out that we’re very proud of the fact that the 

Saskatchewan model of advanced technology has built into it 

some of the very things that he’s been raising. 

 

We talk about university and industry collaboration that’s 

taking place today. We know that there’s a place for 

government and industry and the universities to be involved in 

developing programs and working towards newer ideas and 

areas that . . . where there can be a transfer to business at large. 

 

So we’re very pleased with that model. In fact, that’s the model 

that has been used by several other provinces across the 

country. And I would point out as well that, as I indicated 

earlier, that we have been involved with funding chairs on the 

two university campuses, and this of course is where you bring 

industry on campus, and that has had a very positive effect. 

One other area, of course, that there has been a certain amount 

done, and that’s with graduate students, and going out and 

working with the industry. And I think that’s an area that could 

be expanded, probably, giving graduate students – whether it be 

in engineering or computer technology or science, whatever the 

case might be – if they could have that opportunity to go out 

into the work place and become involved in an internship 

program with some of the advanced-tech companies, I’m sure 

that that would be very advantageous. 

 

So there are areas there that we can look at and expand a lot 

further into. I would indicate in closing that representatives 

from the Department of Science and Technology here in 

Saskatchewan did participate in the Winnipeg conference and 

played a leading role in some of the discussions there. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I think what remains, Mr. Minister, is to act 

on that suggestion, though. And in terms of the students in 

industry, graduates in industry program, it really doesn’t fall 

directly under the purview of your department, but it had to do 

with the Saskatchewan Research Council and the Employment 

Development Agency. 

 

(2030) 

 

I’m sure the minister is aware that funding for that program has 

been cut. A valuable program, as you indicated, if we’re talking 

about the same program, but that program is now history. It 

needs to be reinstated. And I say to you that you and your 

department are the people to fight with this government to see 

that it’s reinstated. I can advocate that but I can’t effect that 

change. That would be my priority that I would commend to 

you. And we need that kind of program, so that’s one positive 

suggestion I could make. Engage, first of all, the department . . . 

Let’s say this. First of all, engage in consultation in the 

academic community, with students themselves, as to what kind 

of program might help diffuse technology. Don’t just talk to the 

technological sector. Follow the lead of the national policy 

forum. 

 

Secondly, reinstate the students in industry, graduates in 

industry program again. Reinstate funding for that. 

 

Thirdly, I would suggest another practical, positive step toward 

equipping Saskatchewan young people for a technological 

future. I would suggest, very specifically, that you and your 

department use these next two or three months, before the end 

of the year, to research and to plan and prepare a summer 

employment program for students, specifically in the area of 

science and technology to assist small firms, as you say. I can 

think of no better way for your department to spend money than 

to invest it in the education of young people and at the same 

time assist Saskatchewan firms. 

 

We have a base to prepare young people for a whole lifetime 

career, potentially, in science and technology, and to give them 

first-hand experience with Saskatchewan companies, hopefully, 

so that they won’t leave the province when they graduate – that 

they themselves help to build that technological community. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2578 

 

And I know that you and your staff are able and committed to 

the research community. Use the next months to prepare that 

kind of program. Consult with the people in the academic 

community, in the student community, in the research 

community, and put together a program for students, especially 

over the summer months. 

 

And I think that in this regard, there are some Saskatchewan 

firms that might be able to use students on more than just a 

summer basis, and look at ways and means -–imaginative ways 

– of integrating them into the mainstreams of technological 

development and research work here in Saskatchewan. The 

dividends will be repaid a thousand times. 

 

I think this is all the more important, Mr. Minister, when we 

note that your government cut funding for summer jobs from 

$13.7 million last year to just over $4 million. So there’s a 

crying need to do something in this area. There’s a positive role 

that you and your department can play in fostering an 

environment for technological development. 

 

I don’t know if you have any comments on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s no 

doubt about it that as far as the education is concerned and the 

importance of it, that will continue to be a commitment of this 

government, and keeping funds in place that will meet the needs 

of today’s young people. 

 

I would point out that I feel the member opposite is raising 

some very good concerns, and one area that we’ve been very 

concerned about and are discussing it and looking ahead to 

programs for next summer. I feel that we do have a definite role 

to encourage companies to participate, again a part of this 

industry-university collaboration, encouraging companies then 

to take some of these graduate students – or they may not 

necessarily be graduate students; they could be possibly second- 

or third-year students as far as engineering or computer science 

is concerned – and giving them that opportunity to work with 

their companies in the summer. And in all probability some of 

them are doing that right now. 

 

But we talk about the moneys that we’re spending on the 

research chairs of the university. This is, as I said, a type of 

university-industry collaboration. I would think that as time 

goes on, there would be a possibility that this department could 

take some of those funds and use them for the type of thing that 

you’re suggesting and getting students involved in a summer 

program. We can participate, help to participate in some ways 

with giving some funding to the program, but I think the greater 

part will be encouraging companies to get involved. 

 

One of the programs that we’re looking at is the Shad Valley 

program that is being operated quite successfully in several of 

the other Canadian provinces, but hasn’t to this point been 

active in Saskatchewan. And that’s one that we’re certainly 

looking at for next summer. The advisory council on science 

and technology is a body that we would want to have involved 

in this area too, in making recommendations to us as to how this 

program could be the most effective in Saskatchewan. 

So I think you raised a good point, and it is something that 

we’re aware of and are putting plans in place so that we can get 

something operating next summer. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Good show. Good show. That’s wonderful. 

 

Turning away from students for a moment, I’d just like to touch 

very briefly on the prairie agricultural machine testing institute 

in Humboldt. I know that it’s not directly your responsibility as 

Minister for Science and Technology, but I also note that in 

departmental literature, PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery 

Institute) is referred to as one of the 16 research and 

development centres in Saskatchewan. It’s noted, for example, 

that PAMI is the only test centre sanctioned by the Organization 

for Economic Co-operation and Development – the only, the 

only independent farm equipment testing agency in North 

America, and as such represents a tremendous contribution, not 

just to the Saskatchewan economy, but the Canadian economy 

as a whole, in terms of certifying the export of certain kinds of 

machinery to countries all over the world. Have you, Mr. 

Minister, been able to make any representations to the Minister 

of Agriculture with respect to the termination of funding for 

PAMI? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, no one can argue 

with the fact that the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute in 

Humboldt has played a very major role as far as testing of 

various types of agricultural equipment is concerned. And they 

do have a world-wide reputation. 

 

As you well know, the announcements were made earlier this 

year that the province of Alberta was getting out of the program 

and that Saskatchewan was also looking at that as far as the 

Department of Agriculture is concerned. And I would simply 

indicate to the member opposite that discussions are ongoing 

between the Department of Science and Technology and the 

Department of Agriculture reviewing the situation as it exists, 

looking at different options, looking at the types of programs 

that should be continued, and that we can still maintain as a 

viable operation. 

 

But to this point, there has not been any definite decision 

reached, but discussions are going on and there is the 

recognition that there are very valuable services being provided 

by PAMI. And so that will be carried on in the months ahead, 

and I would think that before too much longer there should be 

some type of an announcement as to how the programs are 

going to be funded. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well hopefully the announcement as to how 

they’re going to be funded will be that PAMI will continue to 

receive its full share of funding by the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and that the Government of Saskatchewan 

should have lobbied long and hard with the Government of 

Alberta to maintain their funding. 

 

We can’t overestimate . . . It would be very difficult to 

overestimate the kind of contribution that PAMI makes to the 

technological community, the industrial community, the 

agricultural community, the export community in 

Saskatchewan. This is another score as on which you – I  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2579 

 

think it needs to be said – will need to link arms with the 

Minister of Agriculture and really go to bat for PAMI and try to 

maintain some sustaining level of funding for it to allow it to 

continue the work it’s doing, if not to build on it. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I’d like to talk about one particular 

company, and that company is Joytec. And I’d like to begin by 

saying, for the record, with no equivocation, that I wish Joytec 

well. I hope to see Joytec succeed. I hope to see production 

begin there. I hope to see Saskatchewan people employed there 

in assembling the golf simulators. I hope to see Saskatchewan 

benefit economically from Joytec. 

 

But I do have some questions, and I do have some concerns, 

and I don’t know whether you share these questions or 

concerns, but I think that it behoves both of us to protect the 

interest of Saskatchewan taxpayers and the people who have 

invested – the Saskatchewan people – who have invested in this 

company, and the people who are presently working for it, the 

people who hope to work for it in the months and hopefully in 

the years to come. 

 

And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, do you have any perspectives as 

to why no production has taken place yet at Joytec? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, this is something that 

has been discussed with the hon. member before, and I certainly 

am as anxious as you are that Joytec will be successful. But at 

the same time, I think we have to recognize the fact that there’s 

a great deal of risk as far as the advanced technology sector is 

concerned. 

 

We have a company here that’s involved with a very specialized 

type of equipment, and as you well know there’s a lot of 

research and development that is necessary in fine tuning a 

piece of equipment such as this. But from the information that I 

have, Joytec is at the present time looking into all of the options 

that they have as far as the distribution is concerned. 

 

It’s my understanding that they have been successful with 

reaching an agreement with a Japanese firm to produce the 

machines in Japan for sale in that particular corner of the world. 

They have also been in discussions and, as I understand, have 

also reached an agreement with Computech to provide the 

machines, probably manufacturing them and distributing them, 

in eastern Canada and the eastern United States. As far as 

western Canada and the western part of the United States, the 

machines are going to be manufactured in Saskatoon, and the 

latest word that I’ve had on that is the fact that they will be 

going into production some time is November. 

 

But for the last couple of years they have been doing research 

and development, getting rid of the bugs. And there’s not much 

point in going into production until you have the piece of 

equipment in the type of condition that you want, that is going 

to be attractive to buyers wherever they might be. So that’s the 

latest information I have. The company is going ahead and I 

don’t have any further information. 

Mr. Koenker: — My concern, Mr. Minister, is when we are 

really going to see production begin, and I sincerely hope that it 

will begin in November. I note however, that we were told 

initially that Joytec would be producing some 600 machines in 

the first three months of 1977. In December of ’86 the Joytec 

business plan indicated that by March 30, the first run of 25 

units would be completed followed by another 75 units. On 

Monday, June 22 of this year at the Joytec annual general 

meeting the president of Technigen, the parent company of 

Joytec, told shareholders, by the end of September, 15 machines 

a month would be produced out of the Saskatoon facility. 

 

(2045) 

 

A June Technigen VSE (Vancouver Stock Exchange) filing 

statement noted that production was to commence in October of 

’87. And now my understanding is, from the people at Joytec, 

that it will be late November before we see production. Do you 

have any assurances that production will be beginning in fact by 

the end of this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have any 

assurances that production will begin, other than what I’ve 

already indicated. But I would point out to the hon. member that 

when we’re talking about companies that are involved with 

advanced technology, and where there’s a tremendous amount 

of risk involved, that there’s never any guarantee that a 

particular product or process is going to be successful. In fact, 

I’m sure that many good ideas have probably died on the 

drawing board, and other ideas may have reached the stage 

where a prototype was developed. But beyond that, there may 

have been a product that was produced that was a very good 

product, but because of other factors, whether it was poor 

marketing or poor management, or whatever the case might 

have been, the product just never really got off the shelf. 

 

So it’s pretty difficult when we’re talking about an industry 

where we have the amount of risks that there is, to give any 

kind of assurances or guarantees that a product is going to be 

ready for market at any particular time. I don’t have any doubts 

but what the people involved with Joytec felt quite sincerely 

that they would have their product up and going months ago, 

but as sometimes the case may be, snags can develop. 

 

We’re talking about a very sophisticated type of equipment, and 

many little things can go wrong, and a lot of details have to be 

worked out. But I’m sure that it’s very frustrating for people 

that develop machines such as this, that they can’t always get 

them out just as soon as they would like. But certainly I can’t 

give you any assurances and I don’t imagine that they can, that 

they will be into production, whether it’s the middle of 

November or the end of November, or just exactly what the 

date will be. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Perhaps this is something a bit closer to 

home, Mr. Minister. Can you clarify for us tonight the funding 

that Joytec has received from the Government of 

Saskatchewan? Let’s start with the Department of Science and 

Technology. What funds has Joytec received to date from the 

Department of Science and Technology? 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2580 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the funds that Joytec 

has received to date: in March 1984, they received a grant from 

Science and Technology in the amount of $7,000; in January of 

1985, they received another grant for $6,454; in January of 

1986, they received a grant of $38,546; and October 1986, a 

grant through ERDA (Economic and Regional Development 

Agreement) of $24,588; for a total of $76,588. 

 

In addition to that, in January of 1986 they had received 

bridging capital in the amount of $60,000 from the provincial 

government, through my department. But that, of course, is the 

same as a loan, and since that time that money has all been paid 

back. So as far as the funding is concerned that they have 

received, it was an amount of $76,588. 

 

I would simply indicate to the member opposite as well, that I 

know that he has sincere concerns about the company of Joytec. 

But I can assure the member that the amount of attention that 

the company has been receiving over the last few months, on 

the part of the opposition, certainly has been very, very 

negative, and I’m sure that it has no doubt had a negative 

impact on the investor confidence in that particular company. 

And I think that you have to consider that fact when you’re 

dealing with a company like Joytec. I think it’s unfortunate that 

a particular company is picked on in the way that this one has 

over the last few months, and really I can’t really see the 

reasoning behind it, in that we are talking abut a high-tech firm 

in the same that way we’d be talking about any other of the 

170-some-odd companies that we’ve got in this province. 

 

And some certainly are much more successful than others, and 

some of them had their products on the market sooner than 

others, but they’re not all 100 per cent successful in the time 

that they would hope to be successful. So I think it is 

unfortunate that there has been negative attention put on this 

company over the last number of months, because at this point 

in time, we have no reason to believe that they will not be into 

production within the next short while and the fact that it will 

be a very successful company and they will have generated a 

fair bit of revenue for this province, and will also provide a fair 

number of jobs for people in the Saskatoon area. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I have one point of clarification. I note that in 

the ’85-86 annual report for the Department of Science and 

Technology, page 24, Table 1, Joytec has received $45,000 in 

two industrial research contractual grants. Now that’s the only 

figure that doesn’t match with what you indicated earlier, unless 

somehow that full amount wasn’t allocated. What’s the 

explanation in that regard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the figure that the 

member opposite is quoting, the $45,000, was made up of the 

two IRAP (industrial research and assistance program) grants, 

one of 6,454 and the other of 38,546. The other one that I 

indicated here, the ERDA grant, they had originally put in for 

$32,263, but, in fact, only drew $24,588 of that original request. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Am I to understand then that that 45,000  

that’s referred to on Table 1, page 24 of the ’85-86 annual 

report, is taken care of or detailed again in the public accounts 

reckoning of funds received form the Saskatchewan Heritage 

Fund, research and development division? Because I note that 

in Public Accounts, Volume 3, page 613, we have the figure 

from the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund, research and 

development division, of 38,546 for Joytec. So is that simply a 

duplication of those two figures? Or are they, in fact, two 

separate grants that were given to the company? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — I think for clarification that in all 

probability the . . . When I indicated January ’85, the 6,454 was 

probably when the money was committed by the department, 

but it was not drawn until after April 1, 1985, so that would 

have put it into that fiscal year. So if you add those two figures 

together, even though they had applied for it and it was 

committed by the department in January, if they didn’t draw on 

it until after April 1, it would have then been included in the 

’85-86 fiscal year, and when you add those two together, that’s 

where you get the $45,000. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well, I note then that apart from the $60,000 

that Joytec received in bridging capital, which was a loan from 

the Government of Saskatchewan, another $60,000 from the 

federal government which was a loan under the bridging capital 

program, both of which were repaid, that the company has 

received in the neighbourhood of $200,000 when you add 

together the federal funds that have been received under IRAP 

programs and Department of Regional Industrial Expansion 

programs. 

 

I note that, just to begin with, the company received a tax . . . 

The taxpayers have lost over $1 million worth of tax revenue, 

given the venture capital nature of this firm where $3.75 million 

was raised with a 30 per cent tax credit, which means that 

$1.125 million was lost to the provincial treasury in order to 

form this company to begin with. And so my case is that the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer has a rather substantial investment in 

this company in terms of lost potential tax revenue under the 

venture capital program, in terms of direct provincial 

government funding, but also in terms of federal government 

funds that have been put into this company. And therein stems a 

good measure of my concern as an elected representative 

answerable to the public. 

 

And I’ll simply leave the financial figures at that and move on 

to some questions about the participation of Joytec in the 

Premier’s trip to Japan. Can you tell us which members of 

Joytec’s firm were involved in the high-tech mission to Japan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would point 

out to the member opposite that it was purely coincidental that 

Joytec and the Premier happened to be in Japan at the same 

time. Joytec representatives, Joytec representatives went on 

their own to Japan, I think a couple of weeks prior to the 

Premier being there, and it’s my understanding that at least one 

of them was there for another two or three weeks after in 

negotiations, involved with negotiations with the Japanese. So, I 

mean to link the two of them together, there is no relationship in 

so far as Joytec representatives being within the Premier’s 

group at  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2581 

 

all. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — This is odd, Mr. Minister, because I note in 

the Science and Technology publication Frontiers, from July 

’87, page 7, that under the article on that page entitled, 

“Saskatchewan firms sell technology to Japan,” under the list of 

– how many firms do we have here? – seven advanced 

technology firms, Joytec is listed as the first one that partook in 

a recent high-tech mission to Japan, April 9 to 17. And I’m 

wondering, then, how it is that you can say that there is merely 

coincidence when the article goes on to say that the profile of 

the high-tech mission to Japan – and I’m quoting now: 

 

. . . was increased when it overlapped with the Premier’s 

visit to Japan April 3 to 15. Premier Devine was in Japan 

to promote Saskatchewan’s trade and economic interests 

in that country. 

 

Was it sheer coincidence? Or was it not a result of the 

Government of Saskatchewan high-tech mission to Japan that 

Joytec participated in that, and not as coincidence but as a direct 

consequence and component of the Premier’s trip to Japan, that 

Joytec happened to go to Japan? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’ve 

already indicated to the member opposite that it was purely 

coincidental. The delegation that you point out to here in this 

particular pamphlet was headed up by Economic Development 

and Trade, and it was purely coincidental that the Premier was 

there at the same time. And as it indicated in the same article, 

that the Premier was promoting trade with Japan, and certainly 

one of the areas that he was promoting was high technology. So 

there was, other than that, no link-up. This was a delegation 

headed by Economic Development and Trade. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, who 

participated in that mission sponsored by Economic 

Development and Trade? Which Joytec representatives 

participated in that mission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we don’t 

have that information with us this evening, but we can get it and 

provide it for the member opposite or he can, as indicated, wait 

until estimates for Economic Development and Trade. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well I’d certainly appreciate it. It would be 

easier if you could get that information for me and supply it. 

That would certainly be easier. Does the minister know whether 

there were representatives of that mission, the total mission of 

seven companies visiting Japan, accompanying the Premier in 

his visits to various Japanese companies? Were they, strictly 

speaking, two separate missions, or were there points at which 

they linked up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — I’m informed that the only function 

where there was any overlap with the Premier’s group was the 

function that was hosted by the chamber of commerce. But we 

can certainly get that information and  

send it over to the member. We don’t have it with us here. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I note, Mr. Minister, that when he was in 

Japan on April 9, the Premier did discuss the Joytec golf 

simulator with the people from Marubeni. I’m wondering if you 

know the gist of those discussions and can comment on the kind 

of development that flowed, the kind of contact that was made 

as a result of those discussions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I have no 

doubt but what there were discussions between the Premier and 

the Marubeni corporation because the province of 

Saskatchewan is involved with different ventures with that 

particular company. 

 

But as far as Joytec is concerned, I’m fully aware of the fact 

that at least one of the representatives of the Joytec company 

did have meetings with the Marubeni corporation, and I believe 

the information that I have that Marubeni will probably be 

involved with the distribution of the machines in Japan. But 

that’s information that we can probably check out further and 

pass on to the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Does the minister know whether in fact a 

distribution agreement has been signed with Marubeni? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I believe that 

this particular question would be better put forward to the 

officials from Joytec to find out what arrangements have been 

made, what contracts have been signed, and that sort of thing. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, I note that the Premier 

seems to have a rather keen interest in this firm, Joytec. Are you 

aware that the Premier toured the Joytec plant in Saskatoon on 

February 26, 1987? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’m well 

aware that the Premier toured Joytec on that particular date 

because I was there on the same date. And I would also point 

out to other members of this House that I’m fully aware that the 

Opposition House Leader and yourself have been invited to 

visit Joytec and see the facilities and to try out the machine as 

well. And I hope that you have an opportunity to do that or take 

advantage of the opportunity within the near future so that 

you’ll have a better understanding of the product that we’re 

talking and the type of potential that does exist in that particular 

product. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Is the minister aware that on the day after his 

visit to the Joytec plant in Saskatoon with the Premier, that on 

February 27 Joytec laid off seven production employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’m well 

aware of that fact, and as I understand it, that it may be possible 

that some of those employees have been rehired since that time. 

And when they get into production, of course, there will be a 

need for many more workers. But during the last few months 

the majority of the people that have been required at Joytec are 

people in the area of research and development. And as a result, 

then, they found it necessary to lay off some of their other  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2582 

 

employees. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Is the minister aware of employees at Joytec 

contacting either himself or the Premier’s office with respect to 

the laying off of these employees back in February 1987? Had 

you been contacted? My understanding is that the Premier has 

had representations and was told that they were going to be laid 

off the very day that he toured the plant. The people have called 

attention to some concerns, and they haven’t been responded to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I am 

certainly not aware of any representations that have been made 

to the Premier’s office, and I can assure you that there have 

been none made to my office. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, the reason I ask about the 

Premier’s involvement is because there are some questions 

surrounding some of the claims that Joytec has made with 

respect to its deal with Marubeni. I’m sure you’re aware that 

back on April Fools’ Day, April 1, in 1986 . . . that on February 

17 Technigen corporation announced a deal, a distribution 

agreement, a sales agreement with Marubeni that subsequently 

was the result of investigation in April by the Vancouver Stock 

Exchange; that on April 21, Technigen trading was halted on 

the VSE, in large measure because of claims that Technigen had 

made about having a deal signed, sealed and delivered with 

Marubeni, when in fact that was not the case; when in fact 

Marubeni officials stated that Marubeni was only doing 

marketing research and had not yet decided to actually market 

the machine; that the VSE regulators were concerned about 

some of these claims made by Technigen in terms of its 

overestimated evaluation of the deals with Marubeni. Are you 

aware of those kinds of developments with respect to the 

Marubeni deal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’m well 

aware of the information that the member opposite is putting 

forth with relation to Technigen. But I also am aware of the fact 

that there have been a lot of allegations made about the 

president of Technigen that have been denied. And in fact it’s 

my understanding that a court case is also pending with regard 

to some of those allegations. So I think that it’s something that 

there’s much more there that has been put forward for reasons 

that are probably more political in nature than anything else. 

And I think it’s unfortunate that the member continues to raise 

this as it relates to Joytec, because some of it, of course, has 

been denied, as I say, by the individual, and in fact he can’t 

really indicate at this point that all of this information is factual. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, I simply raise these 

questions to alert you to some of the concerns that are in the 

public arena about Technigen corporation and Marubeni. I’m 

glad to hear that you are aware of some of the circumstances 

surrounding the Marubeni deal, or announcement by Technigen 

last spring, because we still have yet, as I understand it and 

apparently as you understand it, to have a firm distribution 

agreement between Technigen and Marubeni. And that has been 

in the works now since – what was the date – February 17 when 

it was first announced, and didn’t in fact exist at  

that time. 

 

I’m wondering if the minister can tell us anything about the 

Technigen deal with Christec corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, as I 

understand it, Technigen is involved with many, many other 

companies. I am not aware of the company that the member 

opposite is referring to. I would think that our main concern at 

this point in time is Joytec, which is a Saskatchewan company 

which has a product that it hopes to be producing within the 

next short number of weeks, and I would think that as soon as 

that happens that the member opposite will see that this is a 

good company, it’s a viable company, and I would certainly 

wish it every success as it moves ahead. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that you 

don’t appear to know anything about Christec, I can share with 

you a bit of information, factual information. On January 20, 

1987, Christec was incorporated in British Columbia. And on 

January 29, 1987, Technigen announced a $2.5 million 

distribution agreement to deliver 300 machines – that’s nine 

days after it was incorporated. 

 

If you were to try to locate Christec Marketing, the address is at 

700 – 815 West Hastings Street in Vancouver. And if you were 

to walk by there, 700 – 815 West Hastings, you would find 

Evergreen Business Centre. 

 

(2115) 

 

Evergreen Business Centre, from my investigation, handles 

business mail and phone calls for 13 different firms such as 

Notorious Records, and the Great Aussie Football Tour. If you 

look at the 1987 Vancouver criss-cross reference directory 

under the address 700 – 815 West Hastings, you’ll find that 

Christec Marketing Limited is not, in fact, listed. So this is the 

second company that Technigen has a distribution agreement 

with. And I point out to you that it’s only a distribution 

agreement. We have yet, as I understand it, to have any sales 

resulting from any of these distribution agreements. 

 

Is the minister aware of any of the details surrounding the 

Technigen distribution agreement with Computech? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’m not 

aware of the details, and I would suggest that these 

negotiations, of course, between two companies are generally 

quite confidential. But I would suggest to the member opposite 

that this kind of information, if Joytec wants to release it, that 

you contact the officials at Joytec. 

 

And I certainly am not aware of the details now, but even if I 

were, I don’t think that I would be in a position to release that 

type of information. If they want to release it, then I’d suggest 

that you contact them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I would 

like to point out to the hon. member from Saskatoon Nutana 

that if she wants to get into the debate, I’d welcome it. 

 

I would also like to indicate that even though Saskatchewan 

might be a leader as far as advanced technology is concerned, 

that it would appear from the  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2583 

 

hockey score that I’ve just received that Canada is also well 

ahead of any other country in the world, that they have defeated 

the Soviet Union, six to five. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I realize that you aren’t in a 

position to provide extensive information on the internal 

workings of Joytec itself. My concern is that you are in a 

position to provide funding and taxpayers’ money to any 

number of Saskatchewan firms, and that I have a related 

responsibility to share with you any information that I have 

relative to the welfare of Saskatchewan taxpayers and the health 

of the Saskatchewan business community. 

 

If I can share some information with you on Computech – I 

have a Technigen news release dated August 18, 1987, that 

notes that Computech is a computer product; I quote: 

 

Is a computer product company as well as a value-added 

distributor of many of the leading mainframe and 

minicomputers. 

 

I interject that no one in the computer industry that I have 

talked to has ever heard of Computech, including the, according 

to my information, the business manager of the Mississauga 

News. Computech is located in Mississauga; he has never heard 

of Computech. The press release goes on to read, and I quote: 

 

Computech has been in the high technology field for many 

years and has established a broad base distribution 

network with offices located throughout the world. 

 

I interject that Computech was incorporated on November 23, 

1984, less than three years ago; I hardly think that qualifies it 

for having been in business many years. 

 

The further point that Computech has a broad based distribution 

network with offices located throughout the world – in 

contacting Computech, my understanding is that they have an 

office in Vancouver, two offices in the States, and one in South 

America. That is their world broadly based distribution system 

with offices throughout the world. My research shows me that 

the Vancouver address, in fashion similar to Christec, is simply 

a mailing address and phone number in Vancouver. In 

attempting to find out from Computech their offices in the 

States, they’re only able to say that one of their offices is in 

Buffalo, New York. They can’t say where their other office is. 

When you phone directory information for Buffalo, New York, 

and ask for Computech, there’s no such firm listed. They are 

able to tell us, however, that their office in South America is 

located in Ecuador, although they can’t tell us where. 

 

Back to their office in Vancouver. That appears to be at a place 

called the Mail Room, listed in the Vancouver phone directory 

yellow pages with the information, “Make Vancouver your 

permanent mailing address on Robson Street; postal boxes, 

business services . . . “ It’s hardly the office for a world-wide 

distribution network, and apparently it’s only been opened the 

last two months  

or three months, perhaps, in Vancouver. 

 

And I point this out to the minister because this is the firm that 

Technigen has signed the deal to sell 4,000 machines at $72 

million within the next three years – and perhaps that will 

happen within the next three years. But the way that I 

understand the deal, there’s no time line for that, so it could be 

three years from now before any machines are actually sold to 

the company. 

 

I’m wondering, to move on, if the minister has any information 

on Corporacion Relacio, S.A., a fourth company that Technigen 

has a distribution agreement with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’d like to 

point out to the member opposite that we’re dealing with a 

Saskatchewan company here, Joytec, and I would simply add 

that Joytec put forth a series of applications to my department 

for grants over the last three years. And at the time that those 

applications were submitted, they met the criteria as set down 

by the Department of Science and Technology. They qualified 

for those grants. The grants were being given for the purpose of 

research and development. That research and development has 

been taking place and is taking place. 

 

So I think for the member opposite to be raising all these 

hypothetical cases and all these various companies is really not 

the issue at all. We have given money to Joytec in the same way 

that we have given to other Saskatchewan companies who have 

met specific criteria. 

 

We have faith in these Saskatchewan companies; we have faith 

in the companies such as Joytec and the other 170-some-odd 

companies, and it’s unfortunate that the member opposite does 

not have some degree of faith in Saskatchewan companies. 

 

It’s one thing for you to talk about the fact that Technigen, 

which is the parent company listed on the Vancouver Stock 

Exchange. You’ve listed three or four other companies where 

are somewheres off there in the distance as well. I would 

suggest to the member opposite that you simply, if you want to 

get more information from Joytec, that you visit their shop, see 

what they’re doing, ask them, if you will, for some of the details 

with regard to the agreements that they have, whether it’s with 

Computech or Marubeni or who it is. And if they wish to give 

you that information, I’m sure that they will. 

 

But as far as meeting the obligations of this department, they 

certainly have met those obligations. And our commitment has 

been met to them, and we wish them success the same as we 

would any other high-tech company. 

 

When companies come to the Department of Science and 

Technology for grants or for consultation, we help them out in 

the best way that we can. And I would wonder, too, are you 

going to be conducting as an intensive an investigation into all 

of the other 170 companies within the province of 

Saskatchewan? I mean, why are you picking out one particular 

company? 

 

And as far as our department is concerned, they’ve met  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2584 

 

their obligations to us, and we wish them well in the future, the 

same as we would any of the other companies. But we don’t 

follow up; we follow up in so far as finding out how the 

company is doing and if the mandate that this department has 

met their need. But we certainly don’t follow up as far as all 

their sales and this sort of thing is concerned. If you want that 

information, I’d suggest that possibly you should go and visit 

the company. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, again I share this information 

with you because of our role as stewards of the public purse, 

and I think it behoves us to be good stewards. You are in a 

position to grant funds to this company, as are other ministers 

of Crown. I think it’s only responsible for us to be as informed 

about these activities as we can. 

 

It’s my sincere hope, as you say, that these companies are not 

hypothetical. They may be; I hope that they aren’t, so that 

Saskatchewan will see jobs and production beginning at Joytec 

so that there will be benefits. I sincerely hope that these just 

aren’t some other companies, as you say, off in the distance 

somewhere. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Minister, that these are companies that Joytec, 

Technigen has distribution agreements with. Distribution 

agreements – they aren’t sales agreements – they’re distribution 

agreements which means that these companies will have to go 

out and beat the bushes and come up with actual sales 

agreements. And I think it behoves us both to know about this 

information, particularly when it’s my understanding that 

Joytec has applied to receive funding of up to $200,000 under 

the industrial incentive program, and undoubtedly will be 

receiving other funding and making other applications to the 

provincial and the federal government. And here in 

Saskatchewan, when a company applies for funds in the 

technological sector, implicit in that is consultation between 

provincial and federal counterparts in your departmental office 

in Saskatoon. 

 

I want to share some information with you on Corporacion 

Relacio, since apparently you don’t seem to know much about 

it. The first thing to be said is that they’ve pulled back from 

their original letter of agreement, or understanding, with respect 

funding Joytec, which was for over . . . just let me check here. I 

can’t find the total right offhand, Mr. Minister. But the fact 

remains that the original agreement has been cut back from 

some $4 million in terms of the letters of credit that were to be 

there for the company. Now Corporacion Relacio only has to 

post a half a million dollar letter of credit and sells 3,000 fewer 

machines for Technigen. 

 

I note further that Corporacion Relacio is reported by 

Technigen to be a Swiss company. This big Swiss buyer for 

Joytec’s golf machines is in fact a Panamanian company 

registered in Panamania which has a Swiss bank account in 

Zurich and an office in Zurich. Panamania, as we all know, is 

the dirty money capital of the world. 

 

I note, in attempting to find out more about Corporacion 

Relacio through the Canadian consulate, that they were able to 

ascertain that Corporacion Relacio is not a member of the 

Panamanian Chamber of Commerce.  

Corporacion Relacio is not a member of the American Chamber 

of Commerce in Panama. Corporacion Relacio is not listed 

anywhere in the computer records of the Panamanian Ministry 

of Commerce under that name. Corporacion Relacio is not 

listed in any telephone directory in Panama. And no one in the 

Canadian consulate in Panama, or anyone they contact in 

Panama, seems to know anything about who Corporacion 

Relacio is. And this is the firm that Technigen Joytec has a 

large distribution agreement with. 

 

(2130) 

 

There is one other very important piece of information which I 

think it’s important for you to understand, or to know, and that 

concerns the individual who is acting as the representative for 

Corporacion Relacio with respect to their half million dollar 

letter of credit. That individual is David Charles Stuart and, Mr. 

Minister, I think you’ll find it very interesting to know – and 

you might want to investigate this for yourself – that this 

individual, David Charles Stuart, has a criminal record, 

convicted for fraud in stock promotion on the Ontario Securities 

Commission, and he has other criminal convictions as well for 

related charges, and that as recently as November 8, 1985, had 

criminal charges laid for possession of stolen property. 

 

Now those charges were withdrawn with the understanding that 

he would make restitution. But I say, this is the individual who 

is representing the interests of Corporacion Relacio in its 

dealings with Technigen Joytec. And it gives pause, I think, 

when it comes to you or other ministers of the Crown, sharing 

funds with this company from the public purse, without 

subsequent investigation as to what in fact is happening – 

maybe not with Joytec, but with respect to the parent company 

in some of the distribution agreements, or we may have good 

money chasing bad. 

 

So I simply leave it at that, and I commend this situation to your 

consideration and your examination. I think it behoves us both, 

in terms of protecting the taxpayers’ interest, given the amount 

of money that this Joytec, Technigen company has received 

from the public purse, given the kind of political advocacy that 

this company has had the advantage of, both from the Premier 

and from the constituency president of your constituency 

association, and, in fact, other individuals related to ministers of 

this government. 

 

I think that there are a host of questions surrounding this 

company that beg for answers. I don’t have access to much of 

the information. What I have access to and causes me concern, I 

share with you and lay on your table tonight with the hope that 

you will investigate it, and that, together with your officials, we 

can see a Joytec corporation that does not just survive these 

kinds of questions but comes out of it and thrives and provides 

jobs for Saskatchewan people, that produces golf simulators and 

benefits, not only the original investors here from Saskatchewan 

who invested in this venture capital company, but the public as 

well; that there will be a day when Joytec will be able to repay 

from its profits, by way of taxation and employment, the 

investment that Saskatchewan taxpayers have made in the 

company. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2585 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 

remarks by the member opposite, and I would simply say that 

we also share a concern about the taxpayers’ dollars and how 

they are being spent, but we also have a very definite 

commitment to the high-tech industry in this province, and I 

would assure the member opposite that if companies come 

forth, whether they’re individuals or groups of individuals, that 

if they have ideas that they wish to pursue, that they meet the 

specific criteria set down by the department, that we will simply 

. . . we will certainly give them encouragement, and we will 

support them in whatever way that we can. 

 

And as you pointed out in your opening remarks, you are very 

supportive of the high-tech industry in Saskatchewan, and I 

know that you’re sincere when you say that. But I would 

suggest to the member opposite that it is rather unfortunate that 

we take a company such as Joytec, which is still in the growing 

stage and is still at the research and development stage, that you 

have done an awful lot in the last few months to try and destroy 

this company before it really gets under way. So I would just 

ask you to be patient. I will certainly follow up with them as I 

have and with other companies and give them what 

encouragement that we can and that we are also anxious to see 

them getting into production. 

 

I would just close with one other comment that you speak about 

Computech and some of these other companies. The article that 

you were quoting from, you should have also included the 

statement in there that Computech has agreed to a $72 million 

deal to pick up the slack from Relacio, pledging to sell 4,000 

golf simulators over the next three years. 

 

So I certainly have no reason at this point to doubt but what 

they will keep that commitment. But until the company gets 

into production, I think that we should give them an opportunity 

to finish off with their research and get into that production. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, just by way of a slight 

oversight, I’m wondering if you could comment on any other 

Government of Saskatchewan funds that Joytec has received 

other than from the Department of Science and Technology. 

What other government departments have given funds to 

Joytec, and what would those grants consist of? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in answer to 

the hon. member’s questions, I would simply indicate that we 

don’t have any knowledge at the present time of there being 

other funds put forward. We will check that out, and we’d be 

happy to provide that information for him as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I’d sincerely appreciate that, Mr. Minister, 

and thank you for that. Just a couple very brief, sort of clean-up 

concerns. We haven’t . . . There’s a host of things we haven’t 

talked about tonight. 

 

I’m wondering if the minister sees any priority – or within the 

department or within his government – for the funding of 

science and technology with respect to the environmental 

industry sector of the economy. And I  

think of specifically of waste technology and environmental 

detection and monitoring technology. I’m wondering if you see 

any window of opportunity, or if you’ve developed any strategy 

with respect to supporting Saskatchewan involvement in the 

high-tech community in terms of environmental protection? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would advise 

the member opposite that science and tech is involved at the 

present time with companies that are doing research in those 

areas. There’s certainly a good amount of research being done 

by the Saskatchewan Research Council in those areas, and we 

certainly will be – will continue to be – involved in whatever 

way we can because we recognize the importance of that area 

and the new research that is essential today. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I’m certainly glad to hear that. That’s very 

encouraging because I’ve noted that the federal Minister of the 

Environment, Tom McMillan, has said as recent as this spring 

that the environmental industry is, he says, “. . . one of the 

major growth sectors everywhere in the world.” And it seems to 

me that we have the potential here to develop a technological 

sector which meets the immediate, real needs of Saskatchewan 

people, and at the same time develop potential markets 

world-wide because there is such a growing demand for 

products that deal with environmental control, clean-up, and 

quality. 

 

And I certainly hold that up as a positive suggestion for you, for 

you and your officials to try to take some new initiatives there. 

But it seems to me that that’s one area of the high-tech cycle, or 

the economy, that if the world community goes belly up with 

computers or microelectronics, we’re such a small player we 

really don’t have much protection. 

 

But to invest our meagre resources here in Saskatchewan in that 

kind of enterprise has the potential to serve us regardless of 

what happens in the larger economic environment, because 

we’re still dealing with Saskatchewan needs first, and the 

implications flow to other jurisdictions across North America 

and in fact the world. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, regarding the importance of this area of public policy, 

science and technology, I have consulted rather closely with a 

number of knowledgeable people in this field, especially in 

Saskatoon, in preparation for these estimates. And what I’ve 

found is that we probably have here a very willing minister who 

wants very much to do a decent job, but a government, 

unfortunately, that has relegated science and technology to the 

back burner, giving it a lot of lip-service, but precious little else. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I want to take a few moments this evening 

to examine some of the arithmetic in your estimates with you, 

to make sure that I understand it accurately. Because I think that 

arithmetic puts you, unfortunately, in a rather awkward position 

of having to deal with a lot of PR without a lot of substance. 

And I would hope that through this debate tonight we might 

encourage the government to be more supportive for science 

and technology, to give you, as minister,  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2586 

 

something more substantial to work with. 

 

As I read the Estimates, Mr. Minister, one very thin page – page 

86 in the blue book – it seems to me that there is an increase in 

Science and Technology, the Science and Technology budget 

for this year that’s in the order of 4 to $500,000, or about a 30 

per cent increase. And all of that, it would appear, is because of 

administrative cost increases, and about half of that goes to the 

property management corporation. The bottom line, it would 

appear, is a 30 per cent increase, all of it in terms of 

administrative costs. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, that compares again to what appears to be a 

25 per cent decrease in the total funds made directly available 

by the government for research and development – a decrease 

of some $1 million in 1987-88 compared to 1986-87, and that’s 

down 25 per cent. If I’m calculating that decrease correctly, Mr. 

Minister, it follows in the fashion that I’m about to describe. 

 

The startling fact is that virtually none of the necessary 

information is provided on page 86 in the blue book; that you 

have to ferret it out from other sources in other parts of the 

Estimates. First of all, you have to look at the Heritage Fund 

and the report on the Heritage Fund contained in the blue book. 

That particular report shows $601,000 as payments from the 

Heritage Fund for research and development, and again that 

would appear to be down from 2.8 million last year, or a 

reduction of 79 per cent. 

 

(2145) 

 

Also with respect to the report on the Heritage Fund, Mr. 

Minister, it would appear that there are $228,000 provided as 

grants pursuant to the ERDA (Economic and Regional 

Development Agreement) . . . That is E-R-D-A, the ERDA 

agreement with the Government of Canada, and that too is 

down from $1.2 million last year, or a decrease of 81 per cent. 

That’s the portion of the Estimates relating to the Heritage Fund 

that deal with Science and Technology. 

 

And then, Mr. Minister, you have to find the economic 

diversification and investment fund that is reported elsewhere in 

the estimates, and there you find grants for advanced 

technology development for something close to $2.2 million 

compared to a nil entry for last year, as the fund did not exist at 

that time. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I’m going to ask you to, if you would, 

confirm that arithmetic, and when you add it all together you 

get the following: the 1986-87 total R&D investment by the 

Government of Saskatchewan, in the various forms that I have 

just mentioned, totalling some $4 million; and in 1987-88, the 

total R&D investment by the Government of Saskatchewan, 

again in those categories that I’ve just mentioned, of $2.999 

million. That’s a difference of $1 million essentially – $1 

million less this year compared to last year, or the 25 per cent 

reduction that I mentioned a few moments ago. 

 

So we have a 25 per cent cut in actual useful R&D funding by 

the government, and we have a 30 per cent increase,  

as I mentioned earlier, in the administrative costs of the 

department. And just for the sake of clarity, Mr. Minister, to 

make sure that that arithmetic is accurate, I would ask you to 

confirm at least the essence of that calculation and indicate if 

that’s basically the state of affairs as reported by these 

estimates. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to point 

out to the hon. member that there is no question about the 

commitment of this government as far as science and 

technology is concerned, and I pointed that out in my earlier 

remarks; support on the part of our Premier, support certainly in 

the commitment on the part of the government as far as funding 

is concerned, and the fact that there is a minister in charge of 

only this particular department. 

 

I did indicate earlier to my critic that indeed there had been the 

25 per cent cut in the research funds from $4 million last year to 

3 million this yea. And as you’ve indicated, that’s found in two 

different places. You’ve got $2.171 million under the economic 

diversification and investment fund, and you have the other 

829,000 under the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund on page 120. 

So the total of $3 million that we have for this year. 

 

But I think at the same time you have to recognize the fact that 

with the economic diversification and investment fund we have 

an amount of $22 million which is available for economic 

development, small business, and science and technology. But 

for the most part, if you consider that the advanced technology 

companies are indeed small businesses, we are talking about 

economic development. So I would think that in some cases 

there could be a little bit of an overlap there in that there could 

be more funds available for small business that are into 

economic development through advanced technology. 

 

So even though our overall budget has been cut by the million 

dollars, I would hope that out of the $22 million that we could 

possibly have some additional funds because they do spill over 

to those other two departments. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Well, I appreciate the minister’s optimism, 

but quite frankly I don’t see good grounds in these estimates to 

share that optimism. 

 

In relation to the economic and diversification investment fund, 

for example, while the minister speaks of a budget commitment 

this year of some $22 million in total, that is down from $25 

million last year, and only 2.1 or 2.2 million of the total is 

specifically committed for advanced technology. And it seems 

to me to be a little bit of wishful thinking to hope that 

something else from some other fund may somehow kind of 

spill over and inadvertently help in the technology field when it 

has not been specifically budgeted for that purpose. I hope the 

minister is not just being naïve when he hopes that that kind of 

indirect spill-over can occur to his advantage. 

 

In terms of specific positions in the department, Mr. Minister, I 

know you’ve covered a good deal detail earlier today, and I 

won’t go over that ground, but I note that in total there’s 20.3 

person-years provided for within your department. I wonder if 

you could tell me specifically: are  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2587 

 

all of those positions at the present moment filled? And if 

they’re not fully staffed up to the 20.3, what is the actual staff 

complement at this moment in time? And secondly, because we 

are dealing with a relatively small department with a limited 

number of people involved, would you be in a position to 

provide us with a listing of your entire staff complement that 

would make up that 20.3 figure, including their titles and their 

duties and the specific locations of their offices? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, we’ll be happy to 

provide you with that list. Something you had asked earlier and 

I didn’t deal with that – the increase as far as administration 

was concerned was due to the fact that the minister’s office of 

Science and Technology is now included with the department, 

so that involved another five positions. With regard to the 

number of people or vacancies that exist at the present time, I 

believe we have four positions that are vacant at the present 

time, two of which were a result of early retirement, and the 

other two of people that have moved on to other areas. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, could I ask you: apart from the 

people who are directly involved in relation to your ministerial 

staff which you have discussed earlier today in the House – 

apart from those people who are directly ministerial assistants – 

how many people from your department would be employed in 

Regina and how many in Saskatoon? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, of the 15 positions 

we have one position that’s in Regina; we have 11 in Saskatoon 

and . . . we have 10 in Saskatoon at the present time, one in 

Regina, and four positions vacant. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I had received some 

information earlier that I would like to raise with you and to see 

if you could confirm it. Is it true that in your Regina office, your 

strength in person-years has been in fact reduced to just that one 

single official; that that person operates here essentially without 

support staff and is occupying – or at least was until very 

recently – occupying space that was originally designed for 16 

to 20 people. Is there that kind of discrepancy between the 

actual numbers of people involved, namely one, and office 

space designed for 15 or 20? Is that the sort of state of affairs 

that prevails? and if it does, I presume you have plans to correct 

that. And I wonder if you could indicate what those plans are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, as the hon. member 

across knows, the department was moved for the most part to 

Saskatoon on September 1, 1986, and the remaining positions 

were here, in fact were taking up that space that was occupied 

by the total department before. 

 

At the present time, we do indeed have one person who is here. 

There is one vacancy that has not been filled here, and those 

offices of course are still maintained. And we would hope that 

in the very near future that there can be some change there 

because, as you well know, we’re now paying rent on space that 

we in fact don’t need. 

 

So we’re looking forward to getting something negotiated there 

as soon as possible. So we do have the one person here, as 

you’ve indicated, but in so far as support staff is  

concerned, this individual is involved with clients not only in 

the Regina area in the southern part of the province but also in 

Saskatoon. So indeed he does have support staff, but the 

support staff at the present time would be in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, when the minister says he is 

looking to correct that imbalance between people and space in 

the next short while, does he have in mind that the government 

would in fact unload that extra space, or would the four 

positions that the estimates provide for which have not yet been 

filled be allocated to Regina to occupy some of that space, or is 

it a combination of both of those things that the minister has in 

mind? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The space that we’re talking about, 

Mr. Chairman, would be allocated back to the property 

management corporation, and they would be the ones that 

would be probably reallocating it to other departments or 

whatever the case might be. But they would be the ones that 

would be looking after that. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that 

information. 

 

I’m anxious to ask you a couple of questions about the 

operations of that portion of the economic diversification fund 

that deal with science and technology matters. And I’m 

concerned that their . . . at least the reports that I have received 

would indicate that there are, to date, no clear or public 

guide-lines, no administrative guide-lines, no statutory 

regulations pertaining to how money from that particular fund, 

the economic diversification fund of the provincial 

government—I don’t mean to confuse that with the federal 

effort – the provincial fund will be allocated. 

 

I have received those reports, Mr. Minister, and I would like to 

ask you first of all: are there any such guide-lines or regulations 

for the administration of those moneys? If not, why not? And if 

they do exist, if there are in fact such guide-lines or 

administrative guide-lines or regulations pertaining to how 

moneys from that fund will be allocated, if they do exist, when 

do you, Mr. Minister, plan to make them broadly and 

well-known to the science and technology industry in 

Saskatchewan and to this House? 

 

I raise the point because when rules and regulations for the 

access to government funding are not well-known or well 

understood or seem to be somehow secretive or perhaps ad hoc, 

that of course raises all sorts of possibilities for doubts about 

political involvement in government decision making. I’m sure 

the minister would not want to leave that impression, and I 

wonder what specific plans he might have in mind to dispel any 

impression that might be there at the present time about that 

problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would simply point 

out to the hon. member that our guide-lines, in so far as the 

advanced technology field is concerned, are quite clear and 

have been laid out, and they are available for people who are 

interested in this particular field to follow through on. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2588 

 

(2200) 

 

We have many calls at our offices both in Regina and 

Saskatoon each week, and many people dropping in that have 

new ideas and processes that they want to follow up on. So I 

think all it takes is a call to any one of our offices to find out 

what our guide-lines are. 

 

We discussed earlier about some of our communications that 

make this kind of information readily available. So I wouldn’t 

see any problem there. 

 

I would assume that probably in so far as the other departments, 

the other economic departments are concerned, that the 

guide-lines are also available and that people can make contact 

with either one of those departments. But in so far as the high 

tech is concerned, I think our guide-lines are quite clear. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I’m referring specifically to that 

portion of the estimates which create the funding for the 

economic diversification and investment fund, which fund, in 

relation to advanced technology development grants, did not 

exist in the previous fiscal year. And because this appears to be 

a new innovation, and perhaps something that has not been 

touched upon specifically before these estimates, I wonder if 

you could send over to me, for my information, and for the 

information of those who have been in touch with me about this 

matter, a copy of the written guide-lines by which moneys from 

that fund will be allocated by the government. You say those 

guide-lines exist. I’m delighted to hear that, and I wonder if you 

could provide me a written copy of those guide-lines so that I 

can answer the inquiries that I’ve received. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, we’d be happy to 

provide the hon. member with that information indicating all of 

the guide-lines, and so we’ll get that to you as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I’d like 

to turn then quickly to the ERDA agreement, the E-R-D-A 

agreement. Just for the purposes of the record, Mr. Minister, 

that is a federal-provincial agreement on economic and regional 

development. That portion of it relating to science and 

technology matters was signed on the August 31, 1984 by 

Saskatchewan and Ottawa. It was to run for a four-year period 

from 1984 until 1989. It was to be a 50-50 cost sharing deal 

between the two governments. Its maximum level of R&D 

spending was to be $33.2 million over those four years. The 

province’s 50 per cent share of that total was to be $16.6 

million or about $4.2 million per fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Minister, to date under this agreement, if my information is 

correct, Saskatchewan has invested the following moneys: in 

1984-85, nothing; in 1985-86, 1.19 million; in 1986-87, 1.19 

million; and then in 1987-88, according to these estimates, the 

smaller sum of 228,000, down to a full 81 per cent from the 

previous level of funding established in the two prior fiscal 

years. 

 

Mr. Minister, you said in answer to an earlier question  

that the commitment of the government in respect of science 

and technology is profound and real and it can be relied upon, 

but it seems to me that that level of commitment that I’ve just 

described in those figures in respect to the ERDA agreement, 

that level of commitment is obviously well below what the 

1984 agreement contemplated, and we only have one more 

fiscal year to go before that agreement expires altogether. And I 

would like to read into the record, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister, section 2.2 of the ERDA agreement between 

Saskatchewan and Ottawa, which states the objectives of the 

agreement. And I quote: 

 

To create the appropriate institutional environment necessary 

for the development and commercialization of advanced 

technology opportunities and industries; to encourage the 

strengthening and enhancement of the advanced technology 

industrial base through the exploration, development, and 

commercialization of technology and product opportunities in 

viable market niches; and to focus efforts on present and 

emerging areas of human and technical expertise and 

competence in the province. 

 

Those, Mr. Minister, are the objectives of the ERDA agreement. 

And it seems to me that you must surely agree that 

Saskatchewan has been falling far, far short of maintaining the 

spirit of this ERDA agreement with Ottawa because the level of 

funding has obviously been far below what that agreement 

contemplated. 

 

And as a consequence, Mr. Minister, I would ask you to 

confirm that Saskatchewan has in fact been falling far short of 

its originally contemplated funding commitment under the 

ERDA agreement, and that as a result of that, we are also 

missing out on some very large and available federal dollars 

that could be levered into the province if the corresponding 

political commitment were there. And it’s because of that kind 

of issue, Mr. Minister, and that kind of question, that some of us 

are concerned that the government’s commitment in relation to 

science and technology may be more rhetorical than real. 

 

And I wonder if you could comment on that level of funding 

under the ERDA agreement and indicate whether you 

personally are satisfied with a level of spending that is 

obviously far, far below what the original 1984 deal 

contemplated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the hon. 

member’s question, I would point out that for this current year 

of ’87-88, that the estimated expenditure under this category is 

probably closer to the neighbourhood of $1 million rather than 

the 228,000. 

 

The funds that are given out under this program are based on 

company response. And when the original agreement was 

signed back in 1984, it was difficult to indicate at that particular 

time just what amount of money would be needed. But I can 

assure the hon. member that in 1984 when this agreement was 

signed between the two governments, that we in this province 

did not have any indication that the price of potash was going to 

be what it is today, or the price or uranium or oil or wheat. And,  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2589 

 

quite frankly, we have to get by on the funds that we’ve got. 

 

Obviously, it would be nice to have the full $16 million to put 

into this program over the five-year term, but I think it’s quite 

obvious at this point that we’re not going to come anywhere 

near to that, and it’s simply because of the economics that exist. 

We have to do the best we can with what we’ve got, and that 

doesn’t take away one little bit as far as the commitment of this 

government to advanced technology. But that’s reality. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I guess it’s a question of 

priorities in the $16 million over a four-year period is less than 

what the government has spent in past years in one single year 

for tax-paid government advertising. It’s an issue of where you 

set your priorities and whether you think advertising by the 

government is more important than spending it on R&D. 

 

I want to ask you, I want to ask you the specific question about 

the 228,000. Are you indicating that that number, in fact, 

reported in the blue book is inaccurate? It appears on page 115, 

and I think you suggested that the actual spending under the 

grants pursuant to the Canada-Saskatchewan Subsidiary 

Agreement on Advanced Technology, as the language in the 

blue book goes, that the figure is likely to be closer to $1 

million than 228,000. And if so, where would that correction 

appear in the estimates of the department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the figure that’s in 

the blue book is accurate. But as I indicated as well, these 

grants are based on company response, and they will be drawn 

from the figure that you see on page 26 from the economic 

diversification and investment fund. From the information that 

we have now and the projects that are under way, we will be 

closer to the $1 million figure, but the balance, as I say, will 

come out of the economic diversification and investment fund. 

So the figure that is here is accurate, but the balance will be 

drawn out of that fund. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — So those two numbers can be added together, 

that is the Heritage Fund numbers on page 115 and the 

diversification fund numbers on page 26, they can be added 

together to get the total spending number and there would not 

be any overlap or duplication between the two figures. I take it 

that’s what the minister is indicating. 

 

Could I ask then, Mr. Minister, in relation to the $228,000 

figure referred to on page 115, is that money already committed 

at this moment in time? Does that represent, in fact, funds that 

your department has already spent or has specifically earmarked 

for spending in a specific way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, yes indeed, there are 

a lot of these dollars that have been committed because of the 

fact that some of the projects run over an 18-, maybe to a 

24-month period. The $228,000 that’s indicated here from the 

R&D area will be used up first, and beyond that the moneys 

will be drawn from the economic diversification investment 

fund. And I’m informed that our commitments probably are in 

the neighbourhood of $500,000 – that’s money that’s  

already been committed to projects that are ongoing. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Then of that 500,000, Mr. Minister, the first 

228,000 would come from the item on page 115, and the 

balance would come from the item on page 26. I wonder, Mr. 

Minister, if that information is generally public, and if you 

haven’t been asked earlier today to provide a list of the 

beneficiaries of those granting programs, I wonder if I could ask 

you now – not, obviously, tonight – but in the next few days if 

you would be in a position to provide us with a list indicating 

which companies or which individuals in Saskatchewan would 

be benefiting under any of these granting programs and 

indicating the amounts that each of them would be entitled to 

receive. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, we’d be happy to 

provide that information within the next couple of days. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I thank the minister for that and I wonder, just 

for greater clarity and in order to make it clear what I’m asking 

for – that would be the information with respect to grants, 

provided under that item on page 115 of the Estimates that 

refers to payments for research and development; that item that 

refers to the ERDA agreement; and then on page 26, that item 

which refers to advanced technology development grants. 

Those three items, Mr. Minister, is what I was referring to, and 

I see you’re nodding your head. I thank you for that, and that 

will shorten up proceedings this evening if we can receive that 

in writing at a later time. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to deal with just one other category of 

question this evening, and that has to do with general 

departmental performance, and I’m concerned about the 

potential that I detect for exaggeration or overstatement by the 

government when it comes to selling its record in relation to 

science and technology. This is a new field; this is an exciting 

field; we all want to be proud of it and talk well of it and so 

forth, but I think it’s also critically important that we be 

accurate and we don’t overstate, or exaggerate, or try to portray 

things as they are not. 

 

And I note, for example, in 1983, before any Science and 

Technology department even existed in Saskatchewan, there 

were four advanced technology firms of major consequence in 

Saskatchewan; those four firms, obviously, if people remember 

the history of that time: Northern Telecom, AEL Microtel, 

Develcon Electronics and SED Systems. 

 

(2215) 

 

Today, four years later, with the Department of Science and 

Technology, there are only three of what might be called the 

major firms. We had four; it’s down to three. And I’m sure the 

minister would agree that that’s not a good sign when we have 

fewer major firms now than we used to have even before the 

department existed. 

 

I think of another example, Mr. Minister. You have suggested 

in some of your written material that the science and technology 

industry in Saskatchewan could achieve revenues of $1 billion 

in 1987. To achieve that level, I’m advised by the industry, 

exclusive of  

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2590 

 

universities and government, the industry would have to employ 

a minimum of 12,500 people. The department says that at 

maximum, industry-wide employment in Saskatchewan will be 

2,500 people this year. Obviously there is a big gap between the 

rhetoric and the actual performance, and I think it’s important to 

be accurate and again not overstate the case. 

 

I’d like to offer another example, Mr. Minister. You have said 

that since 1982 the number of advanced technology firms in 

Saskatchewan has basically quadrupled in Saskatchewan from 

around 40 in 1982 to about 170 or thereabouts now. But, Mr. 

Minister, if you examine the names of those firms that are listed 

in the technology transfer catalogue which you have referred to 

earlier today in this House, you’ll find that that list of those 

firms – apparently setting out all of the information about these 

170-odd firms – that that list includes some of the large and 

some of the small technology companies in Canada, or in 

Saskatchewan rather, specifically in Saskatchewan, plus farm 

equipment manufacturers, plus Ipsco, plus inventors who have 

yet to have a marketable product developed, plus value added 

resellers, plus engineering companies, plus companies which 

have ceased operations, plus part-time, one-man operations, and 

some firms which are at best in a pre-start-up stage. 

 

Mr. Minister, all of that is lumped together to get the figure of 

170 or so. And so the real list is not 100 or 170 bona fide 

advanced technology firms in Saskatchewan; in reality, Mr. 

Minister, I wonder if there would be more like 30 or 40 

companies which could stand up to a factual test. 

 

And again, there’s a real gap problem here between what’s said 

and what’s real. We would obviously like the larger story; we 

would like the bigger picture; we would like more and more of 

the success stories. But I think, in terms of dissemination of 

information, it’s important to stick to the facts. 

 

The minister talks about the need to be upbeat and to be 

positive about this industry, and I agree with that, Mr. Minister. 

And you talk about the need to sell ourselves both to ourselves 

and to others, and I can certainly agree with that. But the 

salesmanship has to bear some resemblance to reality, and it has 

to be based on fact. 

 

And I’m concerned when I learned that the OECD 

(Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) 

report on science and technology in western Canada 

commissioned by the four western provinces in 1986 concludes 

that Saskatchewan has fallen behind British Columbia and 

Manitoba in technological development. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I simply want to urge you to be careful in 

the PR side of your responsibilities; to be a good salesman, yes, 

but not to overstate or to exaggerate or to oversell the 

Saskatchewan situation, which could in future come back to 

rebound against us. Because obviously credibility is a very 

critical part of the whole science and technology atmosphere 

that we want to foster in a healthy and accurate way in our 

province. 

 

And I would be interested to know, Mr. Minister, if you have 

any comment on those few remarks before I finish  

with two very specific questions about departmental personnel. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would point out to 

the hon. member that when we’re talking about 170-some-odd 

companies that they well could range from one individual to 

several hundred, as we know exist in some of the larger 

companies. But we’ve got a good number of companies, we 

have to remember, that start out in their basements with an idea 

that they’re working on. 

 

You have to consider, when you’re talking about advanced 

technology or research and development, that you have to go 

right through the innovative change from that original idea; and 

there are so many steps all the way along the line with it until 

you get to the other end where you’ve got the production in 

place and you’ve got the goods being marketed out there. 

 

Indeed, you can look through the tech transfer catalogue; you 

don’t see all the companies listed there because there are some 

companies prefer not to be in that catalogue to protect their 

invention. So we can’t deny them that freedom. 

 

In so far as your comparison of Saskatchewan with other 

provinces, I would think that this of course could be disputed as 

to whether or not we’re falling behind. I think, as far as the 

amount of growth that there has been in this province in the last 

five years, that that’s incomparable probably in any other 

province in the country. And I think when you consider the 

leadership role that this province has taken and this particular 

department, that in fact our model has been copied by several of 

the other provinces and is now being utilized there. The 

province of Saskatchewan also played a very instrumental role 

in developing the national policy for science and technology, 

which was signed last March out in Vancouver. 

 

So there are areas that we may not be as far ahead as other 

provinces, but I would point out to you that we rank third 

behind the provinces of Ontario and Quebec when it comes to 

the areas of space technology and telecommunications. We 

certainly have the potential to be the leader in Canada as far as 

biotechnology is concerned, and that’s an area that we’re 

pursuing right now. 

 

There’s certainly recognition on the part of the other provinces 

in the country that Saskatchewan is away ahead as far as some 

of the other . . . some of the technologies are concerned. 

 

I think it’s important to note the fact that SED just recently was 

taken on as the subcontractor for the Canadian space program 

with Spar Aerospace, and they will be involved with the whole 

prairie basin, so there is recognition on the part of people all 

across Canada that we are leaders in some fields, but certainly 

we’re not leaders in all fields, and I don’t think we would 

expect to be. But I think we have to look at the strengths that we 

have here, and we have to build on those strengths, and that’s 

certainly what we’re attempting to do. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2591 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Well I appreciate the minister’s comment, and 

my remarks earlier were simply a plea for accuracy in all of the 

salesmanship that we try to develop for ourselves, so no one 

later on can challenge us or conclude that we tried to sell a case 

that was not, in fact, accurate and factual. 

 

A couple of technical points, Mr. Minister, that I would 

conclude with. I have, again from the industry in Saskatoon, 

received the suggestion that, in fact, within your department 

lists of companies are maintained in terms of their 

categorization by the constituency which represents the 

residence of senior officers. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if that 

kind of list-keeping is, in fact, done within your department. I 

can imagine you keep all sorts of lists for all sorts of purposes, 

but do you actually keep a list that indicates the residence 

location or the office location of senior officers within high-tech 

firms? Because if such a list does exist, or if there is the 

common belief that it does exist, it obviously brings some 

political implications into the department, Mr. Minister, that 

would not be healthy or useful. 

 

And my final question, which I think you could answer at the 

same time with the previous one: can you indicate to me the 

status of one Mr. Don Richardson, who, I understand, was 

formerly the director of the Saskatoon cabinet office, and prior 

to that was a media buyer in the private sector, that he is now 

fulfilling a role in the department that may be generally 

described as executive assistant to the deputy minister? I 

wonder if you could offer in your written answer to the 

questions that I’ve asked previously some specific definition of 

Mr. Richardson’s role and where he fits in with the delivery 

staff, the middle-management staff, or the executive staff within 

your department, and does he fulfil any function as a political 

person within the department, an overseer in some form, 

because again I think that function by that particular person 

could leave indeed the wrong implications with the people of 

Saskatchewan, and it’s important to dispel that. 

 

I raised those points now, Mr. Minister. You may not be in a 

position to answer that precise question tonight, but I have 

asked you earlier for a list. You have agreed to provide that list, 

and it would be satisfactory for my purposes if you could give 

me the commitment to provide that information with respect to 

Mr. Richardson as a part of that list. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, in our response to the 

first question, I’m certainly not aware of any list that we have 

that would indicate what constituencies the officers of the 

various companies live in. Certainly I’m not particularly 

concerned about which constituencies they would live in. I’m 

interested in the operations of their companies and the fact that 

if they’re going to be involved in industry economic 

development that is going to benefit the people of 

Saskatchewan, that’s our main concern. 

 

In regard to the second part, we’ll include that information that 

you’d asked for. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I just like to conclude by 

thanking you and your staff for your time this evening. I think 

it’s good that we’ve been able to discuss some of the  

concerns about smaller, fledgling, nascent, basement high-tech 

firms here in Saskatchewan. I hope that you do give 

consideration to see that they get their fair-share from your 

departmental and governmental allocations; also that they do 

shortly see something from this Premier’s $50-million fund for 

high technology, that small firms see some real assistance from 

this fund. 

 

I think we’ve talked sufficiently about the concerns for 

educational funding, and as an educator yourself, I hope that 

you will strongly advocate reinstatement of proper funding to 

the U. of S. and the U. of R,; that you will reinstate proper 

research and development funding and speak strongly for that; 

that you will see that we do have a grains institute and other 

institutes here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I believe that Saskatchewan people are looking to the 

Department of Science and Technology for programs and 

policies that address their real needs, that promote human 

well-being, environmental safety, and a sustainable economy; 

the kind of scientific and technological development that is 

indigenous to Saskatchewan, predicated on Saskatchewan’s 

need, but applicable to the world on an international scale; 

science and technology that consults with a broad base of 

Saskatchewan people, with students and working people, and 

with farmers, and not just the research community and the 

high-tech community; a science and technology policy that does 

not put the public treasury at risk or burden taxpayers; and 

finally, science and technology policy that makes a positive 

commitment to global peace, disarmament, and security. 

 

We have that kind of opportunity here through the 

Saskatchewan Research Council and the PACSAT and the 

RADARSAT programs. 

 

I commend your department for its many, many positive 

initiatives. I think that when you’ve commented on those 

tonight that you’ve been very accurate in saying that there are 

many good things that the department has done. At the same 

time I say again, I think that your hands are tied; that you work 

at a serious disadvantage given your predecessor’s political use 

of funds and the Premier’s propensity to engage in fantasy and 

fiction rather than fact and finance when it comes to science and 

technology. 

 

(2230) 

 

Yours is a tall order. I wish you and your department officials 

well. I pledge myself to work with you toward a scientific and 

technological future for all Saskatchewan people that is 

sustainable, that is affordable, and that really does serve the 

interests of ordinary Saskatchewan people. 

 

And so I close by thanking you very sincerely, and thanking all 

of your departmental officials, those who are here tonight, and 

those who are at work in offices and out in the field and unable 

to here. So I thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, just a brief comment. 

I would like to thank the hon. member for his comments and 

thank the members opposite for forwarding the questions. 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2592 

 

I certainly look forward to suggestions from you in the future, 

and I can assure you that we are strong believers in the 

high-tech industry in this province. I think that we have exciting 

times ahead, and certainly we’re going to continue to do what 

we feel is right in the province and to do our best to promote 

economic development in whatever way that we can. So thank 

you very much. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Item 2 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps I could draw the 

minister’s attention to the request that I made earlier in writing, 

one part of the request dealing with the consultants employed 

by the department. And I wonder under what subvote I might 

seek that information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would point out that 

we provided some of that information to your colleague, but 

anything that is still required there we would be quite happy to 

forward that to you in the next while. 

 

Item 2 agreed to. 

 

Item 3 agreed to. 

 

Item 4 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — On item 4, Mr. Chairman, I have been 

looking over some of the information that the minister was 

good enough to provide to my colleague with regard to Science 

and Technology expenditures in the previous year, and I noted 

for the advertising and printing and related expenses in ‘85-86, 

totalling $99,000, that about 64 per cent of that went to one 

supplier, namely The Marketing Den. 

 

And it says, “Development and pre-production work on 

brochures, newsletters, catalogues, etc.,” and I thought to 

myself that $64,000 is a significant amount of money out of the 

100 or $99,000 in this particular item. 

 

And is this . . . I wonder if this, Mr. Minister, if you could 

answer: is this The Marketing Den that is the company owned 

by Joel Teal, who ran for the PC nomination in Saskatoon East, 

and by Murray Osborn, a prominent PC and friend of Rick Folk 

and Paul Schoenhals? Is that the same Marketing Den? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would simply 

indicate to the hon. member that I don’t know who owns 

Marketing Den, other than I believe that the manager is one 

Murray Osborn. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Is . . . other than that you’re not aware 

that Mr. Joel Teal, the PC person seeking nomination, was also 

the owner? 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could indicate whether this type 

of material, $64,000 worth of it, would be tendered or how 

would it be obtained by The Marketing Den? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I’m informed that 

they are our agent of record, and they are the ones  

that are assigned. They do the work for Department of Science 

and Technology. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I understand you correctly. Mr. Minister, 

they’re assigned it. They don’t tender it. Thank you. 

 

Item 4 agreed to. 

 

Item 5 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I assume the minister’s 

comments with regard to providing me with information also 

applies to the information I’ve requested earlier in writing about 

the department space allocation from the property management 

corporation. If that is to come over in the written form, that’ll 

be satisfactory to me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, we’ll be happy to 

forward that information to the hon. member in the next short 

while. 

 

Item 5 agreed to. 

 

Item 6 agreed to. 

 

Vote 15 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Science and Technology 

Vote 66 

 

Item 5 agreed to. 

 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Research and Development Division 

Science and Technology Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 56 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 56 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Science and Technology 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 15 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? Carried. 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Science and Technology 

Vote 66 

 

Item 5 agreed to.  

 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? Carried.  

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Research and Development Division 

Science and Technology 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 56 

  



 

September 15, 1987 

 

2593 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? Carried. 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

The Saskatchewan Research Council 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 35 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 35 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

The Saskatchewan Research Council 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 35 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Agreed? Carried. 

 

I’d like to thank the officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would also like to 

take this opportunity to thank my officials for providing the 

information tonight and all the support in the past, and I 

certainly look forward to working with them in the months 

ahead. Thank you. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:43 p.m. 

 


