













































August 6, 1987 Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 6, 1987 

 

1569 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Shillington: —Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

with pleasure today that I introduce a visitor to Canada who is 

with us today. I’ll begin by introducing those who are with him: 

Jonathon Wilkinson, Dwayne Havre, and Don Stanger. They 

are with Jean Claude Liechti, who is visiting us from 

Switzerland. I ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

these people to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great 

deal of pleasure that I would like to introduce to you, and 

through you to the members of the Assembly, six residents from 

the Sunset Extendicare home, a seniors’ home in Albert Park in 

Regina South. They are seated on the main floor just inside the 

door. We have six residents and four attendants with them this 

afternoon. I had the pleasure of visiting most of those people 

with my wife recently, last October, and I look forward to 

joining with them in coffee a little bit later on. I ask all 

members to welcome these guests to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I want to add a note 

to the comments of my colleague from Regina South. I want to 

also welcome the seniors and the attendants to this Assembly. 

 

One of the encouraging things in this session, that I don’t think 

I’ve seen before, is the attendance by seniors from hospitals and 

nursing homes at the Assembly. I think this is the third time 

we’ve had them here, and it’s encouraging to see. I want to 

congratulate the volunteers who take of their own time to make 

sure this happens. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Sale of Saskoil Shares 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Energy and it deals with the recent 

sale of six and a half million shares of Saskoil. 

 

Madam Minister, as you know, Saskoil is controlled by the 

government and it sold more than six and a half million new, 

common shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange. Those shares 

were clearly undervalued, because the very next day they closed 

on the Toronto Stock Exchange at $8.25. On top of that, 

Madam Minister, Saskatchewan residents who purchased these 

shares got a tax break of up to $3,000 under the Saskatchewan 

Stock Savings Plan. 

 

So the ordinary taxpayer saw the province’s equity in  

Saskoil decrease, and the ordinary taxpayer had to shell out 

millions of dollars in taxpayers’ money under the Saskatchewan 

Stock Savings Plan, all to have Saskoil expand in Alberta. 

 

My question to the minister is this: Madam Minister, would you 

mind telling the ordinary taxpayer of this province why such a 

generous scheme was a fair expenditure of their tax dollars? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not so long ago 

that I heard the complaint from opposite. When the price was 

up you were complaining. Now the price is down, you’re 

complaining. 

 

Let me inform the members, Mr. Speaker, that when Saskoil 

was open for public shares, this government made a 

commitment that they would operate it without government 

interference, and we’ve held to that. While the news of the day, 

as you say, may be that the shares are undervalued, I assure you 

and this House that Saskoil is a very good investment, and in 

fact you will see those shares go up within time. 

 

If the member has any indication at all that he would like to 

invest, I would suggest it is a good investment and it will be 

going up. 

 

One further point, Mr. Speaker. That did not cost the taxpayers 

a dollar — not a dollar — as the member has suggested. We 

didn’t buy a potash mine, and we didn’t buy an oil company. 

They invested their money and they will get a fair return on it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, your 

statement simply is not accurate. The Saskatchewan taxpayers 

shelled out millions of dollars under the Saskatchewan Stock 

Savings Plan, and I ask you, Madam Minister, to explain to us 

why this is a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan to have 

Saskoil expand in Alberta. Why should the average taxpayer 

feel that this arrangement was a good deal for him, and why 

should they feel that this kind of generous give-away is fair 

when it only pertains to a few people in Saskatchewan? Why is 

that a fair scheme? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, when the stock savings plan 

was put into place, it was put in for a specific reason, and that 

was to encourage investment that would in fact serve this 

province well. That’s what happened with it. He wants to know 

why would they expand into Alberta. I would encourage 

Saskoil, if they should be inclined, to expand elsewhere also, 

because I believe it’s going to serve this province well. I will 

remind you that their corporate head office is in Saskatchewan; 

they pay income tax here, and the majority of their production 

and their employees are here, and that is good for our province 

and our people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1570 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Taxpayer . . . Madam Minister, I wish 

you would address the question that is asked. The question, 

Madam Minister, is this: would you tell the average taxpayer 

how much the Saskoil share offering costs them under the tax 

break known as the Saskatchewan Stock Savings Plan? The tax 

break, Madam Minister, if you don’t know, results in a 30 per 

cent income credit to a maximum of $3,000 per person. How 

many people in Saskatchewan took advantage of that tax break, 

and how much did that cost Saskatchewan taxpayers overall? 

Would you please answer those two questions for me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — His first addressing to me was correct, 

Madam taxpayer, with the recent notice I got from Revenue 

Canada, I’d like the member to know. In fact, it probably covers 

his salary, or close to it. I feel the sting like even the member 

from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

The member is looking for some answers that are not there, Mr. 

Speaker, because his assumptions are wrong. It is not a cost, it’s 

a benefit. And I don’t know how many times we would have to 

go through it before it would sink in, but that’s what it is. It’s a 

benefit to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and to this province, 

and it will bode well, Mr. Speaker, for the industry within the 

province in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Final supplementary. Order. Order. Order. 

Final supplementary. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I want to ask you another 

supplementary question. Since you were so obviously 

undervaluating the Saskoil shares, why didn’t you at least give 

smaller investors in Saskatchewan first crack at this generous 

scheme. The investment dealers report that two-thirds of these 

new shares were sold to non-Saskatchewan residents, while a 

number of Saskatchewan residents were unable to get their 

orders filled. My question to you again is, once you had decided 

to sell these new shares so far below value, why did you at least 

not give Saskatchewan investors a chance to buy these shares? 

Why didn’t you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, the government doesn’t 

make those decisions. My opening statement to the member 

from Saskatoon South was, in fact, this company is run as a 

private company, and it’s not run by the government. We on 

this side of the House do not believe that government has to 

operate everything day by day. In fact, this was an opportunity 

for individuals as a private company to be operating the 

company and run as they see fit, and that, in fact, is what has 

happened. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 

minister in charge of Saskoil, and I ask her this: is she aware 

that a major offering of Saskoil shares was made at the 

approximate price of $7.60 a share? Is she aware that on the day 

the offering was made the market price of those shares was of 

the order of $8.50? Does she believe, as she earlier said, that 

that would be a good buy at 7.60? And if all those are true, can 

she tell me why the people of  

Saskatchewan should be offering a further bonus of $2.25 a 

share for anyone from Saskatchewan who buys this share at 

7.60 when it has a market value of over 8.50? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am aware of 

everything that the Leader of the Opposition has laid out. I will 

say once again to the Assembly and to the Leader of the 

Opposition, the decisions are made by the company, and 

indirectly, I would suppose, through its shareholders, not the 

government. They made those decisions, and I believe that they 

are probably good decisions. We will for sure know in the 

immediate future, and the long term, the decisions that are 

made. 

 

I would guess, when I look at what has happened to Saskoil on 

the stock market and the interest, that in fact most people do 

believe it is a good investment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 

Believing as the minister does that this was a good investment 

at 7.60 and a good investment at today’s price of $8.75, 

whatever it is, would she explain why the taxpayers should be 

giving a bonus to people who pursue this good investment? 

Would she explain why the government — not the company, 

but the government — made the decision to give the buyers of 

these shares a bonus of $2.25 for each share they bought? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I have already referred to 

the stock savings plan. Other provinces do it. I believe that it 

has served this province well with companies other than 

Saskoil. And Saskoil, obviously, has taken advantage of this 

one too. And the people, the people that have responded . . . 

You just heard your own member from Saskatoon South talking 

about people that couldn’t get shares that wanted them. That’s 

one of the reasons why. It’s a good way for investment in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Indeed I 

could expect that when you’re offering shares worth $8.50, 

which have a net cost of $5.35, you’re going to get a long 

line-up. There’s no question that it’s good for the people who 

are buying the shares. 

 

My question to you is: would you explain how it is for the 

benefit of Saskatchewan taxpayers that you give a tax break, 

which means that people who buy these shares have to put up 

about $5.35 net when they get a share which is worth over 

$8.50 on the market the very day they buy it? Would you 

explain how that’s a good deal for ordinary Saskatchewan 

taxpayers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the more 

people that we get investing into enterprises that originate in 

this province, the better it is for the province. That’s the bottom 

line. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 

Obviously, Madam Minister, we can get everybody to invest if 

they’re all going to get a major bonus from the   



 

August 6, 1986 

1571 

 

Saskatchewan treasury. What I am . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And it’s a lot cheaper than buying 

potash mines. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We will debate that at the proper time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order! 

Order. That also applies to the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

delighted that the intervention of the member for 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden . . . And I take it that means he will be 

prepared to answer questions about the potash corporation. But 

right now . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. The Leader of the Opposition is attempting to ask a 

supplementary but isn’t getting much co-operation. Please 

allow him to ask the question. 

 

Order, please. Order, please. I think that if both sides just calm 

down, then the Leader of the Opposition can ask his question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. My 

question . . . My supplementary to the minister is this: why do 

you feel that ordinary taxpayers should suffer major tax 

increases and major cuts in the services, and at the same time 

give a bonus to people who buy shares, a bonus of $2.35 for 

people who buy shares for $7.60 which have, as you freely 

admit, a market value of $1 more the day they buy them? Under 

those circumstances, why do you feel the taxpayers should offer 

a bonus to the people who buy those shares? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, once again, the stock 

savings plan was put into place to encourage people to invest in 

our home province, and that’s Saskatchewan. I suppose we 

could stand here for a long time, and we could question whether 

government puts in money or private people put in money. I 

would suggest to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition that it all 

comes out of the same pocket. The government, in fact, is the 

taxpayers’ dollar. It doesn’t grow on trees; it comes out of the 

working person on the street. I think we could agree on that 

point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the stock savings plan allows an incentive to 

invest in Saskatchewan. How is that good for the people of 

Saskatchewan? First of all, for those who choose, Mr. Speaker, 

to make an investment into Saskoil and in fact into 

Saskatchewan, it gives them an opportunity to make some 

decisions where they are going to put their money. 

 

As it relates to the province, I see several factors where it in fact 

is good for the province. It gives a base of further cash flow to 

the company for expansion. We’ve seen some expansion. I’ve 

already stated their corporate head office is in this province, 95 

per cent of the production is in this province, and the majority 

of their employees are in this province. 

 

Jobs, the investment, and in turn, Mr. Speaker, the income and 

the income tax and the revenues, the spin-offs into the 

small-business community are all a part of the picture. And I 

don’t know why that escapes the Leader of the Opposition. But 

it does not escape this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I regret 

that the minister is not directing her attention to the question 

I’m asking. Does she deny that the issue would have been sold 

out without the tax break? Does she deny that all the benefits 

that she speaks of would have been there without the tax break, 

and why did she feel it necessary to give a tax break of 5 to $10 

million to people to buy shares when they were perfectly 

willing to buy the shares without the tax break? Now why do 

you do that, Madam Minister? Why do you feel that these 

people are the neediest people in Saskatchewan, and not some 

of the other people whose services you are cutting? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Whoops! Far from it. First of all the 

Leader of the Opposition’s question is rather hypothetical. But 

let’s try and deal . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, it is. It is. 

Think about it. Let’s try and deal with it anyway. 

 

Why the stock savings plan? It is precisely to encourage 

Saskatchewan people for the benefits and to invest in this 

province. It’s that simple. If I could draw a picture for you, I 

would, but I’m a very poor artist. I hope that clarifies it for you. 

 

Aid in Meeting Drug Needs 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Premier. First of all, I wish to welcome him 

back to the legislature. And I say to the . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And, Mr. Speaker, judging by the warm 

applause he received from his back-benchers and the 

front-benchers, they want him and need him back, given the 

answers that they’ve been giving the last little while. So they 

welcome you back too, sir. 

 

My question is this. We have just seen, in the questions and 

answers between the Leader of the Opposition and the Minister 

of Energy, the specific difference and the difficulties of your 

taxation give-away policies, coupled with the cut-backs of 

programs — 5 to $10 million on the Saskoil share offering, 

while people on the drug plan, for example, in need, in some 

instances, are not able to look after their monthly drug bills. 

 

My question to you, sir, is this: in the absence of the Minister of 

Health, who advised this House a few weeks ago — several 

weeks ago — that there would be a special catastrophic needs 

plan for those in dire straits, when in the world will you and 

your government get off your butts and start announcing that 

kind of special aid plan for those who need it in the light of the 

cut-back program? 

 

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1572 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me 

to address the question put forward by the member from 

Riversdale. It took him a fair time to get to the point. I will say 

that with respect to investment, with respect to investment, it is 

important to have people, not only Saskatchewan people, but 

other Canadians investing in Saskatchewan to create the 

economic activity to have the tax base. 

 

Now there is two ways that we can do that. We can take the 

government and we can buy potash mines or uranium mines or 

packing plants or various kinds of things or, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. The 

Premier is attempting to answer the question — order, order — 

and isn’t getting co-operation from two or three members. 

Please allow him to answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to investment 

that the member from Riversdale brought up, it’s important that 

we do have investment. I’m sure he wouldn’t disagree with that. 

If we can have more investment come into Saskatchewan and 

more Saskatchewan people invest here, it creates more jobs and 

more revenue. 

 

To give you an example, the Saskatchewan Power bond issue 

where the power company can go to the people of 

Saskatchewan and borrow 100 million or 200 million or 300 

million — rather than New York — then the interest goes to 

Saskatchewan people; in turn they invest in Saskatchewan and 

we can have more economic activity, and as a result we have 

either the second or third lowest unemployment in Canada. 

Now that’s important for our tax revenue base. 

 

Secondly, with respect to expenditures on health care and social 

services. As you know, health care is up 60 some per cent since 

1982, and we see the expenditures increasing at a very large 

rate. The only way that you can sustain that, and the hon. 

members knows that, is to have the increase in economic 

activity that would allow us to be able to afford a foundation, 

the economic tax base, to be able to do that. 

 

Finally, with respect to the specific announcement on the 

comprehensive program for people who have long-run or 

chronic drug needs, that will be announced, I would expect, in 

the next two or three days, or surely within a week. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Supplementary. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

have a supplementary question to the Premier. 

 

It’s all well and good to talk about investment and generation 

back of funds. But in times of economic restraint, Mr. Premier, 

where everybody is asked in Saskatchewan to tighten belts, I 

want you to explain to this House how that solves the problem 

of Mr. Ross Reaney in Saskatoon, who has $600 a month of 

drug bills and cannot afford to pay them. How does your fine 

little speech help out Mr. Ross Reaney and the tens of others 

that we’ve brought to the attention of your government  

and are now awaiting for several weeks, an answer? How does 

that help them out? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I believe the hon. member . . . The hon. 

member is aware that there was a two-month lag time between 

the old program and the new program. So under that two-month 

program . . . the lag time, certainly people who had difficulties 

had the same opportunities to have them covered as before. And 

that’s why we took that amount of time, to make sure that we 

could then kick in a program, after the two months, that would 

cover all those people that had a chronic problem, as they do in 

Manitoba. 

 

So I would say to the hon. member that that two-month period 

of time, from the time we initiated the budget and watching it 

go through, has allowed people that. 

 

Secondly, with respect to the specific concerns that he raises, 

and others, they have gone to the Minister of Health. We’ve 

examined them carefully, and in the next few days we’ll be 

announcing the comprehensive program that will apply to 

everybody, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Supplementary question to the Premier. 

With the greatest of respect to the Premier, he’s far too glib 

with words in his answers; far too glib in this regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And my question, supplementarily, is this, 

Mr. Premier . . . Mr. Speaker, through you, which I must just 

preface by bringing to the attention of the House this 

advertisement by your government on July 1, introducing the 

drug plan. 

 

Why is it, in describing the elimination of the drug plan, why is 

it that you, sir, and your Minister of Health, did not take into 

account the kinds of emergency and catastrophic circumstances 

faced by Ross Reaney and by tens of other people? Why is it 

that you’re making them suffer for up to two months, as Mr. 

Reaney and others are, while you’re giving millions of dollars 

of tax breaks to people who don’t need those tax breaks? How 

do you explain that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 

Riversdale is not being accurate with the information, and he 

should be called on it. 

 

I said, when we announced the program, and let me repeat, that 

there’s two months overlap between the old program and the 

new program. I’ve said that twice. I’ll say it again: there’s two 

months overlap to allow us to examine and to allow people to 

make the transition. 

 

Now we’re going through that process, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve 

had contact with people across Saskatchewan. They’ve written 

us, and the Minister of Health, and said, as we get to the end of 

that program, let’s start the new one that is comprehensive. And 

that’s precisely what we’re  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1573 

 

doing. So the hon. member knows that. We didn’t just start it 

July 1 and end it July 1. There’s a two-month overlap to allow 

those changes to take place. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — A new question to the Premier. New 

question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. My question is a 

follow-up of the questions on the drug plan. My question 

pertains to Mr. Ross Reaney and the headline in the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix that says, “Ailing man runs out of prescription 

drugs,” and I quote from the story as follows, sir: 

 

Ron Waschuk, executive director of the plan, said recently 

(that) assistance for special cases are being worked out. 

Criteria were not complete or approved, he said on July 

22, but they should be in place “very quickly.” 

 

Now Mr. Reaney says in this story that he has run out of drugs, 

two of which could be life-threatening to him. How in the world 

does that two-month overlap policy apply for Mr. Reaney and 

the tens of others that have been brought to your attention — 

even by your own back-benchers, the member from Esterhazy. 

 

Here is a man who does not have the money to buy the drugs. 

He’s on a life-threatening situation, and you’re giving him 

gobbledegook that somehow he’s going to get this help. How 

long does he have to wait? How long do we have to wait? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll say it another time to 

the member opposite so that he understands the . . . and he may 

not want too. But you have a two-month overlap period . . . It 

was July 1 that it was announced, and there’s the overlaps, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve mentioned it several times. And during that time 

we will make sure that we design a program that will allow 

people . . . that will allow people who have chronic health care 

problems and drug problems to have a comprehensive . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! Order, please. Order, 

please. If the Premier has a few more words to say on the 

question he has the opportunity to do that now. I would like 

hon. members to give him that opportunity, if he so wishes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will just say that 

people in this province had an opportunity to purchase two 

months worth of drugs as an overlap and, Mr. Speaker, we put 

that provision in on the advice of people, that we received from 

people across the various health care institutions, and looking at 

the Manitoba plan, and to give us the time to make sure that we 

have an appropriate package when we bring it in in the next few 

days. 

 

So I think the hon. member understands that. If he wants to 

raise the issue over and over and over again, I mean, that’s fair 

enough. But the program is there. They have had two months to 

be able to purchase the drugs and, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be 

coming with the new program as quickly as possible. 

 

MOTIONS 

Leave of Absence — MLA for Cut Knife-Lloydminster 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I move: 

 

That a leave of absence be granted to the hon. member for 

Cut Knife-Lloydminster from Wednesday, August 26, to 

Tuesday, September 8, 1987, for his attendance on behalf 

of this Assembly to the 33rd Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association Conference in Kuala Lumpur, 

Malaysia. 

 

I so move, seconded by the Minister of Economic Development 

and Trade. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to make a statement on a point of 

order which was recently raised in this House. 

 

Indeed, on July 30, the member for Saskatoon Riversdale raised 

a point of order concerning the right of Legislative Secretaries 

to ask questions during oral question period. This is a very 

important question as it deals both with the basic rights of 

members and with a sensitive and important part of the 

parliamentary day — the question period. 

 

Oral questions are a relatively new element in the parliamentary 

process, particularly so in Saskatchewan, where we have had 

our current form of time limited question period only since 

1975. It is not surprising, then, that this House has no specific 

rules or precedents to guide the Chair in this matter. With this in 

mind, I listened with interest to the comments made by various 

members on the point of order. I thank the hon. members for 

their contributions. 

 

Before dealing with the specific issue respecting legislative 

secretaries, I want to clarify the broader issue respecting the 

rights of government private members in question period. In 

raising the point of order, the member for Saskatoon Riversdale 

indicated that question period was not the appropriate forum for 

“government members who have easy access to members of the 

cabinet, both in caucus meetings and other forums.” 

 

I want to make it very clear that government back-benchers 

have the same rights as back-benchers of other parties to ask 

questions. This is based on the fundamental right of every 

member to be heard, and is supported by precedents in this 

House. I refer hon. members to a ruling of the Chair dated 

December 9, 1975, which states that: 

 

It is the right of any private member to ask oral questions. 

While in practice the number of questions is always firmly 

weighted to the opposition side of the House, it is 

important to remember that the rules of parliamentary  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1574 

 

procedure do not require or assume that all members of 

one party speak with the same voice. Moreover, it is 

important to give private members the opportunity to raise 

in the House issues which concern their constituents. 

 

Now I want to turn to the question of whether it is appropriate 

for legislative secretaries to ask questions in question period. In 

this Assembly since May of 1983, at least eight questions have 

been asked by legislative secretaries in question period. In all 

cases, except for the one last week, the questions were allowed, 

and no points of order were raised. None of them were put to 

the Legislative Secretary’s own minister, except for the last one, 

asked on July 30, 1987 by the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 

And in this case, it should be noted that the member is the 

Legislative Secretary for the Premier as the President of the 

Executive Council, while another member is Legislative 

Secretary for the Premier as Minister of Agriculture. 

 

The practice of the Canadian House of Commons was referred 

to in the point of order and in the ensuing discussion and, 

therefore, it may be useful to trace how the House of 

Commons’ practice in this area has evolved. 

 

Initially, parliamentary secretaries were allowed to ask 

questions as well as to answer them. As late as 1973, Speaker 

Lamoureux ruled that parliamentary secretaries had the same 

right as other members to ask questions, although he expressed 

some reservations about the propriety of this in certain 

situations. You will find this in debates of the House of 

Commons, March 6, 1973, pp. 1932-1933. Despite this ruling, it 

appears that it was not considered appropriate for a 

Parliamentary Secretary to ask a question of his own minister. 

You may find this in debates of the House of Commons, 

November 5, 1974, p. 1062. 

 

On November 5, 1975, Speaker Jerome ruled that: 

 

Those who are clothed with the responsibility of 

answering for the government ought not to use the time of 

the question period for the privilege of asking questions of 

the government. 

 

This is in debates of the House of Commons, November 5, 

1974, page 1060. Since that time it has become the accepted 

practice that parliamentary secretaries are not permitted to ask 

questions in question period. 

 

In Saskatchewan the role of legislative secretaries, while still 

evolving, does not and has not, in practice, including the role of 

answering for or acting for the minister in the House in the 

minister’s absence. Thus, the House of Commons situation, 

where parliamentary secretaries were able both to ask and to 

answer questions, does not arise here. A further distinction 

between legislative secretaries and ministers should also be 

made. A legislative secretary is responsible only to his or her 

minister for subjects within the minister’s area of responsibility, 

unlike cabinet ministers who are collectively responsible for the 

operation and policies of the government as a whole. 

 

In view of these differences and practices, I find it would  

be inappropriate to apply the rule . . . to apply the current House 

of Commons practice rigidly in this Assembly. Based on our 

more restricted role for legislative secretaries, based on our past 

practice, and based on the realization that question period is 

more than just a forum for seeking information, it is my view 

that, on rare occasions, legislative secretaries could be 

recognized to ask questions in question period. However, such 

questions should only be directed at ministers other than the one 

for which the member serves as Legislative Secretary. 

 

The duties of a Legislative Secretary, and the special 

relationship that exists between the Legislative Secretary and 

his or her minister and department, make it highly inappropriate 

for the time of question period to be used by a Legislative 

Secretary asking questions of his or her own minister. 

 

While this ruling may be appropriate under current 

circumstances, this practice may need to be further restricted as 

the role of legislative secretaries evolves. In the meantime, I 

invite the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures to 

review this area with the view to giving advice and guidance to 

the Assembly on this matter. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 

want to spend some time asking the minister some very specific 

questions about technical institute cuts. The first item I’d like to 

focus on is cuts that the minister has implemented at the 

Saskatchewan Technical Institute in Moose Jaw, specifically, 

cuts to the truck driver training and heavy equipment operator 

programs, both of which he has chosen to eliminate in that city. 

 

And my first question is with respect to a contractual 

arrangement that existed between his government and the 

Moose Jaw Exhibition Board. The truck driver training and 

heavy equipment operator programs had a seven-year lease with 

the Moose Jaw Exhibition Board at a cost of $121,000 a year. 

And with the elimination of those two programs, it’s clear that 

those programs will no longer be using facilities that the Moose 

Jaw Exhibition Board was leasing to them, and facilities, I 

might add, Mr. Minister, that were especially designed for the 

use of those two programs. 

 

And my question to the minister is this: in light of the fact that 

the lease agreement between your government and the Moose 

Jaw Exhibition Board does not expire until 1991, and in light of 

the fact that the value of that lease agreement is $121,000 a 

year, can you tell members of this Assembly and the public 

what the status of that lease agreement is? Are you going to 

continue paying the  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1575 

 

Moose Jaw Exhibition Board $121,000 a year even though the 

programs that were using those facilities have been cancelled, 

or are you reneging on your contractual agreement to the Moose 

Jaw Exhibition Board? What’s the current status of that lease 

agreement, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, thank 

you for your question. The truck driver training and the cuts 

you referred to there, I might tell the hon. member and the 

members of the legislature, for the last year in which we have 

statistics for truck driver training, 51 per cent were ending up 

with jobs after they had gone through the course. And for heavy 

equipment operators, the same number was 7 per cent. 

 

I think this strikes at the heart of some of the debate we’ve had 

here in the past couple of weeks in so far as why changes have 

been made at technical institutes; why some courses have been 

down-sized and maybe even some eliminated; and why new 

courses have been put in place, because where the opportunities 

are decreasing in one area, there are opportunities increasing in 

the other area. I would want to put those on the record for you 

because I think it shows to you that there’s been a rational and 

reasoned approach in so far as why changes have been made in 

specific course areas. 

 

As it relates to the contract and the Moose Jaw Exhibition 

Board, it’s something we’re aware of, it’s under examination 

and negotiation at this very time, I’m advised. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I’d like a more detailed response 

from you. Either the taxpayers of this province are going to be 

losers in this arrangement — because they’re going to have to 

pay $121,000 a year to the Moose Jaw Exhibition Board for 

facilities that are no longer going to be rented out to the truck 

driver training and heavy equipment operator training programs 

— or else the Moose Jaw Exhibition Board is going to be out 

$121,000 a year as a result of the failure of your government to 

live up to the lease agreement. 

 

(1445) 

 

Now we on this side of the Assembly would like to know which 

one is it? Are you going to honour the lease agreement, or are 

you on the other hand going to end up in a situation where you 

renege on the lease agreement and cost the exhibition board a 

great deal of money? Will you tell members of this Assembly 

which it is? And will you also indicate, Mr. Minister, while 

you’re answering that question, whether prior to cutting the 

training programs for heavy equipment operators and for truck 

driver training, whether prior to cutting those programs there 

was any consultation with the Moose Jaw Exhibition Board 

about the status of the lease agreement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To answer your second question first, 

the answer is no. And what you have painted, and I might add 

inaccurately or erroneously, or maybe you’re leading some 

negotiations that I’m not aware of . . . Because what you have 

done here, after I just finished saying it’s under examination 

and negotiation, what you painted, typically and, quite frankly, 

wrongly, is a complex issue and a serious issue, and you’ve 

somehow  

said there’s only two answers to this — we lose 121, or they 

lose 121. 

 

And it is much more complex than that. I’m not wanting to 

duck your question except to say that it’s not an either/or 

situation. And that’s so wrong for us in this House as 

politicians, to constantly reduce every complex issue to a 

simply duality — either/or, right/wrong, them/us. You know, 

things are much more complex than that in society today. And 

that’s a typical sort of reaction, too often, I would suggest. 

 

And not wanting to duck the question, and not wanting to tip 

our hand in terms of negotiation, and thirdly, not being the lead 

agency in the negotiations, any further information would have 

to be forthcoming from the property management corporation 

who in fact looks after our physical plant. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another 

question with respect to the heavy equipment operator training 

program, specifically, and it relates to the fact that after you 

cancelled that program and laid off all the staff associated with 

that program, your department suddenly decided to reinitiate the 

program again for a few months. As I understand it, the heavy 

equipment operator training program in Moose Jaw is going to 

be operating well into the fall; the instructors have been hired 

again; student enrolment has begun again; and it may well be 

extended into 1988. 

 

Will the minister confirm that the only reason for that program 

being extended is not because of the training value of the 

program, which we on this side of the House think was a 

significant value to that program — contrary to the minister — 

but will he acknowledge that the only reason that program is 

being extended is because you had a contractual commitment 

between your government and the RM of Marquis, and that the 

reason that program is now being suddenly continued again is 

to fulfil that road building contract between your government 

and the Rural Municipality of Marquis. Will you acknowledge 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’ve simply 

demonstrated in that statement an example of the incompetence 

with which the cuts that you have implemented at STI have 

been made. 

 

You didn’t consult with the Moose Jaw Exhibition Board before 

you eliminated the training programs that the Moose Jaw 

Exhibition Board was leasing out space to. There was no 

consultation with the exhibition board. There was no 

consultation at all with the instructors in either the heavy 

equipment operator training program or the truck driver training 

program before you cancelled it. And because there was no 

consultation with those programs, your officials didn’t even 

know about the contract that existed between those programs 

and the R.M. of Marquis, and now you’ve had to back up and  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1576 

 

reinstitute the program in order to fulfil that contractual 

commitment. 

 

And I say, Mr. Minister, we on this side of the House say that 

that’s an example of the lack of consultation and the 

incompetence with which these cuts have been implemented. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. My 

question to the minister deals with similar topics, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

The minister appears not to be listening, Mr. Chairman. Is he 

planning to answer or respond to the last question, or is he 

intentionally not listening? He indicates, Mr. Chairman, that he 

intends to make a remark, and I’ll provide him the courtesy of 

doing that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member has tried to 

suggest, and inaccurately and erroneously, I might add, that we 

went into this process with our eyes shut and not having all of 

our facts in front of us — in fact, going so far as to say we 

didn’t know that we had this contract obligation with this R.M. 

when in fact we knew all of that. And in the face of knowing all 

of that, we decided two things: (a) that the transfer of this 

program to NIT campus would still go ahead, because we 

thought there were more compelling reasons in a global sense to 

move it to NIT than just simply one contract and one location 

outside of Moose Jaw. 

 

So we went into it not making the decision after the fact, but 

knowing up front that that was one of the complexities of 

making this change and transferring the program to NIT. 

 

Certainly, I suppose we could have given notice to the R.M. We 

chose not to do that. We chose to fulfil our obligation there and 

take advantage of the training opportunity. 

 

And I would point out to the hon. member, and to the public 

and to the members of the legislature, that in moving it to NIT 

somehow one ought not draw the conclusion that if you’re in 

Gull Lake, Saskatchewan, that you can’t access these training 

opportunities, because you can. And that’s part and parcel of 

the concept of the single institute. 

 

So to put it simply again, we knew before we made the change 

that there was this situation that required attention. It’s not a 

matter of sort of stumbling along, making a change and then 

realizing, oh, oh, we’ve got this contract. Such was not the case. 

We knew that going into it. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, another question to the 

minister. It’s difficult for members on this side of the House to 

understand how it is that you knew ahead of time about the 

contractual commitment between your government and the 

R.M. of Marquis, specifically between the heavy equipment 

operator training program at STI and the R.M. of Marquis, 

because you laid off all the instructors in the heavy equipment 

operator training program. You indicated to them that their jobs 

were done. You indicated to the students that the student 

positions  

were no longer available. 

 

And then suddenly you turn around a few months later, change 

your mind, reinstate the instructors, reinstate the student 

positions. And you simply — and you’ve already indicated to 

this Assembly that the reason you did that was to fulfil the 

contract between the training program and the R.M. of Marquis. 

 

It seems obvious to members on this side of the Assembly that 

you hadn’t given consideration to that contract when you 

cancelled the program. Will you acknowledge that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I apologize for the delay, but the 

question that you raise is, as I mentioned earlier, relatively 

complex. And it’s complex for this reason, that at the same 

time, as you will recall, with the restructuring of post-secondary 

education, the other initiative that was occurring, of course, was 

the 2,000-position, down-sizing exercise of the government as a 

whole. And as part of that initiative there was a day picked, if 

you like, to have all lay-offs occur. 

 

And the reason that we didn’t sort of sprinkle them out and 

have this rather anguishing process occur over a six-month 

period — two or three every day — was because we feel 

strongly about the welfare of our employees, and we wanted to 

provide them with every opportunity possible, and I’m speaking 

specifically of things like bumping opportunities and the right 

to job opportunities that might pop open in the system. 

 

So much as you might want to connect what’s happening with 

Marquis, and that contract — and who’s training and who’s not 

— the overriding process that was happening at the same time, 

if you like, was this lay-off process. And there was some 

bumping, and some of those individuals have bumped, and 

bumped into NIT, in the case of truck driver training. And I 

don’t have a list of who went where, and who took what job and 

who came back on contract, etc., etc., etc., except to say to you 

that it’s a tortuous process because bumping can involve — set 

up a domino effect where you can get a chain reaction of two or 

three or four. 

 

But the bottom line on the whole process, we wanted to make 

sure that our employees who suffered lay-offs enjoyed the 

protection, and more than that, enjoyed the opportunities of (a) 

new job opportunities, or (b) bumping rights and privileges. 

And that was happening concurrently, if you like, and hence I 

caution the member from drawing conclusions about a 

particular management style, given the fact that those two 

events were going on somewhat concurrently. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well now that the minister has raised the 

question of his employees bumping up to NIT, that raises 

another interesting question with respect to this cut, Mr. 

Chairman, and I want to ask the minister specifically if he can 

explain to this Assembly what sense it makes to undertake the 

following scenario that his government has chosen to undertake. 

We have a truck driver training program at STI in Moose Jaw. 

It was very well established and operated successfully for a 

long time. There was a satellite program, that was connected 

with the STI program, that operated in the North. 

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1577 

 

 

Your government set up the Northern Institute of Technology 

and decided to also offer truck driver training at NIT. Now what 

happened then is that you hired a number of new employees. 

You chose not to use the employees from the satellite program 

in your new NIT program. With one exception, you hired new 

staff at NIT, and now a year later what you have done, Mr. 

Minister, now within a very short period of time, Mr. Minister, 

what you have chosen to do is eliminate the long-established 

truck driver training program at STI in favour of the 

newly-established program at NIT, and generally speaking what 

has happened, with one exception, is that the people who were 

teaching in Moose Jaw in the STI truck driver training program 

are now all being forced to move up to Prince Albert, by way of 

bumping, to teach in the program at NIT. 

 

(1500) 

 

The minister nods his head. That’s exactly what’s happened. 

The people who were teaching at STI, for the most part, are 

now going to have to move up to Prince Albert to teach there, 

so you’ve dislocated those people. You’ve dropped the 

well-established program at STI in favour of the 

newly-established program in Prince Albert, and so I want to 

ask the minister what the logic of that is. 

 

And in responding to that logic, perhaps he will explain to this 

Assembly why it is that the Trucking Association of this 

province, and the Safety Council of this province, have both 

indicated to your government that Moose Jaw is the appropriate 

location to train truck drivers; that Prince Albert is not the 

appropriate location because it doesn’t have the kind of 

four-lane highway provisions that are required to do good 

training. It doesn’t have the kind of high-density traffic that’s 

required to do truck driver training. 

 

The Moose Jaw location has those provisions. It’s close to the 

city of Regina. Students in the truck driver training program and 

instructors can readily use the four-lane highway between 

Regina and Moose Jaw to do training. They can readily use the 

high-density traffic situations in Regina as part of their training. 

Prince Albert doesn’t have those provisions. 

 

We in this Assembly aren’t suggesting, Mr. Minister, that you 

ought to have cancelled the program at NIT. What we’re 

wondering about is what the logic was in light of what the 

Safety Council in this province has said, in light of what the 

truck driver’s association in this province has said, why did you 

cancel the program at STI and force all the instructors, who 

were teaching in that program at STI to move up to Prince 

Albert? Why did you do that? What’s the logic of that in light 

of what I’ve just said? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member, Mr. Chairman, 

used the word “force.” And that is patently wrong. Because 

what he is suggesting there that somehow what the union has 

negotiated in their contractual agreement is somehow 

inadequate, and somehow they are not representing their 

employees well. 

 

How can the hon. member square that with an agreement that 

was duly ratified and a bumping process that was  

bargained in good faith and willingly, and has been in place for 

some good, long time in this province. Somehow a bumping 

process that everyone agreed too is now no good. A bumping 

process that’s a right and a privilege and a protection, that was 

there for these kinds of situations somehow he suggests it’s not 

the right kind of process. And he’s saying that I am forcing 

somebody, and that is patently wrong, Mr. Chairman — 

patently wrong. 

 

Give me one example of an interface with this minister with one 

employee. Give me one example. Because you are patently 

wrong and inaccurate — patently. And you are absolutely 

wrong on that — absolutely. And your logic about the fact that 

there are no freeways around Prince Albert is sound. I 

acknowledge that. But the rationale for moving and having the 

centre of excellence, if you like, in Prince Albert is that if you 

look at the heavy equipment operators where we’ve had, 

according to our most recent surveys, a 7 per cent uptake in the 

graduates for jobs — 7 per cent, 7 per cent. That’s the ‘85 

numbers. 

 

And why we move it to NIT is because that’s where the jobs are 

in that area, is in the North. That’s where they are. 

 

So on the first count about forcing people to bump here or there 

or wherever, you’re patently wrong. We do not force people. 

They have that right, they have that privilege, and the lawyer 

advises me that it’s patently wrong. I thin if one checks 

Webster, the “a” can be taken either way on that one. But I will 

stand corrected if the hon. member so chooses. 

 

So you are quite wrong in your first assumption. And secondly, 

the logic as to why it’s at NIT is that we’ve got a 7 per cent 

track record in Moose Jaw . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 

the hon. member says from his seat that that’s not true. Then 

give me the numbers. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, would 

you not agree that the conditions necessary to provide quality 

truck driver training would include access to things such as 

four-lane divided highways in order to practise passing; 

expressways and clover-leafs to give that kind of experience to 

students; steep hills and winding roads in order to practise fast 

shifting under load and adjusting to lane position on curves; 

multi-lane streets with heavy traffic; narrow congested streets 

with traffic for turns and lane positions that you would find in 

old warehouse areas. 

 

Would you not agree, Mr. Minister, that those are all 

prerequisites in deciding where you locate truck driver training 

in order to provide the necessary infrastructure, if you want to 

call it that, that prepares students to take on the rigs, to handle 

the rigs safely and competently once they graduate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My view would be that — and not 

being the professional here, obviously, but relying on the advice 

of professionals — I think Prince Albert and area has its share 

of steep hills, winding roads, etc., etc. to adequately train truck 

drivers, if you like. 

 

And I would add, I mean if you’re going to use your logic, one 

might say then, well how can you train somebody to  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1578 

 

operate heavy equipment for uranium mines and gold mining 

exploration at Moose Jaw, because there are no gold mines or 

uranium mining sites outside of Moose Jaw. I mean, so your 

logic is quite frankly picayune, it doesn’t make sense, and it 

breaks down if one tries to apply it generally. 

 

What we’re all interested is in making sure that these people 

have training opportunities, that we’re training them for where 

the jobs are, and in this case our evidence suggests to us — and 

I’m prepared to debate the numbers or whatever. I mean I’m 

using the information I have, and we don’t pick it out of the air. 

It suggests that if you look at the heavy equipment operators — 

and I don’t think there’s any surprise, given what’s happening 

in the gold mining particularly, and those areas in the North 

where we’ve seen some extensive development. When it comes 

to things like heavy equipment operators, the opportunities are 

in the North, and what better place to put . . . and make that as 

the centre of excellence than Prince Albert, I would suggest. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I find a little unbelievable the 

logic of your argument at times. I don’t know that in 

preparation for gold mining the training involves wandering 

around in a gold mine. But I do know this: in training to operate 

heavy rigs that move up and down the highways transporting 

goods across this province and across the country, it’s necessary 

to do that in the cab of a vehicle under the conditions that the 

driver will be operating those rigs when he gets out on the road. 

 

Now I ask you again, Mr. Minister, and I appreciated your 

comment before that you were not going to hedge on questions. 

And I would ask you to simply answer the questions that you’re 

asked here. I understand that there are steep hills and winding 

roads in the P.A. area, but will you tell me, Mr. Minister, how 

the Prince Albert area, as compared to Moose Jaw and its 

access to Regina, how are the conditions in Prince Albert better, 

such that it provides the necessary four-lane divided highways 

in order to practise passing. You will appreciate, Mr. Minister, 

even though you’ve never operated one of those rigs, that that’s 

not something that you practise in just a mile or two. 

 

So will you describe how that is more available in the Prince 

Albert area — expressways and cloverleafs, multi-lane streets 

with heavy traffic, and narrow congested streets with traffic 

returns and lane positions that you find, typically, in old 

warehouse areas? Will you please describe for me, Mr. 

Minister, how those conditions are found at least equally in the 

P.A. area as they are operating out of Moose jaw? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — With all due respect to the hon. 

member as I sat here and listened to his preamble, he made P.A. 

sound like it’s some country hamlet with a population of 23 — 

no sidewalks, no paved highways, no bridges, no whatever. I 

mean the issue is this, is it not: can the training program be 

adequately delivered? Even the member from Prince Albert 

doesn’t agree with his observations. 

 

What the issue here is, can NIT put out and assure a quality 

program for heavy equipment operators,  

whoever, at Prince Albert? I’m of the view they can. And one 

year from today, if we somehow have evidence to suggest they 

cannot, then I will be asking my employees to go with this new 

and separate and autonomous board of governors and raise that 

issue with them. 

 

And as I have a fair amount of faith in them that they are no 

more interested in turning out people that are unqualified than 

you and I are — I mean, that’s a given. We all want to have a 

good standard and a good quality. They don’t want to come out 

with a piece of paper that would suggest they’re not adequately 

trained. I have absolutely no doubt that they will be adequately 

trained. They’ve got a good reputation and it will be continued. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I wish you would listen carefully 

before making your superfluous remarks. I preceded my 

comments last time by pointing out the advantage of training 

out of Moose Jaw is the access to the training conditions that 

exist by operating with the city of Regina. It is not uncommon, I 

would point out, for truck drivers to operate their rigs in cities 

as they’re transporting goods across this province and across the 

nation. 

 

I think it’s obvious, Mr. Minister, that your response certainly 

lacks sufficient specificity to be convincing. 

 

But let me turn to another item, Mr. Minister, and come back to 

one that we talked about very briefly before, and that has to do 

with the contract that was held by the Government of 

Saskatchewan with the Moose Jaw Exhibition Company Ltd. 

for the lease of space at the seven-year lease for $121,000 a 

year, Mr. Minister. And would you please describe for me your 

understanding of the conditions of that contract. 

 

And this is a contract, I assume, with the same legal 

requirements as the contract with the R.M. of Marquis. There is 

a contract that exists. And will you please describe what the 

requirements of that contract are on the part of the Government 

of Saskatchewan, perhaps through the property management 

corporation now, and the Moose Jaw Exhibition Company Ltd. 

Would you please tell me what that contract requires? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To repeat somewhat again, we 

acknowledge there’s a seven-year contract, $121,000 a year. As 

well, the property management corporation is essentially the 

lead agency here. It’s not an either/or situation as I talked about 

earlier. There’s negotiations going on. 

 

And the reason I say it’s not either/or, for all the reasons I gave 

previously, but as well, if you sort of look at the role of the 

property management corporation, it’s a large perspective of 

what the government needs where. I mean, and I don’t know 

whether they . . . although we may not need if for the use we 

have in the past, it may fit into some other overall scheme in so 

far as government space throughout the province and 

throughout government. I mean, I guess I would hate to see us 

make management decisions by putting buildings ahead of 

programming and people. 

 

I mean, I think that would be a mistake for us, to sort of suggest 

that, well, because we’ve got a buggy whip  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1579 

 

manufacturing assembly line, although we don’t need buggy 

whip manufacturing any more, because we have the assembly 

line in the building, we somehow ought to continue to run it. I 

don’t think that logic would serve the public well. 

 

What I am saying is we ought not put the public interest, as it 

relates to training and training opportunities, secondary to 

filling up buildings. At the same time, we want to make sure 

that the public’s buildings are used efficiently, and the public’s 

contributions . . . or the taxpayers’ obligations are discharged 

correctly in terms of our legal obligations. 

 

It’s in the hands of the property management corporation. It’s 

not an either/or situation; it’s under negotiation, under 

consideration. And I really don’t have any more to add on it. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, what year does that contract that 

currently exists expire? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s a seven-year contract, but we 

don’t have with us what year it was initially signed. We’re all 

aware it’s seven years, but whether it has two or six or four 

years outstanding, we’re not . . . I can undertake to get and 

provide you at some later time if you so wish. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, if you’d provide that for me 

tomorrow, would that be possible? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll endeavour to do so. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And if I understand 

correctly what you have just told me about two minutes ago, 

then that it is your view that there is a contract in place right 

now between the property management corporation and the 

Moose Jaw Exhibition Board company, and it is your position, 

Mr. Minister, that the government is seriously considering not 

honouring that contract as it currently exists. I believe that 

that’s what you told me. Would you like to respond to that? The 

minister doesn’t . . . Do you want to respond to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Just to give you the best 

understanding that I have of this contract: likely when it was 

originally signed, because the property management corporation 

most likely did not exist then, it was probably signed between 

the Department of Advanced Ed and the Moose Jaw Exhibition 

Board. 

 

Now, of course, the property management corporation is the 

agency responsible for administering that sort of thing. And to 

correct you, no, I did not say we wouldn’t be honouring the 

contract. In fact, I just said that I’m very aware of the legal 

obligations that we have, whether it be with this property or 

others where we have contract arrangements. So I want to be 

clear on that. Once again, you’re trying to distil this to an 

either/or issue, and I’ve already said it’s complex. 

 

And finally, I said . . . And you’re saying either you honour the 

contract or you don’t. Well there are . . . It seems to me if I was 

from the property management corporation, and I  

don’t mean to speak for them, but it seems to me the kinds of 

things that they are probably looking at is maybe buy-outs. 

Okay, that would be one possibility. And there’s nothing 

dishonourable about that. 

 

The second possibility is seems to me, as I said earlier, that they 

have the larger perspective on what kind of space various 

departments and Crowns need to conduct the public business 

across this province. And it may well be that there is some other 

use needed. 

 

So why would you distort the issue, which I’ve already said is 

under negotiation, by trying to suggest that either you’re going 

to honour it or you’re not going to honour it, when I’ve patently 

said that is not the situation? 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, while we’re talking about 

distorting the issue, can we go back to your statistics that you 

used to describe the graduates of the truck driver training 

program? I believe that you said . . . and perhaps you’d like to 

correct this, because it is possible that you didn’t say what you 

meant or what you intended to say; that’s happened before. I 

believe you said that as for truck driver training students, who 

graduated in the year 1985, that 51 per cent got employment. 

 

Would you not agree, Mr. Minister, that the figure 51 per cent 

represents those 1985 graduates who were employed in the 

truck driving field in January of 1986? Would you not agree, 

Mr. Minister, that as a matter of fact, 68 per cent of the 

graduates were employed full time as of January 1986? And my 

question to you, Mr. Minister, is: how many of those graduates 

are employed full time today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can’t give you . . . I don’t know how 

many are employed full time as of today and whether they’re 

employed full time in the occupation for which they were 

trained or another occupation. 

 

But if the hon. member is somehow trying to set the case that 

myself and my department and our government has erred in our 

analysis of the trend lines and the retrospective analysis of 

training-related employment in the truck driver training area, I 

will share with you and all members of this legislature the April 

1986 Saskatchewan advanced education and manpower 

employment statistics report, because it’s chilling. 

 

The number I gave you at 51 per cent for 1985 paints a happy 

face on the situation. Here are the numbers. Training-related 

employment, 1981, truck driver training, STI, course length, six 

weeks. Okay? We’re talking about the same thing. In 1982, 

training-related employment, 48 per cent; 1982 — get this 

number — 17 per cent; 1983, 18 per cent. And you can say, 

well what! Did they get a job anywhere? Well look at what that 

number is. In ‘83, 39 per cent, only, found work in any area 

after going for this course; ‘84, 17 per cent. And it bounced up 

in ‘85 to 51. I was painting a happy face. 

 

Now as a responsible legislator, and as a responsible educator, 

and as a responsible custodian of the public purse, what would 

you do in the face of those numbers? Would you tell that 

person, and continue to tell them: you may have one chance in 

five, or one chance in two, or  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1580 

 

one chance in three that you’ll get a job in this area, but come 

on in. I mean that doesn’t make sense. I mean that’s the thrust 

of what we’ve been talking about in this House for the last 

couple of weeks. 

 

We’re not cutting back on programs just for the sake of cutting 

back, but who are you doing a favour with these kinds of 

numbers? And these aren’t something that we pick out of the 

air, and they’re not something that we put a political spin on for 

our own case — these are hard, cold, chilling statistics. 

 

And yet the hon. member from Saskatoon University, not unlike 

yourself, has said we must cling to the past, don’t make these 

changes, stick to the status quo. 

 

I say, on the one hand, as painful as it may be, if there are 

programs that need to be down-sized, programs that need to be 

consolidated, we must do it. On the other hand, and more 

importantly, put the program and training place in place for 

those new prospects and those new opportunities. Don’t you 

agree? 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, my understand of the Estimates 

review is that it is the responsibility of the opposition to ask the 

questions. It’s the responsibility of the government to provide 

the answers, and I wish he would do that. 

 

It may make a difference, Mr. Minister, if those reports were 

done in some month other than January. It may also make a 

difference, Mr. Minister, if those reports were done sometime 

following the completion of the courses, by the graduates, that 

gave an accurate picture of the record of employment. 

 

And I’ll answer your question, Mr. Minister. I will answer your 

question by telling you this. I will first of all point out that 90 

per cent of the graduates the truck driver training course got 

employment here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

If I was wanting to forecast a need for training, I would go to 

the industry, and I would ask industry: how many truck drivers 

do you need in the province of Saskatchewan a year? 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Minister, will you not agree that the 

industry in Saskatchewan today says that they can use 100 new 

truck drivers a year. And will you not agree as well, Mr. 

Minister, that the Moose Jaw Institute is turning out 60 truck 

drivers a year, and Prince Albert is turning out 45. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As it relates to the information that 

one would use, we would try to use all sources including the . . . 

certainly the industry. 

 

I mean, and you can pick your statistic from wherever you 

want, the reality and hard cold . . . and very hard and cold terms 

and unfortunate terms, as I reported to the House, but I would 

add this: that if there is this increased demand, or if there comes 

an increased demand, we will simply gear up the program. 

 

And you’re suggesting there is the demand. Well, I’m  

telling you that I come from an area in this province that has a 

significant amount of oil patch activity. And if you think there’s 

shortage of truck drivers in this province, then you come to 

Weyburn, Saskatchewan, and I’ll have 20 guys for you 

tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The industry has 

been promoting these courses for years, Mr. Chairman. And one 

of the reasons that they have been promoting them is a concern 

about safety in the industry. And the industry, as my colleague 

has indicated, is saying that they can use 100 new, trained truck 

drivers a year. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that what you’ve demonstrated 

here clearly this afternoon is that you simply didn’t go to the 

people who ran the programs in truck driver training and in 

heavy equipment operation to ask them what was happening to 

their graduates, because they know what’s happening to their 

graduates. And they know that their graduates have a far better 

record of employment than you claim in this House. 

 

And I say to the minister this: what the minister has 

demonstrated this afternoon is that he hasn’t accurately looked 

at the employment record of graduates from these programs. He 

didn’t consult with the industry or the training council before he 

abolished the programs. He ignored the request from the 

industry and from the safety council to locate the programs in 

the south in an appropriate training area. 

 

And moreover, he has ignored the contractual commitments that 

the two programs had before he cancelled them. It’s obvious 

from his answers today that he didn’t take into consideration 

either the contract that existed with the Moose Jaw Exhibition 

Board or the contract that existed with the R.M. of Marquis 

before he cancelled those programs. 

 

And I ask him today simply in concluding this debate, will he 

now reinstate the truck driver training program and the heavy 

equipment operator training program at STI? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To answer your last question first, the 

answer is no. But to give you and others some assurance that if 

a labour market demands more trained truck drivers, we will 

increase the training spaces. Or I would go this far to say that 

I’m sure those who are running the new institute will be 

cognizant and have access to the same kinds of numbers and 

data and trend lines as we do. 

 

But you cannot — I don’t know how you can — ignore the data 

that’s before us. And you’re right. There is more than one 

source, and predicting the future is always difficult at best. But 

how do you ignore numbers like less than one out of five in the 

last six years — there was three years where less than one out 

of five got training-related employment. Worse than that, in 

many of those years the . . . in terms of them getting a job in 

any area of employment was not great — 62, 68, 54 per cent, 

48, 39 per cent. 

 

So we can quibble about it. The important thing is — I  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1581 

 

guess the question comes down to this. Will the province of 

Saskatchewan’s post-secondary education system continue to 

train truck drivers? The answer is yes. Will they continue at the 

location Moose Jaw? The answer is no. It will be at NIT. And I 

have every reason to believe it’ll be a very highly-qualified 

program. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, enough of that. We 

obviously disagree with the minister’s decision. 

 

I want to turn to another cut and very simply ask the minister to 

explain to this Assembly why he made a decision to cut the 

learning assistance centre at Kelsey Institute and lay off the 

instructor there, despite the fact that one out of four students at 

Kelsey obviously need the services of that centre in the sense 

that one out of four students who were attending Kelsey last 

year had a reading level below that of complete grade 10. Can 

he explain to this Assembly why he chose to eliminate that 

program? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think you’ll find there’s a reasonable 

enough answer for your reasonable enough question as it relates 

to the question, being, will we be providing the learning 

assistance and guidance for the students. The background here 

is this. We had that function being undertaken by both the 

community college and the institute. With the amalgamation we 

found ourselves with this duplication. Now what will happen is 

that function will continue because we believe it’s an important 

one, but it’ll be delivered by the college component before the 

amalgamation. And I think the important thing is here that it 

continues, and I guess what I’m saying here today is that it will 

be continuing. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, just very briefly on this, will you 

give this Assembly your assurance that the services to the 

students at Kelsey will be at least at the same level as they were 

last year? Will you provide that assurance, because I can’t 

believe that this kind of a program couldn’t have used more 

staff and more support, rather than less. And it’s our view on 

this side of the House that that position ought to be reinstated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The assurance I can give you, as best 

as one can ever give it, is yes, and in fact perhaps even more 

than we’ve had in the past. I think that’s what you’re looking 

for, and I’m happy today to give you that commitment. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — A question with respect to your decision to 

substantially cut back on the agricultural machinery technology 

program at Kelsey. You’ve said, sir, a number of times in this 

Assembly that you were only eliminating programs that were 

being duplicated. This was the only program of its kind in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Sixty-nine per cent of the graduates 

who completed that program had jobs, full-time employment, 

within six months of graduating. You, sir, decided to lay off 10 

of the 12 permanent instructors in that program. Eight of them 

were rehired back in labour service positions, on a temporary 

basis. 

 

This is an agricultural province. This was an agricultural 

program. Can you explain to the farmers of this province why 

you decided that this program ought to have been substantially 

down-sized? Surely farmers are going to need to continue 

repairing their equipment, and maybe you can explain to this 

House why you didn’t see that program to be worthwhile? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — You asked me what I’m going to tell 

the farmers of Saskatchewan as relates to agricultural 

machinery technologists. As the farmer would know, and those 

who work in the equipment dealerships and in their shops 

around this province, I guess what I would — what I would tell 

them is a reflection of what they’ve been telling me. 

 

Agriculture is in a downturn. The price of wheat just this past 

— just this week went down 20 per cent. We’ve had a couple of 

droughts. We’ve been hit with a bizarre situation internationally 

in so far as subsidies and trade distortions. 

 

To put it simply, any farmer across this province would tell you 

that things are not good in farming and in the farm service 

sector. And one of those sectors in the farm service sector is 

machinery and machinery dealers and the shops and the service 

that they provide. And because of that downturn they are selling 

less machinery. 

 

Farmers are generally tightening their belt and being very 

careful in terms of how they repair and what they repair and the 

expenditures they make. And hence equipment dealers have 

been faced, unfortunately, with some lay-offs of existing staffs. 

And that’s why our government in the past put in place things 

like the 6 per cent production loan, and why our Premier 

lobbied — and lobbied successfully — for a billion dollar 

deficiency payment so that that money would find its way from 

the farmers’ pockets into the farm service sector. And it’s been 

very useful in its help and in fact net farm income this year will 

probably be in that billion dollar range. 

 

So in so far as government can act as a shock absorber and a 

stabilizer, I think we’ve done as well as one can do. But the 

hard, cold facts still are that agriculture is in a serious downturn. 

Lay-offs were occurring in that area. Four out of 10 graduates, I 

think, were finding work in that area, something in that order. 

 

Well the hon. member shakes his head. As I understand it, the 

employment rate for graduates in 1986 is 41 per cent. Now he 

can shake his head if he likes. I mean he can try and tell me, 

which he cannot succeed, that agriculture isn’t in a downturn, 

but it is. And it’s unfortunate. And it’s hurting our province. 

 

But we’re not going to abandon because of perhaps a short-term 

cycle, we’re not going to abandon turning out people who can 

repair and service farmers’ machinery. That might be 

short-sighted. And in fact despite this downturn, the reality is 

that, is that there will be . . . rather than having 96 seats we’ll 

have 88. 

 

And I don’t think that’s a monumental cut-back. I think it’s a 

prudent cut-back, and a prudent adjustment. So yes, there’s a 

program. Does it have 96 seats as it did last year?  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1582 

 

No, but it has 88. And is that unreasonable or unfair given the 

environment, if you like? I think not. 

 

Now in so far as the business of those employees, instructors 

that were changed to a labour service contract, once again, if 

you have instruction time, work time of 175 days and less as 

opposed to the traditional kind of expectation of 200 days and 

more, it’s not a wise use of the public purse to not make that 

kind of management decision. And so we have, because that 

may well mean that we have more money for programming. 

And that’s the reason why that was done, because there were 

not 200 days required or there was not 200 days of instruction 

required here. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — On that note the question I want to ask the 

minister is this: do you think it’s fair to expect that good people 

who’ve been working in full-time employment in a program — 

and we’ll use this as an example but you’re government has 

chosen to do this in dozens of programs throughout the 

technical system — reduce instructor’s time from 200 days to 

160 days and remove their permanent position from the payroll 

and instead hire them on a labour service basis after they’ve 

given years of service to this province. 

 

They were the lucky ones, I might add, because so many others 

were fired indiscreetly by your government. But what you’re 

essentially saying is that you’re asking these instructors to take 

a 20 per cent salary cut. 

 

And my first question to the minister is: is it fair, Mr. Minister, 

to ask good people who give a long service in this province to 

take a 20 per cent salary cut? 

 

And secondly, my question to the minister is this: how is to that 

you expect, in light of that, for these instructors to develop new 

courses, to keep up on the reading material in this program area, 

and generally to undertake all the responsibilities as instructors, 

over and above providing classroom instruction? 

 

You know full well, sir, that these people are responsible for 

things like curriculum development, updating of courses, 

reviewing the current literature to ensure that their programs are 

up to date. That’s what they spent that remaining 20 per cent 

time that you’re now taking away from their positions on. And I 

ask do you, not just with respect to agricultural machinery 

technology, but right across the board, is it fair to expect that 

they can do the same job in 80 per cent of the time and at 80 per 

cent of the salary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member raises a question of 

fairness. And I’m very sensitive to the whole issue of fairness, 

and it’s one that is really — I can honestly and sincerely say has 

been an issue that we’ve kept in front of us from day one, not 

only in terms of dealing with the post-secondary education 

issues but as well in the down-sizing exercise of government. 

 

And no, who would want to ever take any cut in salary? 

Nobody does. The farmers don’t want a 20 per cent cut in their 

initial grain prices. The farm machinery technologists, in some 

instances I’m led to believe, they wanted the job share, because 

in some instances, in fact,  

they were prepared to take . . . work less hours and receive less 

money just to have a job. That’s reflection of the times out 

there. But certainly nobody wants to take cuts. 

 

And yes, we have tried to be as fair as possible in this because 

. . . The question I would put to you is: is it fair to that instructor 

who’s working the 200 days, and who is keeping up on the 

literature and doing the curriculum writing and doing his 

research, etc., etc., is it fair to him that he does that for $200 . . . 

for 200 days for his pay cheque? And somebody else might be 

instructing 150, 160 days, 165 days, and having just that much 

more time, I suppose — unfairly — than the other person. 

 

So you know, I ask you, is that fair? I mean is it fair to the 

public? Is it fair to his other colleagues? How do we justify if 

somebody’s 165 days, when traditionally 200 days is used as a 

bench-marks, as you well know? 

 

I mean, is that fair? I can’t see that it is. I mean, we’re all 

interested in fairness, right from the farmer to the guy who 

works on his tractor, right to the guy who goes through college, 

right to the guy who instructs him. We’re all interested in 

fairness. 

 

And the reality of the issue, the overriding factor here . . . Did 

you mention 61 per cent employment-related jobs as the 

number here for the machinery technologists? 

 

An Hon. Member: — I said 69 per cent for all employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Sixty-nine. That was right in ‘85, but I 

think the member . . . I mean, if you have any sense of what’s 

been happening in agriculture in the last five years, these 

numbers clearly demonstrate it. 

 

Let’s look at the heady days of ‘81-82, when land prices were 

going up. Wheat was, what, 5 and $6 a bushel. Quotas were . . . 

Grain was moving very well. And the discussion then was, will 

there be enough . . . where will we get the capital investment 

required to deal with the farming of the future? At that time 78 

per cent were getting training-related employment and/or 78 per 

cent any employment. Okay? 

 

In ‘82, the number dropped to 64; ‘83, 70; up and down. Now 

we’re getting into the steeper declines — 60 per cent in ‘84; 54 

per cent in ‘85; 41 per cent in ‘86 — I mean, clearly reflective 

of what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

(1545) 

 

And I can appreciate that there are not many in your caucus 

who have some . . . any significant representation from rural 

Saskatchewan. But I can assure you that this caucus here is very 

sensitive to the plight of the Saskatchewan farmer and to those 

who work in the service industry. That’s why we’ve undertaken 

the initiatives that we have. We tried to cushion that as best we 

could, and with some degree of success, I might add. 

 

And . . . I mean, I’m not happy if anybody has to take a cut  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1583 

 

in salary. As I said, I’m not happy that uranium’s gone down or 

potash has gone down or wheat’s gone down or that oil’s gone 

down. Or if you work in those areas, you may have to work for 

less or you may not even have a job. But I think your argument 

of fairness . . . I mean, you have to look at it in all its 

dimensions. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — I want to ask the minister a question with 

respect to his decision to cut the office education programs at 

Kelsey and STI. You decided to cut the STI program in half; 

you decided to eliminate the office education program at 

Kelsey. 

 

The Kelsey program, Mr. Minister, had the best employment 

record of all office education programs in the technical institute 

system. In the past five years, 71 per cent of graduates got 

training-related employment, 78 got some form of employment, 

78 per cent got some form of employment, and 9 per cent were 

working part time. So in all, Mr. Minister, 87 per cent of the 

students who graduated from Kelsey in the office education 

program had jobs within six months of graduating. 

 

Can you explain to this Assembly what your justification was 

for eliminating the program at Kelsey and cutting the program 

at STI in half? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member is correct, for the 

most part, in what he provided this House with, but he 

conveniently ignored a couple of rather important facts. 

 

Yes, compared to last year, STI, the number of seats went from 

120 to 60; and yes, Kelsey, there was 48 and now there are 

none. But what he failed to point out to the members of this 

legislature, and I hope this is not something more than a case of 

selective amnesia, is that at Wascana there’s an increase, 225 to 

235; and at the Prince Albert campus there’s an increase almost 

double, from 40 to 75. 

 

When you add the two up, yes, we have decreased the number 

of seats by something less than 15 per cent, but there’s still 370 

training spaces because we recognize . . . It’s not as though . . . I 

mean, these issues are not black and white. I mean, it’s like the 

agriculture technologists. I mean, we didn’t take 96 seats 

because farming is in a cyclical downturn, and wipe them out. 

That would be imprudent. There are 88 seats still there, and in 

office education where there were 400-plus, there are now 370. 

 

So I think in interests of everyone, in terms of getting the 

correct story out, I won’t overstate the case if you don’t. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, what you’re . . . not only are you 

cutting spaces, but you’re denying access to young people in 

Saskatchewan to those programs in the centre where you’re 

eliminating them. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another question, and this next 

set of questions pertains to your decision to cut a number of 

health-related training programs at the technical institutes in 

this province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Yes, the minister says we touched on this yesterday, and it’s 

true, we did. And I want to spend a few moments of the  

Assembly’s time on it this afternoon. And I want to come back 

first to the certified dental assistant program at Kelsey. 

 

Mr. Minister, you’ve had representation from the advisory 

board to that dental assistant program, urging you to maintain 

the program. In other words, people in the field, people in the 

health professions, are urging you to maintain that program at 

Kelsey that you decided to eliminate. 

 

That program had an 85 per cent record of success with respect 

to people who found work six months after graduating from that 

program. And my information, Mr. Minister, is that as a result 

of the cuts that you’ve decided to make to that program at 

Kelsey by eliminating it, the province now, as a result of the 

program at Wascana, will only be graduating 40 to 45 students 

a year. 

 

The health professions are saying that 75 graduates are needed 

annually in this province. And one of the questions I have for 

you is: where will the other 35 graduates come from? And 

perhaps I can help the minister answer that question . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — He needs all the help he can get. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Yes, my colleague, the member for Regina 

Centre, says the minister needs all the help he can get, and I 

agree with my colleague. 

 

But I suggest to the minister that the course we’re taking, that 

the course we’re taking in these cuts is very similar to the 

course that the minister is setting when he made a decision to 

cut truck driver training and to cut office education. You are 

clearly hoping to open up opportunities in the private sector, for 

the private sector to offer those same courses at tuition rates 

four to five times what students at the technical institutes will 

pay, and that is likely going to happen again with respect to 

dental assistants. 

 

But my question to you, sir, is what is your justification for 

eliminating the certified dental assistant program at Kelsey 

when 85 per cent of the people who graduated from that 

program got employment six months after graduating? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well we are not disagreed on the fact 

that employment prospects for dental assistants have been very 

good. Your numbers are inaccurate in that the decrease is not to 

40, but rather to 50 seats. Why — and I want to make a point 

here — the hon. member continues to use the word “cut,” and I 

don’t mind, but he uses it sometimes, I believe, inaccurately. 

Because unless you use the word “cut,” you imply that there is 

no program being delivered at all. And I know that the hon. 

member would not want to leave the erroneous impression, by 

design or by accident, right? 

 

Because this is one of those examples, yes, the dental assistant 

program is being consolidated in one location. And it’s being 

consolidated in one location for many good reasons, and I went 

through some of these yesterday. Yes, you can find reports — 

and I’m not familiar with them; I once was, and I could get 

them from  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1584 

 

my office, I suspect — that would recommend, in fact, that they 

be consolidated in one location. I believe that we can find 

advisory reports that say that. You can probably find advisory 

reports that would say we should consolidate it all in Saskatoon. 

 

And, in fact, I might even make the observation you get a 

different perspective on where you should consolidate, 

depending on whether you talk to dentists in Saskatoon or 

Regina or Meadow Lake or Weyburn or Swift Current of 

Nipawin. You know, I think there has been some traditional sort 

of territorial infighting almost — and not that that isn’t healthy 

— when it comes to locating some of these programs. 

 

But the reality is everybody who sort of examined the issue, 

including, I believe, if my memory serves me right, your own 

government in 1978. If I . . . I may stand to be corrected on that, 

but I believe in 1978 your own government, the NDP 

government of the day, examined the issue of consolidating the 

dental auxiliaries at one location. And I’m quite certain on that, 

although I may stand to be corrected. 

 

So it’s not as though somebody else didn’t anticipate that a 

better service couldn’t be provided, and better training by 

having it in one location, while the program is consolidated at 

Wascana, because Wascana trains both dental assistants and 

dental therapists, and hence will be our centre of excellence for 

the health and dental sciences training. 

 

Secondly, as I mentioned yesterday, their curriculum has this 

flexibility to accommodate part-time enrolments who may 

desire to complete the training over a two-year period. That’s 

particularly important that we look at the women who want to 

partake of the training opportunities here, especially if they 

have family. And we’ve been fairly conscious of that in a lot of 

these programming areas, whether it be night-time course 

programming and that sort of thing. 

 

A third reason: Wascana’s facilities and equipment, I’m 

advised, are considered the best in Canada. And that’s a pretty 

compelling reason in itself. We have some cost savings because 

we eliminate the duplication. That frees up money to put into 

programming wherever. 

 

But I also give you the commitment that if we needed to 

gear-up training spaces to a larger degree than are now 

available, despite all the dynamics that are taking place today, 

we will do so. I mean, I think that should always be our 

objective: to be sensitive to the ebb and the flow of society; of 

where the jobs and the opportunities area; and where the desire 

is. I mean you can’t ignore the desires of the individual as well, 

who sometimes in the face of cold and chilling statistics still 

want to pursue certain professional areas. I think that should 

always be our responsibility, and as it always is. 

 

But I think the rationale is sound for the consolidation. I don’t 

think there is any arguing that particularly. I know, I suppose, if 

I was a dentist in Saskatoon, I might like it to stay all in 

Saskatoon, but when we weighed all the pros and all the cons, 

the pros outnumbered the finest facility for example, and we 

can expand our training there with  

very little cost, I’m advised, if we do have to. 

 

So for all those reasons we’ve consolidated it in one location. 

And I think it’s important to talk about how a program has been 

transferred from one location to another, and we ought to be 

careful about the impression that we might leave. We talk about 

cuts or cut-backs generally in education. Because I know the 

hon. member would not want to leave the wrong impression 

with the people of Saskatchewan about what’s really happening. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well it’s the minister who’s leaving the wrong 

impression with the people of Saskatchewan about what’s really 

happening. He says there are no cuts. The dental assistant 

program at Kelsey has been abolished. The program is now 

limited to Wascana where there’s been, according to the 

minister, a tiny expansion in the number of seats. So the total 

number of seats has been very, very substantially reduced. 

 

And I might point out to the minister that there were 237 

people, almost all of whom were women, who were trying to 

get into that Kelsey program in Saskatoon to begin in the fall of 

1987. The minister tries to claim that he’s creating new 

opportunities for women. All you have to do is look at your 

cuts, sir, to see that what you are attempting to do is reduce 

training opportunities for women in this province. 

 

Just look at your cuts in Saskatoon as an example. What did you 

eliminate? You eliminated 80 spaces in the diploma nursing 

program at Kelsey, all of which were spaces for women. You 

made a decision to eliminate the office education program at 

Kelsey, and everyone who was enrolled in that was female, I 

might point out to the minister. You eliminated the dental 

assistant program at Kelsey, and all the students in that were 

women. You eliminated almost — the minister nods his head — 

almost every student would be a women there. There may have 

been a couple of male students, but the large majority of people 

in that program would be women. You eliminated the certified 

nursing assistant program in Saskatoon. All the students in that 

were women. 

 

You have consistently, Mr. Minister, launched an attack on 

programs in the technical institute system. Most of the student 

spaces that have been eliminated have been spaces for women. 

Do you deny that? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I would want to point out again, as I 

did yesterday, and I will read into the record again some of the 

considerations that we have given to women and their training 

needs, now and into the future, Mr. Chairman, whether it be 

making sure that we have identified those job opportunities that 

are there now and those that would be there in the future, and 

accommodating their kind of family commitment sometimes; 

whether it be to have flexible curriculum and flexible courses as 

we have in Wascana; or whether it be in the provision of 

night-time courses. And I’ll let that record stand clear. 

 

And the one thing that we must never, ever let the NDP or the 

public of this province forget, Mr. Chairman, is this  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1585 

 

fact. Because this bears directly on the point of accessibility, 

whether it’s Northerners, women, or people across this province 

generally. 

 

Because I’ll ask this legislature and the public of Saskatchewan 

again: when the NDP were in power, was there a formal 

program of extension of institute courses across this province? 

The answer is no. The answer is no, again for the third time, 

and the hon. member in his initial questioning raised the whole 

issue of accessibility. And when they were in government, 

despite all their talk and lip-service that they pay to some of the 

groups out there, that they so vehemently espouse to represent, 

Mr. Chairman, the reality is they did not lift a finger for them; 

they merely paid lip service. 

 

And their idea of somehow being the sugar-daddy to women, 

somehow being the sugar-daddy to all the women in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, is their . . . Their idea of that is to have 

them engage in courses and training, have them spend a couple 

of years of their life, and maybe 10 or $20,000, and then when 

they come out and look for those jobs, they aren’t there. 

 

Nursing. Talk about some of these health sciences. In some 

cases, 60 out of every 100 or 75 out of every 100 graduates 

were not getting full-time jobs in their specialties. But don’t 

take my word for it. I’ll read again, because you raised the issue 

specifically, of the nursing assistants. And I’ll read again for 

you, because you’re so condescending and so all-knowing. 

What did the Saskatchewan Nursing Assistants’ Association 

report say on page 79? 

 

The Saskatchewan Nursing Assistants’ Association released a 

report on utilization of certified nursing assistants in 

Saskatchewan which advocated that overall institute admissions 

to the nursing assistant program be, and I quote now directly, 

“. . . sharply curtailed to bring supply back into reasonable 

balance with demand.” Page 79. 

 

Now the hon. member has suggested for the second day in a 

row, Mr. Chairman, that somehow I as minister or he somehow 

as opposition critic, knows more than the nursing assistants’ 

association. 

 

Just minutes ago, we had the hon. member from Moose Jaw 

North saying, don’t you ever listen to the professionals? Don’t 

you ever listen to the industry? Why didn’t you listen to the 

truck drivers’ association or the heavy duty equipment 

operators’ association? Okay? 

 

And now because we have listened to them and paid some heed 

to their report that says, you can continue to funnel in hundreds 

of young people but there are not jobs when they come out; you 

can continue to have young people spend 10 or $20,000 of their 

money and two years of their time, but there’s no jobs at the 

end of it; are we doing anybody a favour? 

 

I mean, the essential issue comes down to this again, Mr. 

Chairman. The world is changing. The economy is changing. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Let’s not get into a long speech. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And the hon. member across says, 

let’s not get into a long speech. Well I’ll tell you what. Until 

your party recognizes that the world economy is changing and 

we can no longer cling to the past with emotional rhetoric and 

blind ideology, you are going to be in opposition a long time, 

my friend. You’re going to be there a long time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Because the reality is, you do not 

have a blueprint. You have not researched this question. You 

have not consulted with the people. That is the reality. 

 

In every instance that you have raised in this House today and 

before, there has been a logical, reasonable, fair-minded, and 

sensible rationale for any program changes that were made — 

whether they were cut-backs, whether there were transfers, 

whether there were consolidation, whether there was the 

elimination of duplication or out-of-date courses. 

 

In every instance you have to admit, in every instance — 

whether it was machinery technologists, nursing assistants, 

heavy duty equipment operators — in every reason the logic 

was there, the rationale was there, the reasoning was there. And 

it was there in, too often, black and white, cold, chilling 

statistics. That is the facts. 

 

As I said yesterday, the questions that you should be asking in 

this legislature are: Mr. Minister, what are you doing about 

making sure that we have the training places in place for the job 

opportunities of the future? And that is the essential question. 

That is the essential question. And by making these changes . . . 

 

And I’ll tell you what. As a politician, if I had never to make 

any changes or make waves, I’d love the job. But we’re elected 

to do more than just be some kind of sit-on-our-butts 

politicians. If there are changes that have to be made because 

they are right, they’re responsible; then we must do them. You 

don’t make change just for change’s sake. 

 

In this case we’re talking about doing some things differently 

because the world is different, and you can dismiss this and 

shrug it off as some kind of philosophical musing. But don’t 

take my word for it. And I’m not going to take the time of the 

Assembly to read what the University of Saskatchewan had had 

to say about this, or what the Saskatchewan Community 

College Trustees Association has had to say about this. And I 

could go on and on. 

 

You are the only ones who don’t realize that the world is 

changing. The New Democratic youth recognized there had to 

be changes. The institutes’ students recognized there had to be 

changes. The staff recognized. It is only you who do not 

recognize it. And I’ll tell you what. I am quite prepared to go 

through this if you wish, course by course, number by number, 

because we have nothing to fear on this side of the House. We 

have nothing to fear and I’ll go through this course by course at 

every campus and at every institute and the numbers and the  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1586 

 

conclusions come up the same every time, every time. 

 

What we are doing is positioning ourselves for these job 

opportunities of the future and we remain unresolved in our 

determination to do so. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, we obviously hit a nerve. I note 

that you didn’t attempt to answer my question with respect to 

cuts to programs for women. I note you managed to ignore that 

studiously. 

 

But you raise some interesting points with respect to the 

position of the Saskatchewan association of nursing assistants 

and your cuts to the nursing assistant program, because I 

distinctly heard the Minister of Education trying to suggest to 

this Assembly that the Saskatchewan association of nursing 

assistants supports his cuts, and the minister knows that that’s 

simply not true. 

 

The Saskatchewan association of nursing assistants submitted a 

brief, many briefs to your government, asking your government 

to maintain accessibility to nursing assistants’ programs in this 

province in both Saskatoon and Regina. And my question to the 

minister is: does he deny that the Saskatchewan association of 

nursing assistants asked him to maintain the course at Kelsey as 

well as the course at Wascana, and does he deny that the 

Saskatchewan association of nursing assistants pointed out to 

him that every province except Prince Edward Island and 

Newfoundland has at least two points of access for students 

studying to be nursing assistants? Does he deny that? Does he 

deny that the association asked him to keep the Kelsey program 

open? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member perhaps wasn’t 

listening when I talked about the fact that we’ve been very 

conscious of women and the training opportunities that should 

exist and can exist for them now and in the future. 

 

And I’m going to go through these numbers again, because it 

doesn’t matter which one he picks — diploma nursing, certified 

nursing assistants. And I’ll put it to you. I know . . . I was at the 

graduation when the president of the nursing assistants’ 

association made her remarks. So I will leave it to the public 

and to you to ask the question, how do you square those 

remarks there, perhaps in the emotion of the moment, with their 

very own report that said, enrolment must be “. . . sharply 

curtailed to bring supply back into reasonable balance with 

demand.” 

 

And what were they talking about? What kinds of . . . what was 

the facts they predicated that report observation on? 

 

Well let’s go through these. Because you’re saying that I won’t 

acknowledge what’s happening in these related . . . these 

specialties where a goodly number of them are, in fact, women. 

Well let’s look at certified nursing assistants. And I said in my 

remarks that in some instances as high as 60 per cent, or even 

worse, as high as 75 per cent were not getting training-related 

employment. 

 

Well let’s look at certified nursing assistants in detail, and I 

think from this we will conclude why the nursing assistants 

concluded what they did in their report on page 79. In 1983, 75 

per cent of certified nursing assistants  

were not finding employment in their training specialty. In ‘84 

it was 69 per cent were not finding employment. In ‘85 it was 

62 per cent. In ‘86 it was 63 per cent. Is it any wonder why you 

would find that statement in their report. 

 

Now you tell me, hon. member, you tell me and the women of 

this province why you would like to continue to lead them 

down the garden path and say, come on in, pursue a career as a 

certified nursing assistant; oh, I’m sorry, three-quarters of you 

might not get a job or two-thirds of you might not get a job, but 

come on in, spend two years and maybe 20,000 bucks. How can 

you stand here and say somehow that you have professional 

women’s best interests at heart when you do that? 

 

Okay, diploma nursing. What’s the score care there? In the last 

four years which we have numbers, ‘83 through ‘86, the 

number who were not . . . these aren’t the ones who were 

finding work, the ones who were not finding work in their 

training-related occupations. In ‘83 it was 50 per cent; in ‘84 it 

went up to 53 per cent; in ‘85 it went up . . . or it stayed at 53 

per cent; in ‘86 it went up to 58 per cent. 

 

Now you can put your political spin in terms of your rhetoric on 

this; you can give us some rude rhetoric about how you know 

what’s best for women, but I’d like to know how you square 

what your observations are with these statistics and these facts. 

And you explain to me, to the members of this legislature and to 

the public, why we should continue to have young women and, 

for that matter, those adult males — those young males as well, 

who in some instances pursue these careers, why they should 

continue to take up those opportunities, training opportunities, 

when the reality is, at the end of the day they may not get a job. 

 

Now I acknowledge, and I acknowledge readily, as I did before, 

that there are some young adults, and I don’t blame them, who 

will say despite those numbers, I have — want to pursue that 

profession. And they should be able to. And that’s why we have 

the spaces that we still have. And there are a substantial number 

of them. 

 

Because there are some who want to pursue careers with 

professions because it’s something that they’ve always wanted 

to do. And they believe enough in themselves — and I’m happy 

to say that’s really a Saskatchewan tradition — that despite 

sometimes bone-chilling statistics, that they know that if they 

take that course — they’re the keen and the entrepreneur and 

the go-getter and the self-starter — that they’ll end up with a 

job, they’ll find a job. And that’s why you would not want to 

shut off the opportunities, even in the face of those numbers. 

 

But if you’re going to argue that we ought not to adjust them, 

because of those kinds of data and the kinds of things that the 

nursing assistants said in the report — and I can’t explain to 

you why they say one thing in the report and another publicly. I 

can’t explain that to you. 

 

(1615) 

 

I can see the rationale for what they said in the report and I can, 

perhaps, appreciate the emotion of the moment. I mean, I will 

grant you that I suppose, you know, having  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1587 

 

taken your training, and Kelsey, and now it will be consolidated 

in another centre, and there’s that certain tradition and heritage, 

and I can appreciate that. We’re not insensitive to that. But 

there are some other reasons that were even more compelling 

that changes had to be made. And so I say to you that’s the 

hard, cold facts. Who would you be doing a favour if you led 

them down the garden path? Perhaps, you’d like to answer that 

question for us. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s a very — you gave 

us a very interesting speech. The first point I want to make in 

response to what you said is that you gave us an interesting, 

historical record during your time in government of how 

employment, full-time employment opportunities for people in 

the health professions have declined. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that that 

directly corresponds to your conscious decision — the 

conscious decision of your government to steadily erode 

medicare in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — If there aren’t full-time jobs in hospitals for 

nurses — and I don’t agree with all the statistics by the way that 

the minister gave — but if there aren’t full-time employment 

opportunities for young people who’ve graduated at nurses in 

our hospitals, it’s not because there isn’t a need for those 

nurses, it’s because your government has consciously cut 

positions for nurses at hospitals in Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to go back — I want to go back to 

the remarks — I want to go back for a minute to the remarks 

that you made about your cuts to the certified nursing assistant 

program in this province because the Saskatchewan Association 

of Nursing Assistants say something very interesting in their 

brief that I note you didn’t want to quote from, and that is that 

they quote a recent publication, Job Futures — An 

Occupational Outlook for Saskatchewan . . . to 1992. And they 

note in their brief that it says this with respect to employment 

prospects for nursing assistants . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who’s brief? 

 

Mr. Prebble: — This is in the brief. The minister asks, whose 

brief? And I tell him again, it’s the brief to you, sir, from the 

Saskatchewan Association of Nursing Assistants. And they say 

in their quote: 

 

The occupation may be particularly sensitive to 

government expenditure policies. 

 

Now I think that hits the nub right on the head. They note that 

there are many potential job opportunities in home care 

programs which you, sir, have cut back — in day care services, 

in convalescent homes, in chronic and rehabilitation centre — 

all of those areas have been starved for funds by your 

government, sir. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan nursing assistants  

association also says that they have urged you to set in place a 

certified nursing assistants training be the minimum 

requirement for the provision of nursing care in our province. 

And they’ve asked that the government facilitate nursing aides 

becoming nursing assistants. 

 

If you simply had taken that measure, sir, there would have 

been full demand for the certified nursing assistants’ programs 

at both Kelsey and Wascana. And my question to you is: will 

you not acknowledge that what you should be doing is 

expanding home care, expanding rehabilitation services, 

upgrading nursing aides by training them to be nursing 

assistants, and retaining the programs and access to nursing 

assistant programs at both Kelsey and Wascana? Will you not 

acknowledge that that is what you should be doing? 

 

And finally, sir, will you acknowledge that your cuts to the 

dental therapy program at Wascana, your decision to eliminate 

that program is directly tied to your decision to eliminate the 

school-based dental . . . children’s dental care program in this 

province? In other words, your training cuts in health care are 

directly related to your training cuts in medicare. Will you not 

acknowledge that, and will you therefore not reinstate the 

certified dental assistant program at Kelsey, reinstate the 

certified nursing assistant program at Kelsey, and reinstate the 

dental therapist program at Wascana? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member from Saskatoon 

University drew a fairly long bow on his last remarks, Mr. 

Chairman. He somehow wants to have the women of this 

province ignore — and I can go over the numbers again when it 

comes to diploma nursing — he wants to have the women of 

Saskatchewan ignore, and those males who are interested in that 

career, that in ‘86, 58 per cent didn’t get jobs; in ‘85, 53; in ‘84, 

53; in ‘83, 50 per cent did not get jobs in those training-related 

specialties, Mr. Chairman. 

 

He wants them to ignore that. He wants you and I to ignore that. 

And I don’t think that’s responsible, nor is it right. And then he 

tries to sort of make the connection somehow that when the 

NDP were in, all was well in the health care system, and that’s 

why everybody was getting jobs despite the numbers to the 

contrary, Mr. Chairman,. 

 

Well I would ask you, and I would ask the members of this 

Assembly, and I would ask the public of Saskatchewan, who 

was in power . . . he talked about nursing homes . . . I ask you 

who was in power; who was government in this province; who 

was the premier when the NDP put in place a moratorium on 

nursing home construction? I’ll bet you need a lot of nursing 

home attendants, Mr. Chairman, when you’re not building any? 

And who was it? It was that NDP, Mr. Speaker, that was in 

government at that time. They were the ones that put a 

moratorium on nursing home construction. 

 

And I challenge that member from Saskatoon University who, 

in his own city probably had more nursing home spaces 

constructed in the last five years — and I don’t know for sure, 

but I’ll go so far as to say — maybe more in  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1588 

 

the last five than they had in the 15 years previous. Because I 

can go by my own experience in my constituency. For 11 years, 

Mr. Chairman, for 11 years the people in Fillmore and area had 

wanted a nursing home. They even had their money in the bank, 

Mr. Chairman. Did the NDP build them a nursing home? No; 

they got one of those famous letters, you know, about “there’s a 

moratorium on. We’re not building any more.” 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s absolutely ridiculous. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That’s what they . . . That is not. The 

hon. member from Moose Jaw North, and I’ll tell you what. I’m 

going to get that letter, Mr. Chairman. And if I can’t get it 

today, I’m going to get it tomorrow, and I’m going to file it for 

this House so the hon. member from Moose Jaw North will see 

the letter that his NDP colleague wrote saying: we’re not 

building any more nursing homes. 

 

And it’s obvious, Mr. Chairman, that I’ve hit a nerve amongst 

the NDP, the saviours of medicare, they like to say. Well they 

are the ones that denied the people of Fillmore and area a 

nursing home for 11 long years, Mr. Chairman. That’s their 

brand of medicare. That’s what they did, and I’ll tell the hon. 

member from North Battleford, because he’s not going to tell 

me “or else” like he tells the chamber of commerce. There was 

more done for that North Battleford area when that find young 

fellow, Myles Morin, was their MLA than has ever been done 

by the MLA currently sitting there, I’ll tell you that. 

 

But the story doesn’t stop there when it comes to health care 

and what’s being done and what we need . . . the people we 

need in those places, Mr. Chairman. Because that was the 

member’s question. In my own constituency gain, no wonder 

we didn’t need . . . no wonder there were no jobs in Stoughton, 

Mr. Chairman, for the nursing home, because they waited and 

waited there for their nursing home to be completed, and added 

on, and go from 24 spaces to 36. That’s the record of this 

government. 

 

I would suggest to the hon. member, in rebut to his argument, 

that’s absolutely wrong, that there have been more nursing 

homes built by this government than any other administration in 

history. And that’s the facts, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And he talked about day care centres, he talked about day care 

centres. Well what’s the record on day care centres? Since this 

government came in, the Progressive Conservative government 

of our Premier, Grant Devine, what’s the record on day care 

funding? Have we doubled it? No, we’ve tripled it, Mr. 

Chairman, that’s what we’ve done. And I’ll tell you, by tripling 

it I have no doubt that there are more young people required in 

that area, in terms of providing the adequate supervision in 

these day cares across this province. And, Mr. Chairman, that, 

too, is a fact when it comes to that whole area of social 

spending and health care spending. 

 

And it’s a fact, Mr. Chairman, that health care spending is over 

a billion dollars in this province, and we are going to continue 

to provide the . . . I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman. I had a wrong 

number here, and I want to correct it. 

When it comes to day care funding, we didn’t do quite as well 

as I suggested, and I apologize to the House for that. In ‘81-82 

the NDP spent less than $7 million on it, and the last number 

for ‘87-88 is nearly $13 million, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Now how does the hon. member from Saskatoon University, in 

their usual pious and sanctimonious way, try to suggest that the 

reason that we don’t have nurses getting employment or 

whatever, is that somehow it’s because we are not funding 

medicare. 

 

By every measure, Mr. Chairman, the expenditure is up. The 

number of nursing homes built is up. By every measure it’s up, 

and I say to you, as the people of Saskatchewan saw in the last 

election, they don’t buy their phoney-boloney logic; they don’t 

buy their phoney-boloney numbers. And I’ll tell you what: they 

stand four-square behind our Premier, because our Premier 

stands for the senior citizens and their heritage and the 

important qualities that they brought as pioneers to this 

province, and he’s going to see that they’re looked after, 

whether they’re young, middle-aged, or old. And our party and 

our Premier stand by that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m delighted to be 

able to enter this debate today. I thought we were doing 

education estimates, but after listening to the diatribe from the 

member from Weyburn, I find out . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Diatribe. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Diatribe — mispronunciation. I stand corrected. 

 

I find that suddenly we are into health estimates; we’re into 

personalities of one of my colleagues; we’re into day care. I’d 

like to respond to a few of the things that the member from 

Weyburn brought up. 

 

First of all, in health care, the member just chooses to ignore 

that when the New Democrats were in power, it was . . . out 

government was implementing home care. It was listening to 

the very people of our province and the needs that they 

expressed, when people were saying to the government of the 

day, we want the opportunity to live in our own homes as long 

as we possibly can, and the government of the day was 

introducing home care and indeed expanding on it. 

 

There’s something I’d like to point out to the member from 

Weyburn. Rather than expanding upon it, you have simply 

increased the fees that are charged to people that are using that 

very good system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Turning very briefly, Mr. Chairman, to day care. 

The member tells us and assures the House and the people of 

the province that this government is doing wonderful things in 

day care. I just wonder how he can square that with what’s 

happening at the University of Regina where there is not one, 

but two day cares in  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1589 

 

imminent danger of being shut down. Why? Because of the 

inaction of the member opposite, the Minister for Education. 

His inaction . . . I shouldn’t say because of inaction, it’s rather 

because of an action he took. 

 

The action was that before the election they announced this 

wonderful . . . and it is a good students’ union centre. The 

project was announced; the money was certainly there. There 

was nothing too good for our students before the election, but as 

soon as the election was over they pulled the funding for that. 

Both the day cares that are in danger of being closed, Mr. 

Chairman, happened to be going into what is not being used as 

a students’ union centre. 

 

So the reality simply flies in the face of what the minister has 

been trying to say. Indeed I challenge the minister to go onto 

the university campus in Regina, if he dares. I don’t think he 

does. 

 

Turing to education, Mr. Chairman, the Wascana Institute of 

Applied Arts and Sciences cuts have been done in the most 

illogical and even nonsensical manner. It seems logical for the 

criteria of courses to be provided or, indeed, courses to be cut to 

include a number of things. 

 

(1630) 

 

First, the availability of instructors. You obviously have to have 

some instructors around. Second, the availability of adequate 

learning facilities, which certainly WIAAS has. Third, the job 

employment probability of graduates. Fourth, the location of 

potential students. And fifth, the availability and location of 

other educational opportunities for people. In other words, what 

other learning centres are there around in the vicinity that can 

take up the slack if you’re going to cut or eliminate a program. 

 

I have before me, Mr. Chairman, a list of the programs that 

have been eliminated or cut, and the list shows the employment 

probability index, program by program. I’m sure the minister 

has this. I’m not so sure that he had this information when the 

decision was being made as to what programs were going to be 

cut because, as I mentioned, the cuts are totally illogical. 

 

Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, why you reduced the capacity by 

eliminating and reducing programs in areas with better than 

average employment probability for graduates? 

 

And I want to cite a few examples for the Minister so that he’ll 

have something concrete to respond to, and I hope that you 

respond to this question much better than you responded to the 

previous question. It would be nice if we’d even stay loosely in 

Education for a change; it would be a refreshing change. 

 

The examples that I want to cite, Mr. Minister, are the 

accountancy program that was eliminated at WIAAS. You 

choose not to say cut, so . . and indeed, cut, elimination — it’s 

all rhetoric. The other half of the story is the employment 

probability index for the accountancy program at WIAAS, Mr. 

Minister, was 1.54. 

The administrative studies, which program was also eliminated 

from WIAAS, the employment probability — and this is 

counting both years of the program, Mr. Minister, and 

recognize that the first-year students are certainly not going to 

be seeking employment — but the employment probability was 

0.61. The number I’ve given you is, of course, weighted in the 

wrong direction. The employment, actual employment, is much 

greater upon graduation and after graduation. 

 

Office education, Mr. Minister, from Kelsey, the employment 

probability index is 1.35; dental assistant, again from Kelsey, 

1.53; dental therapy from WIAAS, which is being subject to a 

phase-out, the employment probability was 1.17; agriculture 

parts marketing from Kelsey, the employment probability was 

1.54; barbering, hairstyling from Kelsey, the employment 

probability, 1.35; the same program from NIT, the employment 

probability, 1.2; cosmetology from Kelsey, the employment 

probability, 1.22. 

 

Of some of the courses that were not cut or reduced or 

eliminated, I’d like to just list a few of them. They include 

medical radiology technology from Kelsey, with an 

employment probability of 0.77 — less than half the 

employment probability of accountancy that you have 

eliminated from WIAAS; agriculture mechanics from WIAAS, 

an employment probability of 0.72; carpentry at NIT, an 

employment probability of 0.59; commercial cooking at STI, 

employment probability of 0.86; masonry construction, again at 

STI, an employment probability of 0.9; radio, TV, and 

computer electronics at NIT — grand employment 

opportunities — a probability index of 0.45. And the list goes 

on. 

 

It just simply doesn’t make sense, Mr. Minister, to cut back 

programs with relatively high employment prospects. And 

indeed, if programs are going to be cut, the very least that you 

should do is cut programs that happen to be in areas where the 

employment probability of graduates is low. 

 

What rationale, Mr. Minister, did you use in deciding which 

programs would be cut? Obviously the employment of 

graduates did not figure in this decision. So my question is: 

what did you use in the decision-making process when you 

were making these employment cuts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I’m almost getting to 

the point where I’m starting to object to the impression that 

hon. members are leaving — the erroneous impression that 

they’re leaving — when they very, very loosely use the word 

“cuts” and “eliminate.” 

 

I don’t know, Mr. Chairman, whether the hon. members are 

trying to leave the impression when they talk about programs 

being eliminated, whether they’re trying to leave the impression 

that programs are being eliminated, as opposed to programs that 

are being transferred to another location — whether they’re 

doing that out of ignorance or out of design, Mr. Chairman. But 

it’s becoming a bit disturbing because the public are not well 

served by that kind of inaccuracy. 

 

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1590 

 

In virtually every instance that the hon. member raised, if not 

all, and I didn’t catch them all — but in virtually every instance 

he raised where he talked about the program being eliminated or 

the program being cut, he is absolutely wrong, and I take 

objection to it. 

 

If he wants to more correctly address this debate and be serious 

about it, I’m prepared to be serious. He’s not right when he 

talks about programs being cut. He’s right maybe, if he talks 

about a program that was running at NIT and is now in Moose 

Jaw, or one that was in Saskatoon and is now in Regina, or vice 

versa. But to leave the misleading impression, Mr. Chairman, 

that somehow these programs are wiped out and do not exist is 

absolutely wrong. And the public of this province are not well 

served; in fact, the students of this province are not well served, 

and I’ll tell you why. 

 

That’s absolutely nothing other than absolute fear mongering. 

And he’s playing on the fears and the emotions of our young 

people. He’s taking advantage of them. And I’ll tell you, Mr. 

Chairman, I object to that. I think that’s shallow, shallow, 

shallow. And I’ll put the record as straight as I can, Mr. 

Chairman. Barbering — and I don’t know whether he 

mentioned that one — but barbering is one that has been 

completely eliminated. And he went through a litany of 

statistics . . . okay, went through some of the very same areas. 

 

I mean, I heard machinery technologist, agriculture machinery 

technologist, dental assistants, all of those, where we went 

through it and we talked about why we made the decisions we 

did based on the information we had. And we’ve also talked 

about if the situation changes, as best as anyone can determine, 

we will increase or decrease or modify or change or add. Now 

what can be more reasonable than that for the people of this 

province? 

 

Now they want to cling to the past, that’s fine. If they want to 

try and leave the wrong impression with the people of this 

province, that too I suppose is their right. But quite frankly, Mr. 

Chairman, I object to that tactic because it’s not fair to the 

young people of this province. It’s not fair. And I’m happy, as I 

told the hon. member from Saskatoon University, to go through 

these program by program if he so wishes. Because we didn’t 

somehow sit in some office, my office as the hon. member 

might like to suggest, and sort of decide, well, let’s get nursing 

assistants. 

 

I mean, what nonsense. But what do you do when you’re faced 

as a responsible legislator, which I presume the hon. member is, 

when three out of four are getting no jobs after a couple years of 

training? What do you do? What do you do, Mr. Chairman? 

 

The hon. member from Regina Rosemont, if he’s got something 

to say, get up and say it. You’re chirping away. As the hon. 

member somehow suggests that we should ignore the fact in 

some instances that six out of ten, or three out of four weren’t 

getting jobs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

And now the member from North Battleford doesn’t want to 

hear this. He would rather somehow send people through the 

system with no job prospects at the end of the day. 

We can continue to go through these step by step, course by 

course if you wish, but the reality is, the numbers are not much 

different in terms of the changes we made. 

 

And it’s important to point out that this is not a knee-jerk 

reaction. With the exception of barbering, okay, with the 

exception of barbering, virtually every other program, although 

the location may be changed, or if it was offered in four places 

at night, now be in two, in some instances seats might be 

reduced. 

 

But more importantly, and an area that this debate has never 

centred on, Mr. Chairman, is they’ve never once asked me, 

although I have willingly volunteered to the legislature, the 

number of new training spaces and the number of new program 

areas that we’ve put in place, whether it be at the Moose Jaw 

campus or the Saskatoon campus or the Regina campus or the 

Prince Albert campus. 

 

They conveniently overlook that. And I believe they overlook 

it, Mr. Chairman, because they’re trying to paint a distorted 

picture of what’s really happening in post-secondary education. 

And I don’t think anybody’s well served by that. 

 

And I’ll submit to line-by-line questioning as long as they so 

desire, but I’d rather deal with some facts and get the political 

rhetoric out of the way, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have before me a copy of 

a Leader-Post article that says, “Hepworth gives students more 

rhetoric.” And it doesn’t seem to matter if you’re in the House 

or out there, all you’re capable of doing is providing more and 

more of the same old rhetoric. 

 

You talk about taking exception, Mr. Minister, to us using the 

term “cut.” Well I don’t know what in the world would be more 

direct and more germane in the whole entire English language 

. . . I understand the language; I just don’t speak it very well. I 

don’t understand what would be more clear than to say that the 

accountancy program has been cut from WIAAS when what 

you have said to those students is that you can’t take it in 

Regina any more; we simply do not offer it here at all. In other 

words, it’s been cut from here. 

 

And then you’re saying, but it’s offered at another location 

where it has been offered previously. That location happens to 

be STI. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, the administration and accounting students 

from Wascana Institute were told when you made your 

announcement of the program cuts, which was very late in itself 

. . . but then you had the audacity to tell them, well apply at 

STI. The problem, Mr. Minister, as I’m sure you are aware, or 

at least I hope you’re aware of some things that are going on in 

your department, the training places were full because of the 

lateness of your announcement of that program elimination 

from Wascana Institute. 

 

And in addition to the lateness of your announcement of the 

cuts, Mr. Minister, the cuts — and I use that word  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1591 

 

deliberately . . . In addition to the lateness of the cuts there are 

other programs, or pardon me, other problems for students, such 

as the difficulty in finding suitable accommodations in Moose 

Jaw, difficulty in arranging for transportation, baby-sitting, 

family arrangements, and that sort of thing. 

 

Mr. Minister, do students have to now resort to travelling out of 

province to obtain the training because the places are all full in 

STI in those programs? I want to know on what basis you’re 

trying to justify the elimination of the administration and the 

accounting programs from Wascana Institute, and you have not 

even undertaken to answer that question. You give us some 

rhetoric about being willing to tackle programs, program by 

program, and here I have offered you on two occasions to 

debate the issue of the administrative studies and the accounting 

programs being cut from Wascana Institute, and yet you duck 

and weave and dodge and just generally evade the question. 

 

(1645) 

 

You asked for some solutions, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 

accused me of always being negative, of never having a 

solution for you. I have some solutions that I’d like you to pay 

some attention to because they’re common sense solutions that 

. . . of course that would escape you, but you might be able to 

find one out of three of these solutions — one out of these three 

you might just agree. 

 

Why don’t you, Mr. Minister, allow the first year students . . . I 

think I’ve got your attention. Mr. Minister, why don’t you allow 

a first-year phase out to accommodate existing students, or 

better yet, reverse your cut-back decisions? Reverse the 

program cut-backs and allow a management team of staff, 

students, to develop a plan that can most effectively rationalize 

the new super-institute that you’ve created. 

 

The third option, Mr. Minister, is for you — and this is one that 

you may choose — is to continue on your present course, and in 

doing so, the problem is that you’re going to cause unnecessary 

pain for students and staff of the technical institutes. 

 

I just want to conclude my questioning, Mr. Minister, by saying 

that you spoke of a reality and of changing job opportunities in 

the future. Mr. Minister, the federal government, which also 

happens to be a Conservative government, has projected that by 

1991 our present training capacity will not even meet one-half 

of the estimated employment needs in accountancy and office 

studies. 

 

Therefore, my question is: why are you cutting that training at 

Wascana Institute in administrative studies and accounting? 

Why cut it when by 1991 you will be training fewer than 

one-half of the required graduates, and in the meantime creating 

such an undue hardship? Why in the world are you going to go 

ahead with such a ridiculous cut? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll get right to the issues the hon. 

member raises. Accounting, specifically — the hon.  

member has talked about cuts. The facts there are: there are 42 

additional seats in Moose Jaw. Each and every one of those 

who were displaced, given that they passed their courses if you 

like, will be given an opportunity at the new centre of 

excellence in Moose Jaw. I think that’s very fair and very 

reasonable. 

 

Now the hon. member suggests further that there’s a hardship 

with having to move and to transfer, and I agree with him. And 

I agree with him. And I saw nothing in what he raised of a 

solution to that. And when their party was in government, Mr. 

Chairman, the reality is they never tried to address that 

question. Because the additional point on accounting seats and 

training spaces and student opportunities that he should know is 

this — and I want this clearly in the record, Mr. Chairman, 

because there’s been a lot of erroneous reporting on that very 

issue of the whole question of accounting and accounting 

spaces. There are 42 extra in Moose Jaw to account for each 

and every one that was taking at the course at the alternate 

location, so everyone is going to have the opportunity if they 

pass their course. 

 

But more than that, Mr. Chairman, but more than that, in 

Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan, because we now have, as well, 

2,600 student opportunities through out extension program that 

was non-existent in the NDP days — 2,600 opportunities 

through the extension program. So what that means, Mr. 

Chairman, for example, if there are 10 people in Meadow Lake, 

or whatever the appropriate number might be, who want to take 

that course, they can have it delivered in Meadow Lake, 

Saskatchewan, or Weyburn, or Swift Current, or Nipawin. 

 

An Hon. Member: — But nothing in Regina. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And the hon. member, from his seat, 

says nothing in Regina. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, the 

city of Regina will be well served in the future, as in the past, 

when it comes to education opportunities. But more than that, 

through extension, through distance education, through this new 

institute structure, accessibility will be made, will be increased 

on a province-wide basis. And that’s something that we should 

be proud of, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Not only when it comes to that specific one he raised, 

accounting, are there 42 additional seats in Moose Jaw, and 

contrast that with his statements of cuts and eliminations. You 

know, and I won’t get into that any further, Mr. Chairman, 

because that is exactly what’s happening. Not only do we have 

the extra seats, but we have the extension program for delivery 

across this province. And I’m proud of that. 

 

And it’s not something that’s been well recorded, Mr. 

Chairman. And I thank the member opposite for the opportunity 

to raise this, and I look forward to the questioning from the hon. 

member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question to the 

minister is: what is the government’s position with respect to 

asbestos in schools, and I’m wondering if the minister could tell 

us what rules and regulations exist with respect to asbestos in 

schools, whether or not there is any  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1592 

 

program for funding to schools that have asbestos in schools for 

the removal of it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m advised that in the past, 

sometime, where there may have been a problem identified with 

what they call friable asbestos, and where school boards raised 

this with that, and on the basis of inspections by the Department 

of Labour, any problems that existed were attended to and 

cleared up. And there was assistance through the provincial 

government in so far as capital funding to right the situation. 

 

I’m, as well, advised that the policy hasn’t changed, and that if 

there are instances that would be brought to our attention, we 

would involve those officials from the appropriate departments 

as expeditiously as possible, and as I understand, as has 

happened in the past, to make sure that the problem was cleaned 

up and righted as soon as identified. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, I’m wondering if the minister is 

aware that Pius X School in Regina Lakeview has asbestos in 

the ceiling, so I’ve been advised. I also understand the 

Department of Education has been contacted about the problem, 

and I’m wondering what has been done or what will be done by 

the Department of Education with respect to that problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The officials that I have with me are 

not aware of any specific notification. However, we can 

undertake to consult with others who may have been more 

directly involved with this case and report back to you if you so 

wish. Or, in fact, we will . . . not if you so wish, we will do that 

for you. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Could you get back to me this evening or 

tomorrow? This evening? Okay, because I’d be very interested 

in knowing exactly what the situation is, Mr. Chairman. I’ve 

heard a number of complaints from parents who are very 

concerned, and I want to be able to assure them that everything 

is being done to clean up the problem. 

 

The other thing that I wanted to convey to the minister is the 

fact that I have heard from a number of parents in Regina 

Lakeview how deeply concerned they are about the 

teacher/student ratios in the schools; that the high 

teacher/student ratio, they feel, means that their child will not 

get the first-class education that they want for their children and 

that this province requires to meet the 21st century standards. 

So I want to convey that concern, a concern that has been 

addressed to me on a number of occasions by parents. 

 

I also want to advise the minister, Mr. Chairman, that there are 

some teachers who have talked to me about the burning-out 

factor and the fact that they feel burnt out; that because of high 

teacher/student ratios, they are having an extreme difficulty in 

providing the quality of education that they would want to 

provide to their students. So I make those statements simply to 

convey the concerns of constituents of Regina Lakeview to the 

minister. 

 

One other thing that I wish to raise with the minister is the fact 

that I spoke to a university student today who may be  

looking for full-time employment, but is also considering the 

possibility of going back to university on a full-time basis. This 

student, Mr. Chairman, has a chronic medical condition and 

cannot afford the $140 up-front costs for drugs, and if this 

student has to pay the $140 up-front costs for drugs, will not be 

able to attend university on a full-time basis. 

 

Now it’s not at the stage where we would address the Minister 

of Health or the Minister of Education personally about this 

because the individual has not made up his mind whether he is 

going to take a full-time job or go to university. But I wanted to 

raise this problem so that the government will think about it and 

consider what they are going to be doing about those sorts of 

situations because, as was indicated earlier in the House today, 

they are looking at things that they will do to help unique 

situations. 

 

Well I consider this as something that may not occur often, but 

it occurs, and I consider that very unfair. I think that’s very 

unfair to an individual if they cannot go to university because 

they can’t afford the up-front cost of drugs. 

 

And I’d like to know from the minister today what the 

Department of Education could do for a student, along those 

lines, so that when I’m talking to that individual I can convey 

the information, and whether he would be receptive if I asked 

this student to approach him about some special assistance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Just quickly in response to, and I 

appreciate your sensitizing me to a potential issue there with 

that student. And as I think we heard the Premier say earlier 

today in this legislature that the Minister of Health will be 

addressing that whole question of those with special or unique 

circumstances when it comes to their drugs and the health care 

plan of this province, and so I’ll leave it in the Minister of 

Health’s hands. But I . . . as you wished, you know, consider me 

sensitized to the question. 

 

As he relates to another and a rather serious issue and one that 

we spend some time thinking and talking about, the whole 

question of the challenges and the burn-out. I think, as it is 

sometimes referred to that our teachers and the pressure that 

they’re increasingly under, and the whole question of 

teacher/student ratios. If one was to look at the hard cold data 

and the statistics on this, one could say that Saskatchewan, in 

terms of its pupil/teacher ratios, has a very good ratio relatively 

speaking across Canada. And even over the last three years in 

this province we’ve seen the pupil/teacher ratio go from 

something like 17.1 down to 17 to . . . as of September ‘86 

down to 16.4, if you use the totals, down to even 16.1 to 1. And 

so one I suppose could, you know, take some comfort in that. 

 

But the reality is the teachers out there on the front lines, if you 

like, or at least what I’m hearing from them — and maybe the 

issue isn’t so much the pupil/teacher ratios, it’s the reality of the 

school today. The teacher is faced increasingly with demands to 

keep up with curriculum changes. What I hear teachers telling 

me that every week their stack of mail with new inserts for 

curriculum guides,  

  



 

August 6, 1986 

1593 

 

etc., etc., is never ending, and the pressure to keep up with that, 

the expectations of society. 

 

The examples I’ve always used, and the ones that I see teachers 

nodding their heads on is, you know, 20, 25 years ago accidents 

on the highways were a problem, so give it to the education 

system. So we had driver training. And then it’s, you know, 

AIDS and it’s drugs and alcohol abuse, and we always have this 

expectation of the teachers and the educational system, and we 

pile it on them, and they’ve done a good job there. 

 

But it adds to the challenges and the pressures of that teacher on 

the front line. And we have some concern in that area, very 

much, in so far as the challenges facing them. And the young 

people today, maybe not many of them, that are fighting 

themselves, the issues of peer pressure, and chemical and 

substance abuse, and what effect that has in the classroom in 

terms of unruly behaviour. 

 

And all of those things . . . even perhaps more than that hard 

number that the system has traditionally used to evaluate the 

teacher’s burden, the pupil/teacher ratio. I don’t know as it 

acknowledges some of these things like changing curriculums, 

and the changing nature of the student, and the changing nature 

of society, and its expectations of the education system. So 

there’s these . . . Although you can measure things tangibly, and 

we look very good on paper — and I suppose I could say, I’m 

even proud of it — I’m not so sure we measure these intangible 

things that, perhaps, in a larger way contribute to the issue that 

you raise relative to burn-out, more so than pupil/teacher ratios. 

 

But further than that, if there’s a specific school in Regina, or 

something that has a particularly bad pupil/teacher ratio, I’d be 

. . . You could maybe, you know, send that across to me. I’d be 

happy to look into it for you. But generally, the numbers are 

quite good. That doesn’t address, as I said, those intangibles 

that I talked about earlier. 

 

And I will undertake to get the information relative to asbestos 

in Pius X. If we can get if for tonight, we will; if not, at our 

earliest possible opportunity we will. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Being past 5 o’clock the committee 

is recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


