


















































October 30, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 October 30, 1987 
 
 

3741 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we 
were dealing with the Saskatchewan Economic and Financial 
Report of March 1987. And we were dealing with the question of 
what things were charged against the deficit for the current year, 
and what things were not charged against the deficit for the current 
year, and how you could write off your advances to the 
agricultural credit corporation and call those a charge on the 
revenues for the current year, whereas you do not do the same 
thing for SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Corporation) or the Saskatchewan Forest Products. 
 
I am trying to figure out on what basis you decide that when you 
are writing off deposits or advances to corporations — deciding 
you’re not going to recover them — sometimes you decide that 
this is something which affects your deficit for the year in 
question, and sometimes you decide that it’s going to increase the 
overall deficit, but somehow you’re not going to count it in this 
year’s deficit. Would you care to tell me why the ag credit 
corporation was written off against the fiscal year ending on 
March 31, 1987 and, let us say, SEDCO was not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If I could back up just one matter. If one takes 
page 8 of the financial report, and you take the revenue shortfall 
and the expenditure increases, that will come to 1.2 without 
including the write-offs on SEDCO and Sask Forest Products and 
. . . Okay. 
 
The reason that the long-standing policy on the write-off of the 
losses has been against the cumulative deficit . . . I’m advised that 
the reason for the difference with regard to the ag credit 
corporation is in the statute of the corporation, whereby, we’re 
required to make that payment over for these loan losses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I think I have to 
disagree with you. I’ve looked at the statute. I have it here. If 
anyone cares to refer me to the section which requires that, I’d be 
delighted to hear it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t have a copy, and I simply can repeat, 
that’s the advice that we have for the difference, that it is statutory, 
and it’s upon that that we did it in this manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would be 
more than interested to know who gave you advice that you were 
required to do it, but I’ll pass that by. If your officials can indicate 
who said it was required by the statute, being Chapter A-8, I’d like 
to know. But moving on, moving on, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
 

An Hon. Member: — Do you want us to get it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well if it’s right at hand . . . Somebody 
can have my copy or they can get their own from the Table. It’s 
Chapter A-8 which provides indeed that out of the money 
appropriated by the legislature, the minister may make grants, but 
that’s all. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ll see if we can get it quickly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Okay. I want to underline the point that 
the 1.2 billion that the minister indicated in March would be the 
likely deficit, which he has since adjusted to 1.235, did not include 
the $45 million that he says he wrote off with respect to SEDCO 
and the forest, potash corporation and the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. And I simply underline the fact that 
those losses have been sustained, and the accumulated deficit of 
the province has gone up that additional 45 million over and above 
the 1.2 billion the minister spoke of. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say that there’s a custom to write these off 
against the accumulated surplus of the province, and there may 
well have been a custom when there was a surplus. There has not 
been a surplus for some little time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, or I will say deficit then. But the custom didn’t prevail when 
there was any deficits. And I would like the minister to indicate 
when the last write-off of a Crown corporation was written off 
against the accumulated surplus or deficit? When did that last 
happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — My officials will go back. They do indicate 
that they have written off loans against revolving funds. For 
example, the grain car corporation, you may recall that there was 
some considerable dispute with the Provincial Auditor that went 
on over several years, and that is being written down over a period 
of time as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think each of 
those will be very different from a write-off. We’ve had write-offs. 
We had write-offs for SEDCO two or three years ago, and I’m not 
at all sure they were dealt with in this way. They may well have 
been, and that’s what I ask the minister. But, Mr. Minister, I want 
to . . . It may well be in the case of SEDCO they were written off 
on the books of SEDCO and not on the books of the province, that 
could be. 
 
I want to turn to this question of the speculative news stories about 
write-offs of various figures, sometimes quoted at $810 million for 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And you and I have had 
some correspondence on this, and you tell me that decisions have 
not been made, notwithstanding that the stories have been around 
for four or six months. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the annual report of the potash corporation for the 
year ended 1986, which was tabled in March of 1987, I do not 
detect anything which suggests that the corporation, in the opinion 
of the board or the management, the corporation is in such a 
powerless state that a massive write-off would be necessary. 
 
In your Saskatchewan Economic and Financial Report of 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3742 
 
 

March 1987, you do not mention it. We’re not talking about a 
trifling sum here; we’re talking about $800 million. Somewhere 
between March and May you reached the conclusion that the 
potash corporation was effectively bankrupt and needed to have 
— when I say needed to have, I mean that the province had to 
regard its investment in the potash corporation as being next to 
worthless. When did you reach that conclusion? Did you reach it 
. . . had you reached it before March of 1987, and if so, why didn’t 
you mention it in the Saskatchewan Economic and Financial 
Report of March 1987? And if you hadn’t reached it by then, what 
crossed your mind between March and May which caused you to 
think that somewhere in that 60-day period that you dropped $800 
million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I wasn’t the minister responsible prior 
to, I believe, October-November of 1986. When we began . . . or 
one of the first things was a full analysis of the state of the 
corporation. 
 
One thing I think you will note in the annual reports of the potash 
corporation — I don’t have a copy before me — is the serious 
reduction over the last few years on retained earnings, which the 
significant reduction of retained earnings was, I think, a strong 
signal that all was not well. Of course we were going through a 
rather lengthy period of depressed prices, and as we went through 
that review, it became abundantly clear to me that the corporation 
with the serious debt load that it had with prices, and even 
assuming that prices would increase a reasonable level, would not 
financially be in the position to get out of the financial hole it was 
in. And so options were and are being considered as to how best 
deal with that, and that is certainly an overview of my thinking on 
the potash corporation with the options available to how to turn 
the company around as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
speaking of the potash corporation and speaking of its total 
long-term debt in which I include capital leases — which I think is 
fair and everyone would concede that they are in the same position 
as debt — the amount of the long-term debt is $662 million, and it 
part of the debt which I take it you feel cannot be borne by the 
potash corporation and, therefore, requires to be re-financed or 
converted into shares or written off or whatever options you’re 
considering. 
 
Mr. Minister, this debt consists of various issues of bonds which 
are set out on page 16 and various leases which are set out on page 
17 of the potash corporation report. And, Mr. Minister, would you 
agree that, aside from about $115 million, this entire $662 million 
is debt contracted after May of 1982? Would you concede that 
virtually all of the debt of the potash corporation, which is on the 
books of the potash corporation, is on there after May of 1982? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As the hon. member knows that, prior to 
1982, what had happened was there was a substantial equity 
injection into the potash corporation from the heritage fund. We 
don’t have . . . We weren’t expecting to debate the details of 
potash at this time, but there was 
 

debt incurred prior to 1982, guaranteed by the province of 
Saskatchewan. Certainly there was significant debt, and I’m 
saying significant only because I don’t have the precise figure. 
Since 1982 the bulk would, at least at this time I think, be from 
what’s incurred for Lanigan. 
 
I’m not sure, and I don’t recall exactly when that was put onto the 
books of the corporation, but certainly there would be a significant 
amount of the debt incurred since 1982. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, do you 
concede that something over $225 million of the debt of the potash 
corporation was incurred in borrowings from the Government of 
Saskatchewan since you became Minister of Finance — $225 
million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I can’t concede and I can’t dispute the 
figure, either, only because I don’t have it before me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well it’s just 225 million; it perhaps 
hasn’t come to your attention yet. But, Mr. Minister, the point I 
want to make is reasonably obvious — that at the end of 1981 the 
debt of the potash corporation was 88 million. I don’t know what 
it was on May 5, 1982, but it may have been something more than 
that. Now it is 662 million. 
 
I am not quarrelling with the decisions made by the member for 
Yorkton when he was chairman of the corporation and when he 
spoke glowingly about the future of the potash corporation. I’m 
not quarrelling with the decisions made when other ministers — 
the member for Saskatoon Sutherland, now chairman, the 
investments which were made when he spoke glowingly of the 
future of the corporation, because I think, by and large, aside form 
a little in error in timing and perhaps a big error in timing — we 
don’t know — I think their decisions were right. 
 
What I suggest is that when virtually all of the debt of the 
corporation was incurred, since May of 1982, it ought to be 
recognized that if there is a massive write-down of this debt or a 
massive conversion of this debt into shares, then what is being 
written down, what is being written off, or somehow devaluated, is 
money advanced by the government opposite after they took 
office in May of 1982. 
 
I think they made some good investments and I think they will pay 
off. But should I be wrong, should I be wrong, just maybe then the 
debt which was written off is debt put on by the member for 
Yorkton when he was minister in charge, the former member for 
Sutherland, Paul Schoenhals, and the other chairman. And I just 
want to underline that, because if anybody is talking about 
massive write-offs of debt, we know where the debt came from. It 
came from the member for Yorkton and the others when they 
shared that ministerial responsibility. 
 
As I say, I think that while we — hindsight — we all have 20/20 
hindsight, I think that five years from now or 10 years from now 
we’re going to say the member for Yorkton was right, and the 
former member for Saskatoon Sutherland, Mr. Schoenhals, was 
right to put some money 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3743 
 
 

in that corporation. But should they and I be wrong, then we know 
that we lay it at the door of the member for Yorkton and Mr. 
Schoenhals and others. But if it was a bad investment, surely . . . If 
a very small amount of money, and it would be a very small 
amount of money had been spent up to that time, you don’t put 
another $600 million into it — which is what was done. And the 
figures speak for themselves and cannot be gainsay. 
 
As I say, I think you didn’t make an error. But if an error was 
made, it was made by those who raised the debt of the potash 
corporation from $88 million on December 31, 1981, to $662 
million on December 31, 1986. And that is a massive increase in 
debt. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member for Wilkie is asking about debt paying. 
If he would enter the debate, and he’s free so to do, I would be 
happy to attempt to deal with the question. 
 
I want to make one other point. The member for 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden has suggested that the net equity of the 
corporation has declined, and he’s right. But may I remind him of 
the 1983 performance of that corporation when a loss was made of 
$18 million and a dividend was paid of $62 million. Now that, I 
say, is designed to reduce the net equity of any company. make 
yourself a loss of $18 million, pay yourself a dividend of $62 
million, and you will indeed drop the net equity by 78 million in 
one year. Now we can hardly remark on the fact that the net equity 
is going down when we have a policy of paying dividends of $62 
million in the face of very substantial losses of $18 million in that 
year, and in the year before, a very, very modest profit of $1 
million. Certainly there were accumulated surpluses. 
 
A great deal of money was made in the period immediately prior 
to 1982 by this corporation. I do not suggest that it all came about 
because of the particular skills of the management, but I point out 
that ’78 had 25 million; and ’79 had 78 million; and 1980 had 168 
million; and 1981 had 142 million. Any one of those years would 
turn around this corporation. That is not my point, Mr. Minister. 
My point is that the potash corporation has been run into the 
financial ground by the government opposite by paying substantial 
dividends in years when they had substantial operating losses, and 
in borrowing very large sums of money and injecting virtually no 
new equity. That is a prescription for very difficult financial times. 
 
Very large capital expenditures were incurred — over $500 
million. virtually nothing was put in in equity; all borrowed 
money; no reference to any standards of debt/equity relationship 
which ordinary business men would use; and then, lo and behold, 
the company is in some difficulty for one year now, and we have it 
stated that somehow the corporation is a failure. Well the 
management has been a failure. The management has been a 
failure, but the corporation should be given a chance. 
 
The corporation should be given a chance to achieve some of the 
outstanding successes it had in previous times. I freely admit that 
the equity which stood at 732 million in 1981 has been run down 
to 500 million. But 

even 500 million in equity is not an insignificant sum of money. 
And I think that the suggestions that somehow massive errors 
were made at some period in the past is in no way supported by 
the figures because the big debt was run up after May of 1982, and 
I hope no one denies that because it all is on the books and it is in 
the annual report and it cannot be denied. 
 
If the corporation was a . . . If it was unwise to get into the 
business and spend 88 million in borrowing, how much more 
unwise to borrow another 500 million? Well I think both were 
wise, but it’s pretty hard to maintain that to borrow 88 million is 
bad news but to borrow another 500 million is good news, as some 
members opposite seem to do. 
 
Leaving that aside, Mr. minister, I want you to tell this committee 
what you have in mind with respect to the treatment of the potash 
corporation on the books of the province. Do you intend to write 
off 810 million or any other sums that you have referred to? Do 
you intend to convert debt owing to the province into equity? Do 
you intend to value the shares that you take in exchange for your 
debt as the amount of your debt, or do you intend to declare that 
you have suffered any capital loss? Would you give the committee 
a statement of what you have in mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well obviously it’s not in the budget. Any of 
the options are not taken into account for the purposes of the 
’87-88 budget. Just to go back. I think that the hon. member 
should not let the public forget when you talk about a debt of $88 
million, the loss that some would call the opportunity losses as a 
result of the choice to put $450 million into this particular 
investment. 
 
The fundamental question about potash is: should the people of 
Saskatchewan, the Government of Saskatchewan have invested in, 
I suggest, a highly volatile and risky venture. That’s the 
fundamental question and I think that whatever decisions the 
government ultimately makes, I’m sure that’s how the public will 
judge. 
 
There’s little doubt as well — and one can’t be critical of the debt 
if one is agreeing with the decisions — there’s no doubt we had 
the company when we assumed office in 1982, and we did try and 
make decisions to make the company go. And the decisions that 
will be made with regard to a debt write-down, in whole or in part 
— a debt/equity swap — are from the same position to try and 
make the company go. Those are the decisions that we’ve faced 
and that is what the decisions will be designed to do, is what can 
be done to make the company go. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m reassured 
by that. I think the members might be interested in some of the 
comments: 
 

It is our firm belief that a new and strong PCS can emerge. With 
this belief in mind the board of directors supported 
management’s recommendation to continue with all of our 
major projects in Saskatchewan. I refer to the PCS Mining 
Lanigan phase two expansion which is now under way. 

  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3744 
 
 

This is the member for Yorkton in March of 1983, full of 
optimism. 
 
(1930) 
 
Then moving along: 
 

The optimism with which the board of directors and the 
provincial government view PCS is reflected in the decision 
announced shortly after year end that the corporation would 
move its new headquarters in 1985. While their decision was 
based primarily on economic reasons, the fact that it involves, a 
20-year commitment indicates the confident way in which the 
future of the corporation is seen. 

 
This is, Mr. Chairman, Cliff Wright in 1984, and so on. So a good 
deal of optimism was expressed, and very little of the concerns 
which are now expressed by the minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I will make one final question to you and put this to 
rest: do I understand then that you have not made any decisions 
with respect to any different way of handling, on the books of the 
province, the investments which are shown as being investments 
in the potash corporation of Saskatchewan? And I am particularly 
referring to the Public Accounts of 1985-86, the last which I have, 
and I am referring to Volume 1 at page 15, where it is indicated 
that $494 million is a loan to the potash corporation of 
Saskatchewan; and on page 17, that $418 million is an investment 
in the potash corporation. 
 
I know that those numbers have changed somewhat in the fiscal 
year ended 1987, March 31 ’87, but is it your intention to reduce 
those numbers in some way or change them, so as to reflect a 
different valuation on the books of the corporation of the 
government’s investment — using the term broadly — including 
loans and advances and investments in the potash corporation of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No decisions have been made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I noted 
— and that’s my earlier point, and I refer now to page 15 of 
Volume 1 of the Public Accounts. There it is stated that there’s 
$494 million lent to the potash corporation of Saskatchewan, and 
we have . . . and I’m querying how you could reduce that without 
affecting the budget deficit for . . . the annual budget deficit. 
 
And I’m looking above, and I see an advance to the agricultural 
credit corporation of $1.215 billion which appears to be of exactly 
the same variety of investment, and I’ve raised it earlier. 
 
I’m puzzled at the way in which you can deal with a reduction in 
the value of the investment in the agricultural credit corporation in 
one way to affect the annual deficit and the potash corporation in 
another way not to affect the annual deficit. I know you’re looking 
that up for me; I won’t labour the point except that on the face of 
it, they appear to be on the books of the province carried in exactly 
the same way. And I would have thought on first  

blush that if you were going to write down one and charge it 
against the budget deficit for the year, then if you wrote down the 
other, you’d have to charge it to the budget deficit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, as I’ve indicated the write-down is only 
one option. There is the possibility of a debt/equity swap as well. 
And I know our differences; I just restate the advice that we have 
in terms of the ag credit corporation and the statutory provisions. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was going to 
give up my place to the member for Wilkie who wanted to speak, 
but apparently he doesn’t. And then I was going to make . . . let 
the member from Regina win the prize — Regina Centre. 
 
I want to just pursue another aspect of the Department of 
Finance’s role and the minister’s role with regard to the potash 
corporation, and the matter I want to raise briefly is the matter of 
the write-down that you’ve proposed to make. The confusion that 
seemed to surround it, the confusion — you can correct me, if you 
wish, afterwards. The confusion that seemed to surround it, and 
what I think to have been a major factor in the decision by the 
Department . . . United States Department of Commerce in 
imposing the tariffs that they did on potash moving to the United 
States. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are quoted in March of 1987 saying, after you 
had said that there was a problem and you were going to deal with 
it, you were quoted in March of 1987 in the Leader-Post as saying: 
 

The provincial government has scrapped its plans to write off 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan’s (PCS) debt for fear 
the move will be seen as subsidization by Americans already 
lobbying for tariffs (in the) Canadian potash imports. 

 
This is said, this news story, to have come from yourself, Mr. 
Minister. You obviously realized at that time that there were some 
serious implications. 
 
In July of 1987, another newspaper report, I believe the 
Leader-Post again, said: 
 

(The provincial government will) write off the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan’s $810 million debt. 

 
And that was one of the elements that seemed to begin to trigger 
considerations by people who were bringing the case on behalf of 
the industry and the United States to the Department of Commerce 
there. Because in July of 1987, as well, there were statements 
made by one Ted Kassinger, who was the Washington lawyer 
fighting to get tariffs imposed on Canadian potash, which I think 
were very revealing. And the statement that he made was: 
 

(The) plans to write off the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan’s $810 million debt will ultimately strengthen the 
U.S. anti-dumping action launched against the Crown 
corporation. 

  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3745 
 
 

He further also said that . . . or the article said in reporting on Mr. 
Kassinger’s comments: 
 

The Progressive Conservatives’ proposal to write off the debt 
could be welcome evidence for the case of new Mexico potash 
producers who are trying to get a 43-per-cent tariff imposed on 
all Canadian potash sold in the United States. 

 
As it turned out, some of that tariff ended up being 85 per cent, 
Mr. Minister, why did you not take into consideration the 
implications of all of this on the dispute that was being adjudicated 
into the United States and the impact it might have on their 
decision when you were making these kinds of statements. Did 
you not think that those kinds of statements would be used by the 
lawyers who were acting on behalf of the American industry to 
fight for the case that they were trying to make before the 
Department of Commerce? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I cautioned the member earlier to realize that 
we are considering options. In fact, the write-down of the debt 
could well be a very positive factor in determining constructive 
costs for the purposes of dumping. So to interpret the talk of 
write-down, write-off as being harmful to the case is, quite 
frankly, contrary to both the legal and the political advice we get 
in the United States. 
 
Secondly, I can recall spokespeople in the United States talking 
about this being a positive initiative by the province of 
Saskatchewan. If I recall, and I paraphrase — I don’t think I’m 
misinterpreting what he said because he was quite specific — for 
example, the mayor of Carlsbad — and Carlsbad is a major player 
in terms of the anti-dumping acting in the United States — said 
that the write-down of the debt is the first indication that they have 
that the province of Saskatchewan is going to run the potash 
corporation as a private sector business, and that this was healthy 
and to the advantage of the corporation in the dumping charges. 
 
We have to walk the line quite carefully between dumping and 
countervail. And so certainly we have to be cautious walking that 
line, but here are many indications that the write-down of the debt 
or perhaps a debt/equity swap will enhance the position of the 
potash corporation before the U.S. Department of Commerce. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well obviously it didn’t because the 
decision is well-known. The decision is well-known, and I know 
that there are further hearings that are to take place. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I would like to draw to your attention, that it 
seems to me that the mayor of Carlsbad would not be quite as 
knowledgeable about the value of this in fighting the case before 
the tribunal, whatever it was, in the United States, as would be the 
mayor who was fighting that on behalf of the industry in New 
Mexico. And it is that person who said, quite explicitly and quit 
clearly, that his case was considerably enhanced by what was 
being said here in Saskatchewan. And I simply say, Mr. Minister, 
that was clearly an example of atrociously bad judgement on the 
part of the government at a time when it was clear that there was 
bad signals 

coming from south of the border. And I leave it at that because I 
don’t think your debate and my debate is going to change our 
arguments with respect to that. But I want to make that point 
because I think it’s an important point that might be made. 
 
I want to ask you one other thing, and my colleague, the member 
from Elphinstone, the Leader of the Opposition, referred to it 
when he referred to the dividends that your Department of Finance 
took out of the potash corporation before you were the minister, as 
opposed to the amount of profits that the potash corporation made. 
And the statistics I have is that between 1982 and 1984 the potash 
corporation had to pay $124 million in dividends to the 
government. Between 1982 and 1984 the potash corporation paid 
dividends of $124 million. But I am also told that the combined 
profit for those three years is only $8 million. 
 
Now how can you justify taking that kind of dividend out of a 
corporation like the potash corporation of $124 million when its 
profit was only 8 million over that period of time? It seems to me, 
Mr. Minister, that that’s robbing from Peter to pay Paul, and even 
worse, it seems to me that the government — and I admit you 
were not the minister at that time — but your government was 
determined to make the potash corporation look bad in order to 
help its deficit look a little better. Now can you justify that kind of 
a transaction to the committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me just clarify at the outset that the 
rulings announced by the U.S. Department of Commerce are 
preliminary. They are not final rulings. 
 
Secondly, if one was to take the hon. member’s argument, one 
would assume that the highest duties would have been imposed 
against the potash corporation. And, of course, we know that they 
weren’t, that there were other companies that had considerably 
higher duties than the potash corporation. I can simply indicate 
again to the hon. member that there’s some strong indication that 
the debt write-down or write-off may in hence lower the 
constructive costs on the dumping charges to further prove the 
case that there was no dumping. 
 
I think the hon. member — to respond to the latter part of his 
comments — that the hon. member can go back to prior to 1982, 
when it was much expressed that the potash corporation was going 
to be a key vehicle in the economic development and in the 
finances of the province. I think it fair to say that the hon. member 
took much revenues from potash into the revenues of the 
corporation. 
 
(1945) 
 
So to suggest that because it very quickly turned out to be not 
quite as optimistic at one point, that the taxpayer should offset that 
revenue loss when the corporation had retained earnings, I think, 
would have been unfair to the ordinary taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now I was going to leave that, Mr. 
Minister, but you tempt me. I want to make it very clear that we 
took, for the years of 1980 and 1981, $50 million in dividends. But 
I also want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3746 
 
 

the net earnings of the potash corporation in 1980 were $167 
million, and in 1981, $141 million. 
 
The investment was making a very high return. No one can deny 
that, and neither can you, Mr. Minister. It was an investment that 
was working well. 
 
Now I suspect that the potash corporation would be in far better 
shape today if your government hadn’t immediately, on election, 
decided that it was going to make the potash corporation look as 
bad as possible, so it made sure that the potash corporation’s share 
of the offshore market would become less than it was prior to 
April of 1982. It became less as compared to the other mines, 
sector mines in the province. All of those decisions such as that 
one were geared to down-play the role and the well-being of the 
potash corporation, which as my colleague mentioned earlier and 
explained very well, was a good investment. A $418 million 
investment had something in excess by 1981, December of 1981, 
an equity of $732 million, and a debt of only $88 million, and had 
been paying those kinds dividends because of the earnings. 
 
I’m not going to pretend that those earnings under the market 
conditions that developed over time would have been maintained 
at that level. I mean, I’m not that unrealistic that I would suggest 
that. But I’m saying the potash corporation could have done far 
better if there had been a deliberate attempt by management to 
make sure that it was doing well and had done better. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to leave that for now, and I want to pursue 
further what I had begun questioning you about at the beginning of 
your estimates, and that’s the whole question of the 
mismanagement and why we are where we are. I want to just state 
again that in spite of all the arguments that have been made by you 
and your colleagues about somehow the problem that you face is 
somebody else’s fault, it can’t be denied that the financial mess 
that Saskatchewan faces today is primarily a mess of the 
government’s own making. It’s a result of its political expediency 
and the kind of mismanagement which we have referred to. 
 
Now I think that the public is legitimately concerned and should 
have some assurances that maybe this will not continue. I’m not 
sure that they’re confident that it won’t continue. But one of the 
first places you could begin by providing us that assurance in this 
committee, Mr. Minister, is give us some assurances about when 
the next budget is going to be, and assure the committee and the 
people out there who depend on a timely budget to know where 
they stand — more or less when you intend to bring in this next 
budget which is, obviously, only something eight or nine months 
away from now, or less. 
 
The reason I want to ask that question, Mr. Minister, is because 
the process that took place this year was really a process that 
showed great disregard for responsible government. And I say that 
the reason for that probably is because this government seems to 
have some kind of an 18th century view of the world, and that is, 
that government doesn’t have to answer to anybody. It has to do 
what it thinks, and the Premier will say what it thinks is right, but 
that’s fine. After that, they don’t have to answer 

to anybody. There’s kind of a “big brother” view that government 
knows best. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, since this is the first time in the history of 
Saskatchewan that we’ve had a budget later than April 10 — and 
the only time that it was brought down in April was in 1985 — 
can you tell the committee, and I don’t expect to hold you to a 
date, but can you tell the committee whether your next budget is 
going to be brought in before the beginning of the next fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, it’s our intention to bring it in prior to the 
start of the fiscal year. I can’t give you date and you didn’t ask for 
one. 
 
I’d like to put in perspective. The hon. member has taken the 
position — and I’m sure he sincerely believes it — that he, on 
leaving the portfolio, left a surplus. Obviously that was not the 
case, and I think that the reason for the early election in 1982, 
prior to the passing of the budget, indicated that the hon. member 
knew full well that he couldn’t meet the targets. But even let’s take 
his argument that he did leave a surplus — $130 million is the 
figure that the NDP have thrown out. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 139. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — $139 million. That means that your 
administration, during a time when there was extremely high 
resource prices . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — $10 a barrel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, extremely high in relative . . . and very 
high potash . . . The hon. member wants to ignore that. I suggest to 
the hon. member that $139 million surplus, if we accept that figure 
for debating purposes, means that you left office with the province 
having enough money to operate government at 1982 expenditures 
for 18 days — 18 days of operating government at 1982 
expenditures is not much of a surplus to leave. So I suggest to the 
hon. member that we can debate this for some considerable period 
of time but the figure that you’ve sued and held out is one that 
perhaps leaves some question in the public’s mind as well. 
 
So I’ve indicated to the hon. member that we hope to have the 
budgetary process back on a traditional and normal track next 
year. We hope to be able to indicate, particularly to those third 
parties that need to do their budget planning earlier, we hope to be 
able to give them an indication in fair time and get the whole 
process back on track. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, it just so happens that I 
brought the July 1986 Saskatchewan economic and financial 
position with me today. And for you benefit I want to remind you 
that it is issued by the Saskatchewan Finance department under the 
signature of one, Hon. Gary J. Lane, Minister of Finance. Mr. 
Minister, that is your financial statement, and you make it very 
clear here on page 13, for 1982, year ended March 31, excessive 
revenue overexpenditure $139 million — then some more — thus 
rounded off to $140 million. 
 
I remind also the committee, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3747 
 
 

Chairman, that during those 11 years prior to that surplus, there 
was never a deficit the kind of which you have had accumulated in 
your last six budgets. In your six budgets since your government 
took over, there has been a huge deficit every single year. 
 
Now there could be a lot of explanations for that, but one of the 
explanations, clearly, is that some of the revenue side decisions 
you made were decisions that were wrong. They were bad 
management decisions. They were political decisions that had 
nothing to do with fiscal responsibility. 
 
First of all, you gave up $300 million a year, or in total during 
your first term of government, a billion dollars of oil revenues. 
You cancelled the gas tax. Quite popular. Your members in the 
back benches applauded it, but none of them asked you what the 
implications were. Well they were $700 million over the period of 
the first term of your government. That’s $1.700 billion. 
 
In order to finance this borrowing, you had to make up that 
shortfall in revenue, Mr. Minister. It cost you another somewhat in 
excess of $300 million in interest charges over that period of time. 
There was your total accumulated deficit by the end of 1986. It’s 
as simple as that. 
 
And I haven’t even spoken about the waste in the expenditure 
side, which may very well have given you even a modest surplus, 
if you had wanted it. I remind you also that during the time when 
we ran those balanced budgets, and sometimes surplus budgets, 
that the price of oil was $10 a barrel. The price of oil was $8 a 
barrel. During the time when you ran your deficits, the price of oil 
was 27, 28, and $30 a barrel, all but for the last year or so. 
 
So don’t try to say to the committee and to the taxpayers that 
somehow it’s all somebody else’s fault. You had choices to make. 
You made those choices, and they were the wrong choices. They 
were the wrong decisions. Mr. Minister, you had other choices to 
make, and you made them. And I want to ask you about them. 
 
Earlier this year, you borrowed some money. You borrowed some 
money in Japanese yen. Now it is well-known to anybody who 
gets into this kind of market that when you borrow yen, you are 
playing high-stakes financial poker because the value of yen 
compared with many other currencies can rise dramatically, and in 
recent years, it did. And the example that was used when you 
borrowed that money to demonstrate that was that, had you 
borrowed $100 worth of yen five years ago, today you would have 
had to pay back $180 because of the change in the value of the yen 
compared to the dollar. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, can you tell me, since you’ve borrowed the 
yen, has there been a change in the value, and what is the status of 
the money that you have borrowed today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me, let me . . . just so the hon. member 
perhaps has it clear. All of a sudden the forgiveness of the . . . or 
the oil royalty is now costing 350 millions of dollars a year . . . 
 

An Hon. Member: — No, I didn’t say that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, that’s what you said. In fact, it was in 
total, it was that amount. About five years, to the hon. member. 
Five, five. 
 
So we acknowledge that the cost of foregone revenues over the 
five-year fiscal period, ’82-83 to ’86-87, was $350 million or $70 
million per year. However, let’s compare to what was in place 
prior to 1982. The NDP had an oil incentive program. No matter 
how much they hate the oil industry, they still decided that there 
was a few southern seats that they wanted to try and hang on to. 
They had a program that cost $178 million per year, or 178 million 
or $59.5 million per year. A difference between the two programs 
of approximately $10 million per year. 
 
However, here is the difference in results for only $10 million per 
year. There were 9, 250 wells drilled under a Conservative 
government; there were only 3, 470 oil wells drilled during the 
time of the NDP program. But as well, because the NDP had a 
grant program to the oil industry, when we took office in 1982, the 
NDP left a $300 million liability owed by the government to the 
oil industry under the grant program that you had established. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sure, sure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the hon. member . . . I’m sure they 
didn’t tell him everything. But . . . And maybe he did forget, but 
short — it maybe good but it’s very short. I suggest to the hon. 
member that realistically when you look at the cost, aside from the 
$300 million liability owed to the oil companies when we took 
office because of the grant program, the differential between our 
oil program in foregone revenues and yours under the grant 
program was a difference of about $10 million per year, but, in 
fact, nearly three times the number of wells were drilled and the 
activity is three times as great. 
 
(2000) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well, what did you get for it? You got 
nothing for it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the revenues have gone up significantly 
in several of those years and the hon. member knows that. 
 
With regard to the foreign exchange rate exposure, let me give you 
the overall view, and I will talk about specific borrowing programs 
as you raise them. About 80 per cent of the province’s debt was 
denominated in Canadian dollars while about 20 per cent is 
denominated in U.S. dollars. Virtually all of the debt denominated 
in U.S. dollars is for the purposes of Crown corporations. 
 
On April 6, 1987, the province entered into a two-part financing 
package with Nippon Life Insurance and Company. The first part 
of the deal was a 5 billion yen loan for 10 years with a 5.5 per cent 
coupon. The second part of the deal involved the sale of $85 
million in Canadian dollar denominated bonds to Nippon Life. 
The purposes were for the consolidated fund. 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3748 
 
 

The part one of the package deal results in the consolidated fund 
having a yen foreign exchange risk. The province took both sides 
of the transaction. We could not take just part one of the deal; we 
had to take both part one and part two. 
 
The proposal and the factors are about some five or six rather 
technical paragraphs, and I’ll get them highlighted, but the policy 
of the borrowing is as follows: that in virtually all of the foreign 
borrowing, they are swapped back into Canadian dollars. The 
practice, I gather, has been for some time that a modest amount 
may be borrowed directly to maintain the province’s position, but 
virtually all of the borrowings are swapped back into Canadian 
dollars. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you, in your statements on oil 
revenues just made my point about mismanagement. Here is the 
scenario which shows how badly you have done. In 1978 oil 
revenues to the Saskatchewan treasury were $146,393,000 and 
there was a balanced budget. In 1979, revenues of $350 million 
and there was a balanced budget. In 1980, revenues of $396 
million and there was a balanced budget. Similarly in 1981, 
revenues of $482 million and there was a balanced budget, and by 
the end of the fiscal year, which ended in March of 1982, there 
was a surplus of $140 million. 
 
During your term the revenues were considerably higher. You 
had, for example, in 1982-83, revenues of $770 million; in ’83-84, 
$760 million; ’84-85, revenues of $865 million; and ’85-86, 
revenues of $769 million, and you ran massive deficits — just the 
point that I’m making. You had considerably more oil revenue and 
you couldn’t keep the house in order so that you could think about 
the future of the next generations of people who are going to live 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Just the point that I’m making. You had considerably more oil 
revenue and you couldn’t keep the house in order so that you 
could think about the future of the next generations of people who 
are going to live in Saskatchewan. Are you prepared to dig for 
them a hold of a debt, which in the gross terms in $10 billion that 
they have to face? That’s $10,000 for every man, woman and 
child in Saskatchewan; and I’m reading today that the federal debt 
is another $10,000 for every man, woman and child in 
Saskatchewan. That’s $20,000 for every man, woman and child in 
this province, of debt because of your kind of administration. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, who could have done better? You could have 
done better because your talk about drilling more wells and 
pumping more oil didn’t result in anything of benefit from the 
point of view of revenue to the treasury. Let me point out to you 
that in 1980 the production in millions of cubic metres was 9.3 
millions of cubic metres, with a value of $862 million, and the 
revenue to the province was $483 million or 56 per cent. But by 
1985 the production was in millions, 11.9 million cubic metres; 
the value had increased to 2,400 million; and your revenue was 
655 million, only 27 per cent of the revenues. There is where you 
made the give-away which amounted to $1 billion during your 
first term of  

government which further led to a greater deficit which we now 
face, Mr. Minister. 
 
Can you tell me: why were you not able to collect in revenues at 
least close to what was collected in percentage terms in 1980 and 
1981 during the term when your administration was in power? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The hon. member can’t have it both ways — 
he can’t complain about the oil royalties, and then say we’re 
getting revenues which should have reduced the deficit. But I 
think that the hon. member has to look at the oil industry in total. 
Take a look at, for example, the recoverable reserves in the 
province of Saskatchewan have increased from 25 million barrels 
in 1981 to an estimated 65 million in 1987 — a significant 
increase for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When we take a look — and the hon. member keeps talking about 
$10 a barrel in 1981 — in fact, the price of oil was 17.65 a barrel. 
17.65 in 1981; 1987, 19.18. Wells capable of producing in 1981, 
11,072; 1987 it’s forecasted 18,900. I would suggest that that’s a 
100 per cent increase. Oil field employment: 1981, 7,390; 10,250 
— nearly 3,000 more people working. 
 
Obviously through the course of that we’ve had sales tax benefits. 
We’ve had income tax benefits, corporate capital tax benefits and 
corporate income tax benefits. So, for the hon. member to 
compare and not include some of these substantive benefits to the 
people of Saskatchewan, I think is unfair. The production in 1981 
was 46.5 million barrels, and in 1987 estimated 75.8 million 
barrels — a significant increase. So I suggest to the hon. member 
that for you to exclude these substantive benefits I don’t think is 
giving the total picture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I just 
want to ask the minister whether he thinks comparisons based 
upon 1981 are fair comparisons. Would he not compare 1980 or 
1979? 
 
Everybody who knows anything about the oil industry in this 
province knows that in 1981 the two western provinces were 
locked in a war with the federal government; that production of oil 
in Alberta was well down; that there was — some people will 
remember — actually wells were shut in in a major way in 
Alberta. There was a good deal less production than there was in 
1980 and 1979. 
 
And while the minister may well wish to make his point, I think in 
fairness to the committee, it would be helpful if he would not 
select a very atypical year like 1981, when there were wells shut in 
massively in Alberta. We may well remember that. less so in 
Saskatchewan, but significant wells were shut in because . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
If the member for Weyburn isn’t aware of this, or won’t even 
acknowledge it, then I would like him to enter the debate. But I . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I beg your pardon? I thought the 
member would not wish to repeat that so that I could repeat it. 
 
And I wonder whether, because of the particular political 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3749 
 
 

circumstances, the minister would use 1980 or 1979. In some 
ways they would be . . . the comparisons would be the same, but 
with respect to production they would be unquestionably higher in 
1980 than they were in ’81. And the drilling would be 
unquestionably higher in ’80 than it was in ’81. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In fairness to the hon. member, that ’86-87 
was not an atypical year either with a drop from $30 a barrel down 
to $10 a barrel. So I suggest that the figures that the hon. member 
from Regina North East gave did not reflect . . . did not reflect the 
benefits . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Talk about 1985. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — . . . no, would have not reflected the benefits. 
he deliberately excluded some rather significant events in the oil 
industry. 
 
And that is — and I don’t think that the member from Regina 
Elphinstone would disagree — that there are substantially more 
wells being drilled over the last couple of years than even during 
the late 1970s under his administration, that the recoverable 
reserves in the known reserves have increased rather significantly. 
 
And so I suggest that if we’re talking about a total picture, I think 
it’s fair to say the following: that the oil industry has been much 
more active under our administration; that the long-term benefits 
increasing the known reserves for the people of this province have 
. . . known reserves have increased significantly under our 
administration; and that if one looks at the tax regimes applicable 
to the oil industry under our administration and under the previous 
NDP administration . . . I have given you the figures that, in fact, 
there was a differential in revenue loss between the two programs 
of approximately $10 million per year, that as a result of that 
differential, there was a great increase in oilfield activity for the 
benefit of the province in several other revenue sources. 
 
(2015) 
 
And finally, that the grant program that existed under the latter 
years of the NDP administration left a liability for the province of 
approximately $300 million that had to be paid back to the oil 
industry. so I suggest to the hon. member, if you want to come 
down to basics, the province of Saskatchewan oil industry — and I 
think all of the people benefit because of that — is in far better 
shape today than it was in the past. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The only people that aren’t in better shape 
today are the taxpayers because the oil companies are doing so 
well, Mr. Minister. 
 
Keep in mind that we’re talking here about a non-renewable 
resource. it’s a resource that you can develop and you can pump it 
out as fast as you can — and that’s fair — but if you don’t assure 
that you get for the taxpayers a fair share of those revenues, 
they’re never going to get it, because you can’t collect a tax or a 
royalty on something that’s no longer there. 
 
Your policies, although they may have assisted the general 
increase of activities — I’m not convinced of that,  

it might have been there anyway — but although they may have 
assisted that, the general taxpayers of Saskatchewan have received 
no benefit. Tell the people of Hudson Bay what benefit they’ve 
got because of this great activity in the oil field . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Now the minister from Urban Affairs who speaks from his seat, all 
he can tell the citizens of Hudson Bay is that he’s cut their 
revenue-sharing grant back this year by 1 per cent. Now that’s 
hardly evidence of how much they’re benefiting from this great 
development in the oil sector, Mr. Minister. 
 
If you had been collecting these revenues which you’re giving up, 
and your royalty holidays — three years for wells drilled now — 
even if the price of oil goes up to $35 a barrel, they’re going to get 
the holiday. If you were collecting a fair share of those revenues, 
you wouldn’t have to shut down hospital beds which lead to 
waiting lists of 11,000 in the city of Saskatoon. You wouldn’t 
have to destroy a children’s dental plan which was the best of its 
kind in North America. You wouldn’t have to be turning away 
hundreds of students form our universities, who can’t get in 
because there’s no more room for them. 
 
That is the rub of the issue here, Mr. Minister. Your kind of 
economic policy and fiscal policy gets nothing for those taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan who live here and work here and are going to be 
here when the oil some day may be gone — not when you and I 
are alive. But surely we have some obligation to think about our 
children and their children and their children’s children. How 
short-sighted can you be when you think only how well the oil 
industry can do and think so little about how much the general 
population of this province will get from that? 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it’s this kind of bad decision making that has 
brought you to a situation where you had to say one year from the 
time when you said you had to say one year from the time when 
you said you were going to have a deficit of $389 million — I’m 
sorry folks, but I’ve changed my mind, it’s now $1.235 billion. It’s 
this kind of ludicrous policy and bad judgement and deliberate 
give-aways to friends of your political party that have caused this 
to happen. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I’m going to leave that and I’m going to ask 
you something else because it’s related. It’s related to the whole 
question of management and providing the information we need to 
know and so public needs to know. It has been a practice over the 
years that the Minister of Finance publishes during the summer, in 
July, the Saskatchewan Economic and Financial Report. That has 
been done year after year after year. You did it every year from 
1982 to 1986, but there hasn’t been any for 1987. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: why has there not been, in 1987, the 
Saskatchewan economic and financial position which would let 
the public know where the province stands financially, what its 
debt is, what its net equity is? Can you explain that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me get onto the record a fair amount of 
evidence of how the NDP have served to not only distort but fail 
to understand the oil industry. We all heard the member from 
Saskatoon South that the price of  
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3750 
 
 

oil only averaged $10 a barrel during their 10 years. Isn’t that 
interesting that, that totally includes the years before OPEC began 
increasing the price, but when you start to take into account the 
last few years of the New Democratic administration that oil prices 
in 1979-80 as they kept rising 12.85, nearly $13, ’80-81, $15.24? 
 
As a matter of fact the actual for ’86-87 of $15.29 is 5 cents a 
barrel higher than the actual in 1981 — in the last year of the New 
Democratic government. And that’s comparison without taking 
into account inflation. If that was inflation adjusted, I would 
suggest that we would be getting a lot closer to the 1975 values of 
7.21. 
 
So in relative terms, Mr. Speaker, the price the last few years has 
not been that much higher than the last few years of the New 
Democratic administration. And to make the argument that we are 
pumping it out as fast as you can ignores as well the fact that our 
oil conservation policy is one of the strongest in the country. 
 
Secondly, what we are doing as fast as we can is we are 
discovering new reserves, Mr. Speaker, and because of our policy 
by expanding the known reserves of Saskatchewan oil, we are, in 
fact, enhancing the position of future generations of Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker, not just pumping it out. There’s far more oil 
discovered today which is a legacy for future generations. To take 
the argument, as the NDP did with natural gas, that the best thing 
to do with the gas is sit on it, ignores . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Manage it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, sit on it. Sit on it is not managing it. I tell 
the hon. member that sitting on natural gas, sitting on natural gas 
is poor management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was the policy of the New Democratic Party. 
They made long-term contracts with the province of Alberta to 
buy their gas while they sat on Saskatchewan gas. I suggest that 
that was bad management. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, if the 
New Democratic Party and its administration had of . . . had 
incentives to gout and encourage the oil industry to discover new 
reserves of natural gas as we have done that, in fact, not only 
would the taxpayers have had some significant benefits during the 
late 1970s in lower natural gas prices, but, secondly, the known 
reserves would have increased dramatically. 
 
So to argue that because there are incentives which turn out to be 
less costly than the New Democratic Party’s, and the fact that we 
certainly are increasing production, in fairness, ignores and 
ignores completely the great increase in the known reserves that 
our programs have brought about. 
 
I’m advised with regard to the financial report that the member 
ended his previous comments with, that there is a rebasing of the 
statistical basis which I gather is done from time to time and that 
has not been completed. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Come on, Mr. Minister, that’s silly, that’s 
silly argument. You know very well that that report isn’t there 
because you don’t want certain information to be made public. 
Now every year that report has been there; it’s been there in July. 

Let me just tell you something about the report so that it’s on the 
record. 
 
The documents that I’m talking about normally report on the 
provinces, things like the province’s net debt or its equity positions 
— and I have them here for 1986, July. It shows how on March of 
1982, the one I have here, the province had positive equity of $1 
billion — positive $1 billion equity. It also shows that by March of 
1986 that equity had gone and was a debt now of $645 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, that’s mismanagement. That’s what you have 
created; that’s the legacy that you’re going to leave behind. I want 
to know, Mr. Minister, because if that . . . since that document 
hasn’t been tabled one cannot know. But you have your officials 
here and so you should be able to tell the committee: what is the 
figure for March 31, 1987 with regard to the net debt of the 
province of Saskatchewan? We know what it was for 1986. What 
was it for March 31, 1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the net debt, the end of 1987, of course 
is going to be the amount estimated in the budget plus the increase 
in the deficit, and it’s going to approximate $1.900 billion. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let’s make this very clear. Mr. Minister, 
the net debt of the province in July . . . at March 31 of 1986 was 
$645 million — $645 million. You are telling the public of 
Saskatchewan here today that that net debt has, in one year, 
increased to $1.900 billion? Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well if you could add, you add $1.2 billion 
deficit, you’re going to get that figure. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I want to return to a 
subject which my colleague from Regina North East dealt with. I 
want to approach it from a slightly different fashion. 
 
Mr. Minister, when questioned about the deficit, you whine and 
complain that it was your bad fortune to fall upon hard times. I 
want to suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that your budgetary 
problems have little to do with hard times and everything to do 
with your inability to control expenditures. 
 
Mr. Minister, I refer you to a stirring address, not quite on a level 
with the Gettysburg Address or the Sermon on the Mount, but no 
doubt every bit as important. It’s your own budget address of June, 
1987. 
 
On page 44 you gave the consumer price index for Canada for the 
years ’82 to ’86 inclusive. I invite you to calculate — it’s a fairly 
easy thing to do if you have a calculator with a percentage item on 
it — calculate the percentage increase in the cost of living for the 
years ’82 to ’86 inclusive. You’ll find, Mr. Minister, that comes to 
32 per cent. 
 
Now I invite you then, Mr. Minister, to refer to Public Accounts 
for the year March 31, 1982 and take the  
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3751 
 
 

statement of the province’s revenue, which appears as it usually 
does, at the beginning of the book on page 8(a). For the year ended 
March 31, 1982 the province’s budgetary revenue was 2.663 
billion. Then, Mr. Minister, I invite you to take the revenue which 
you estimated for last year, which again appears on page 8 this 
time, and that comes to — for the last year — estimated, 3.358 
billion. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you subtract the revenue . . . If you calculate the 
percentage increase in the revenue from those same years — 
March 31, ’82 to March 31, ’87, you get a figure which is a little 
larger, but not much. It’s almost exactly 32 per cent. What I’m 
suggesting to you, Mr. Minister, is that your revenues have kept 
pace with inflation. The difference is not material to the argument. 
 
Then I invite you, Mr. Minister, to calculate the increase in the 
expenditures during the same period of time. The increase in 
expenditures are almost 50 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, the cost of living increased by about 32 per cent. 
Your revenues increased by about the same, but your expenditures 
increased by 50 per cent. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you want me to 
go back and detail some of the expenditures which I think this 
province might well have done without. Your budgetary problems, 
Mr. Minister, have everything to do with your inability to 
management government, and nothing to do with having fallen on 
hard times. It’s true you’ve fallen on hard times, but that’s just 
beginning to bite now. Mr. Minister, you’re going to get the full 
brunt of that in the years to come. 
 
Over the past years your revenues about kept pace with the rate of 
inflation. The tragedy of it all is, as my colleagues have pointed 
out, Mr. Minister, that your revenues could have easily matched 
your expenditures if you hadn’t made irresponsible tax cuts. So I 
ask you, Mr. Minister, if you don’t agree that your own figures 
suggest that your budgetary problems have to do with your 
inability to control expenditures, and to the fact that your 
government fell on hard times. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’ve yet to find out where the hon. 
member is arguing that your revenues should exceed the CPI 
(consumer price index) increase, but that’s a logical extension of 
what he said. But I find it surprising that the hon. member stands 
up for the first time and criticizes this government for increasing 
health expenditures some 63 per cent, which would be double the 
figures that he has used for the consumer price index, that he 
would be critical of increasing expenditures primarily to our 
farmers well in excess of the rate of inflation. That the 
expenditures on education increased over that five-year period 
well in excess of the rate of inflation. 
 
If you are arguing — and I suggest the hon. member will be the 
first to argue it from the opposition benches — that our 
expenditures on health, education, and agriculture, for example, 
should be strictly limited to the rate of inflation, then I happen to 
disagree with the hon. member and this government disagrees with 
the hon. member. 
 
To further state, recognizing that certainly expenditures have 
increased and they’ve been increasing far too  

rapidly. And on the one hand, you criticize the budget for trying to 
control expenditures and cap expenditures and get people to 
recognize that there are limits; and then on the other hand, say that 
there should be more; and then turn around and criticize us 
because we’re spending too much on health, agriculture, and 
education, is completely contradictory to every debate that’s been 
going on in the House from the opposition benches this session. 
And I find it rather surprising that the hon. member, as the session 
winds down, is now doing a complete — I suppose we could it in 
politics, the Shillington flop — flip-flop, and that’s a new term as 
to where he’s coming from in this debate. 
 
Mr. Chairman: Order. I’d ask the members not to use other 
members’ names. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I anticipated, Mr. Minister, that you wouldn’t 
want to deal with the argument as such, but you’d want to light it 
on something else. 
 
Mr. Minister, the fact is that you’re spending a smaller per cent of 
your budget on health now than you were in . . . than was the case 
in 1982 when you took office. Mr. Minister, you’re spending less 
in absolute dollars on health — I’m sorry, on highways — than 
you were. You’re spending a smaller percentage of that budget on 
education than you were in ’82. Mr. Minister, your budgetary 
problems have to do with patronage, enormous waste, and some 
expenditure which I doubt that any other government would 
attempt . . . much less attempt to justify. 
 
You have an advertising program, Mr. Minister, which is several 
times what it was when you took office and you were critical of 
our advertising budget the last year we were in office. Mr. 
Minister, you’re spending a smaller percentage of that budget on 
health; you’re spending a smaller percentage of that budget on 
education. Mr. Minister, you’re spending less on highways than 
you were then. What you’re spending more on is patronage — the 
highest salaries for executives and political assistants of any 
provincial government in Canada. The Premier’s office which is 
bloated — there is no other word for it — with political hacks. 
 
Mr. Minister, your budgetary problems, I say again, have nothing 
to do with hard times; have everything to do with your inability to 
control expenditures and your own wasteful management. Mr. 
Minister, it’s not health that’s brought you into this difficulty, and 
you couldn’t persuade anybody in Saskatchewan it is. It’s not 
education which has brought you to this difficulty, and you 
couldn’t persuade anybody involved in education that it is. Mr. 
Minister, your problems have to do with patronage — waste and 
just a total inability to handle it, the expenditures of this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, let’s just . . . I know the hon. member 
doesn’t listen anyway, but I’ll just give you a couple of examples 
of the composition of the combined funds expenditure and that is 
the percentage of that particular time to the total. In 1982, 3 per 
cent of the budget went to Agriculture. The last figure I have, 
1986,  
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3752 
 
 

6.1 per cent — doubling, Mr. Speaker, in five years. Health in 
1982 was 24.5 per cent of the budget; 1986, 29.4 per cent of the 
budget. So for you to sit and argue that they have been decreasing 
is simply not true. 
 
Now certainly, when you’re using 100 per cent for total 
expenditures if we raise health up and we raise education up and 
raise agriculture up, there will be offsetting reductions on the other 
side. 
 
I don’t think it takes a financial genius from the opposition, if you 
could ever find one, to figure that out. but I suggest to the hon. 
member that your statements . . . that the hon. member’s 
statements — and you want to yell and scream when you find out 
that you’ve completely distorted the facts and misinterpreted the 
facts, your calculations were wrong, they were completely wrong. 
 
Secondly, your calculations were inaccurate, and your premise 
that you started out with — your diatribe 10 minutes ago about the 
percentages, is totally wrong. And argue as you did that some 
expenditures were not keeping pace with inflation was wrong, 
completely wrong. So I suggest to the hon. member — now we 
can get into a debate as to whether more should be spent, less 
should be spent, but I think that the public is seeing tonight on the 
questions that you’re trying to have it both ways; that on the one 
hand you want a whole bunch more expenditures for everything 
else, but you don’t want to see any restraints and you don’t want to 
see any revenue increases. 
 
To make the spurious argument that everything was patronage, I 
don’t believe in the history of this province that any government 
hit the patronage levels when we have it becoming the norm of 
practice that a member’s family from the new Democratic Party 
gets automatically hired by the government — your seat mate. 
 
Name me a Koskie in Saskatchewan that doesn’t work for the 
provincial government. For Heaven’s sake there has to be a 
genetic defect for someone to go out in the private sector in that 
family, for Heaven’s sake. I find it surprising, Mr. Speaker, that 
you want to avoid talking about that situation, so I suggest to the 
hon. member that his premises were wrong, his calculations were 
wrong, and his argument’s wrong. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that the 
percentage expended on health in this year is less than it was in 
your first year in office. You’re not spending more on health, 
you’re spending less, Mr. Minister. I ask you to figure it out. 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The hon. member — it’s 32 per cent — the 
hon. member did not include in his calculations the capital 
expenditures which are now under the property management 
Crown. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, prior to 
the election, there was an estimate that the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan would cost $5 million. And after the election, we noticed that 
the actual cost was more in the vicinity of 10 to $11 million. 
Another  

example of an underestimation of the cost in a pre-election period. 
 
In 1987-88 I notice that the budget provides 15.7 million for the 
plan, but there have been statements made by individuals who are 
involved with the plan in your department to the effect that $24 
million a year would be required if 100,000 people contributed to 
the plan — 24 million. Now we note that there is only 30, 200 
people who have entered the plan and yet you’ve budgeted for 
15.7 million. And I’m wondering how you explain that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — With respect to your initial comments, when 
we did the 5 million, it was made abundantly clear that that was 
budgeted for. We did not know what the take-up was when we did 
that. We’re approximately $10 million in expenditures, the take-up 
for that is again approximately 30,000. 
 
We are anticipating next year an increase . . . about 34,000. We are 
expecting next year an increase and are budgeting for an increase 
of a further 15,000 people. The estimate is based on a view that 
there was some confusion in the first year as to the tax 
deductibility of contributions, which we view may have 
constrained some people from joining the plan. So our estimate 
with the material and the familiarity with the plan that is 
increasing, that we would increase the number of participants in 
the plan by 15,000. That’s how the number is arrived at. 
 
Ms. Simard: — So the 24 million a year estimate if 100,000 
people contributed to the plan is not an accurate estimate? I 
assume that when you talk about 15.7 million for 31, 700 or 
45,000, if you’re adding 15,000 to it, that the former figure I stated 
is not an accurate one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the estimates were simply given that if 
you had 100,000 people receiving the maximum government 
grant, it would approximate $30 million. In fact, the average grant 
is coming in about $260, and if you got 100,000 people at that, 
you would obviously be at about 26 million. So when we are 
giving those figures, I think they’re . . . I don’t think anyone 
expects them to be precise because you can’t do it, but they are a 
range. As we get more into the use of the plan by the public and 
we get a far better track record of what the average contribution 
requiring a match would be, we will get more precise estimates. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, in 1986 when the plan was being 
established, the general manager for the plan was Mr. Crozier, and 
I understand the current general manager, according to the 1986 
annual report, is Gary Benson. I’m wondering if you could tell us 
when Mr. Crozier left his duties and under what circumstances did 
he leave? And also, whether he received a termination pay 
package? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Crozier and Mr. Benson are both 
seconded from departments: Mr. Benson from the comptrollers 
branch of Department of Finance; Mans Crozier has been a 
long-term public servant in Saskatchewan with Department of 
labour, pensions branch, and he’s back in those traditional duties 
that he’s carried out. 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3753 
 
 

So there was no termination, no severance. They’re on 
secondment, and we will be, when we get the board established, 
which I hope to have done by early in the new year at the latest, 
then I would expect the board to begin to look for a permanent 
general manager, chief executive officer, or whatever they’re 
going to call it. But right now they’re on secondment. I can’t tell 
you what the circumstances were; it was just a change of officials. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I understand from the 
1986 annual report that there are three cabinet ministers who are 
members on the board of trustees and I understand there are no 
other members at this time. However, in August of 1986, the 
Premier was stated as saying in a news release that: 
 

At least one-third of the new board will have to be plan holders, 
reflecting the important involvement of the people of 
Saskatchewan in their own pension plan. 

 
And that’s a quote from the news report. So I’m wondering what 
the minister is intending to do to involve the plan holders and the 
people of Saskatchewan on the board of trustees of that plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve indicated that I would anticipate that we 
would have the board probably early in the new year. One of the 
things that I wanted to see . . . It is still our intention to carry out 
the statement indicated by the Premier. 
 
I think when we get more people involved in the plan this year — 
and of course that carries over into January, February, because you 
have the 60-day period to pick it up — that there will be more 
people perhaps expressing interest in participating in the board 
who are plan holders. If we do increase by 15,000 participants, as 
we expect — we’ll have a pretty good idea of that by, in all 
likelihood, the end of February — then obviously there’ll be a 
broader base of people to choose from. So it’s still our intention to 
carry out that directive of a third being plan participants on the 
board. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, with over 30,000 participants 
already, I would think that it would be fairly easy for you to find 
potential board members amongst those 30,000. So I would 
suggest that there isn’t any further reason to delay looking into this 
matter and that it be looked into as soon as possible. 
 
In the past members of your government, Mr. Minister, have 
stated that the introduction of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan will 
encourage other governments, including the federal government, 
to take action to include home-makers in their plans for pension 
reform. Now I wonder if the minister could tell us how much 
progress has been made in this regard, and at what stage are the 
discussion between the federal and provincial governments to 
expand the Canada Pension Plan to include home-makers and 
others that have been excluded. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There is a home-makers report if it’s not — 
my officials indicate that if it’s not been out in the last week, we’re 
expecting it in the not too distant future  

— dealing with the Canada Pension Plan done by Health and 
Welfare Canada with the participation of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, at least one other province — and I’m not at liberty to 
give the name — has indicated some very, very serious interest in 
the Saskatchewan pension Plan. We have had interest from other 
provinces, but one certainly has expressed some serious interest. I 
think as well that some of the province’s position will become 
more firm once they have the national report on home-makers 
pension that I’ve just referred to. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Will this report be available to us as well, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised that it’s being released publicly. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you. I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, 
whether the whole question of the deduction of Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan contributions from guaranteed income supplement, 
from the federal guaranteed income supplement, which has been a 
problem for us inasmuch as it’s transferring the responsibility 
from the federal government to the province, I’m wondering 
whether that has been settled between you and the federal 
government or what steps you are taking to have that remedied. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Ottawa has ruled that they will consider 
income from the Saskatchewan Pension Plan as income for 
guaranteed income supplement. We’ve expressed both strong 
disagreement and strong disappointment, and we’re continuing our 
lobbying efforts to get that reconsidered. I don’t . . . I’m not sure 
whether there’s room for optimism in light of the federal report 
which is anticipated soon. That may or may not make reference to 
that consideration. At this stage, anyway, the federal government 
has said, no, that it will include it as income. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well that has been one of our criticisms, Mr. 
Minister, inasmuch as your government jumped the gun and 
hadn’t had the matter looked into before you came forward with 
this plan. The fact of the matter is is that means that people who 
are receiving guaranteed income supplement get their pension 
deducted from that and, therefore, the province is, in effect, paying 
for that when the federal government was before. And therefore 
that’s a serious inadequacy, and we’d urge the government to 
continue to negotiate with the federal government to ensure that 
that’s remedied. 
 
The other question that causes some concern is the lack of 
portability of this plan. And I’m just wondering what 
arrangements the minister has made for a person who wishes to 
leave Saskatchewan, for example, and go to another province. 
What arrangements are there to take this pension with him or her? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, first of all, with regard to the question 
of the guaranteed income supplement, we were quite aware of the 
possibilities when we devised the plan, and we very much tried to 
encourage the federal government right through development of 
the plan not to 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3754 
 
 

include the pension in income. 
 
So we share the concern of the hon. member, but to make the 
point that we have not . . . that we jumped the gun, I think is unfair 
in that we do believe fundamentally, even with that, that we 
should be encouraging people to have a pension plan and not just 
rely on a guaranteed income supplement. 
 
Can you remind me of your second question? 
 
(2100) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Portability. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’re not of the view that we’re prepared to 
extend the grant aspect — the government matching grant — to 
people outside the province of Saskatchewan. I don’t think you’re 
making the argument that we should. If someone retires who has 
been a contributor to the plan and leaves the province, obviously 
they will get their pension no matter where they are. If they leave 
the province though and they are still eligible to contribute, they 
can’t contribute. What has been built up in their fund will be paid 
to them when they retire. 
 
We are prepared, and we have made it clear, that if other provinces 
establish a plan that can be compatible, that we would be more 
than pleased to enter into negotiations with a view to have an 
agreement as to portability. Obviously we can’t . . . we wouldn’t 
be supporting portability if it meant that it was a one-sided 
arrangement where by Saskatchewan people get a matching grant 
to certain levels and other provinces didn’t. So it would have to be 
compatible. But we have made it clear on numerous occasions that 
if they are compatible, we would be very, very supportive of an 
arrangement to ensure portability. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, one of the major concerns that we 
have repeatedly raised during the debates on this plan is that the 
plan will not benefit those who need it the most because it’s based 
on voluntary contributions, and many of them cannot afford to 
make those contributions. 
 
For example, the non-working spouse of a wealthy doctor could 
afford to contribute to this plan the way it is currently set up, 
whereas a single mother working at minimum wage could not 
afford to contribute. And it’s for this reason, Mr. Minister, that we 
have constantly stressed the need to take into consideration family 
income of the contributors to determine whether or not this plan is 
being used by low-income people. 
 
And I’m pleased that the minister recognized the need to keep 
track of those figures some time in February. And he said that . . . I 
believe you said that your department was conducting a survey on 
the family income of people who were contributing to the plan, 
and I’m wondering if you’d have those figures available for us 
tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I am advised that the statistical analysis is not 
yet complete, but I can tell you the status of development — that 
the department is developing a family income model that 
“marries” tax filing spouses. This, to the best of our knowledge, is 
the first such effort in 

this area by any provincial government, probably any government 
in Canada. So the work is at a preliminary stage. 
 
The definition of family income does not and, in our view, cannot 
conform at this time with the statistical definition of family 
income. The major definitional deviation is the number of incomes 
contributing to family income. And at this time, our model is 
limited to the incomes of spouses. 
 
Statistical definitions right now include incomes of other members 
of a family unit, for example, children living at home earning 
income or third adults such as parents-in-law, etc., who may 
contribute further incomes to the family income. So the present 
statistical definition does not work for the purposes of the question 
of family income for the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, which we 
would consider both spouses. But once the data is available on a 
more detailed basis, including such factors as age and sex, we will 
be more than pleased to provide this to the Assembly. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, it was February of this year that 
you said this information would be available in a few weeks. Now 
we’re looking at the end of October, to be exact, and it’s still not 
there. So I’m wondering what the delay is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the problem . . . we were optimistic 
because there were some definitions of family income before. But 
as we got into it — and we thought it was readily available — but 
as we got into it, as I indicated, the statistical problem is that 
family income for other purposes includes children who are 
earning income who would not be participants in the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, or other members of the family 
earning income. So to try and find a definition of family income 
which is narrowed to the two spouses for the purposes of the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, quite bluntly, turned out to be far 
more difficult than we had originally anticipated. So we’re 
breaking new ground on this and that’s the reason for the delay. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, why don’t you just ask the people, 
when they apply to be a plan holder, what the family income is, 
and would that not give you the information that we require? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, because the plan is — and we’ve had this 
debate before — the plan is based on the individual contributor. 
So they don’t necessarily have to, one, give the information, and 
we’re not sure that we could get complete information that way 
either. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, even though it’s based on 
individual income, you could still ask for some information as to 
the total family income. And I suggest, Mr. Minister, that the 
reason why you’re not asking for it is because you know that it is 
not . . . it is going to be in the higher areas. And you know very 
well that this plan is not meeting the needs of those people who 
are in the low-income area. And I would suggest to you, Mr. 
Minister, that that’s the reason why we don’t have this information 
tonight and that’s the reason that you refuse to ask people what 
their family income is. 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3755 
 
 

The other criticism we have made of this plan on a number of 
occasions is that it does not meet the needs of seniors today who 
are living in poverty. it does nothing to meet that problem at all, 
and yet we’ve seen it introduced into the province with a great 
deal of fanfare and with a great deal of back patting about what an 
innovative measure it is. But it does nothing for the immediate 
crisis. It does nothing for low-income people who are unable to 
contribute to the family even though those are the people who will 
need it more than anybody else 25 years from now. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can tell me at this time 
whether any university students have taken advantage of this 
program because I understand that the former general manager 
had suggested that university students should be among those who 
take advantage of the proposal. Can you tell me whether you have 
any figures as to whether university students have taken advantage 
of the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We don’t have figures as to university 
students, but those under age 34 — approximately 15 per cent of 
the members to date — 5, 288 are in that age category. 
 
To argue that the plan is no good for seniors, I think is an unfair 
one, because the plan was not designed to be a pension for people 
that were already retired. And we recognize that there are some 
serious problems with people who have already retired and don’t 
have a pension, and we particularly acknowledge the serious 
problem of many single women who are seniors who have either 
no pension or an inadequate pension, and that is one of the reasons 
for the pension plan in the first place. At least the next generation 
of single female seniors will have had an opportunity to be in a 
better position. 
 
And it’s interesting to note that 53 per cent of the contributors 
today are between the ages of 50 and 65, and the majority of that 
53 per cent — that 53 per cent of the total number, is . . . actually 
53 per cent of the contributors in that category are also female. So 
that the women in the ages 50 to 65 who are seeing retirement or 
age 65 as something on the horizon, they recognize that there are 
some significant benefits to them to join the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan. 
 
We have not stood up and said it’s perfect. It is not. But it is 
designed to encourage those, particularly women who don’t have 
the opportunity to contribute to a pension, to have a pension plan 
of their own. 
 
To take the argument — and we’ve debated it many times and the 
argument has been made public — that we should look at family 
income, I have serious concerns about that. If the argument that 
you should treat the income of the husband and wife as one for the 
purposes of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, of course flies in the 
face of the argument of the equality of men and women because 
you are saying, in many cases, that one — and it’s quite 
appropriate for one spouse to be the economic earner, and the 
other one . . . and that that person should pay for the non-working 
spouse — and that’s the fundamental crux of the argument that 
you make when you say that we should use the family income. 

And I think that the hon. member, having been in private law 
practice, knows that there are circumstances out there where there 
are people who have one income generator in the family, and let’s 
take the traditional one of a husband who may be making a 
generous income who is not in any way making provision for his 
wife. And you know that that happens. And I would hate to see a 
situation develop where we ignore the realities that there are some 
out there not making provision for the home-maker, even if they 
have the income to do it. And they do have an option with the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
 
Finally, keep in mind, to further encourage and enhance the 
position of people who are becoming seniors over 65, we did bring 
in the guaranteed minimum pension, which is a subsidy to the 
pension so that they would get some, I believe, significant benefit 
by participating in the plan and having more income, certainly 
than they would have had without the plan. 
 
So to indicate that it does nothing, I don’t think is fair. Does it 
encourage those who are aware of the difficulties of over 65? I 
think that the evidence to date of the contributors and their ages 
would indicate that they are aware of the benefits of the plan and 
they see it as a benefit to themselves. 
 
(2115) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, what I was asking you tonight is 
whether or not you were keeping track of family income in order 
to determine whether this plan was meeting the needs of 
low-income people. And if people of wealthy families are able to 
contribute and people of low-income families aren’t, then there 
should be some provision made in this plan so that people of low 
income are also able to contribute to the plan. And that’s the point 
we wish to make with respect to family income. 
 
But at this point I want to move to the Public Utilities Review 
Commission and point out once again, as we have in this 
Assembly before, that in 1982 this government made a promise 
that the Public Utilities Review Commission would be established 
for the purpose of monitoring the setting of utility rates, and that 
promise was broken in this House in 1987, just a few days ago, 
when the Public Utilities Review Commission was abolished. 
Notwithstanding the fact that your government talked about open 
government, it has now closed the doors on the people of 
Saskatchewan with respect to public input into the setting of utility 
rates in this province. 
 
You indicated, I believe, that the cost of the Public Utilities 
Review Commission was approximately $6 million and that this 
expenditure was too great. However, we have suggested that the 
main reason why the Public Utilities Review Commission was 
axed was because it became politically inexpedient for you to 
maintain the commission and to keep the commission going. 
 
And in that regard we’ve discussed the severance of the 
commissioners and former Judge Boychuk, and I believe the total 
severance all together would be in excess of $120,000 the 
taxpayers have paid to the former Judge Boychuk and the 
commissioners. I’m not saying that Judge  
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3756 
 
 

Boychuk, as an individual, is not entitled to the severance. The 
New Democratic Party opposition has always recognized Judge 
Boychuk’s integrity and his long-time service to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. In fact, we had appointed him as 
Ombudsman; we’d appointed him as chief judge, for example, and 
also as chairman of the Wage and Price Control Board, I believe. 
So, you know, that’s not the problem that we’re talking about. 
 
But when Mr. Boychuk’s integrity, for example, became very 
apparent on the Public Utilities Review Commission because he 
refused to march to the government’s tune, in spite of the fact that 
he was making decision that you felt were not popular, he went 
ahead and did what he thought was right. And even though we, 
personally, may not have agreed with some of his decisions, 
nevertheless, he stood by what he believed. And now he’s being 
axed and of course being given a severance package. 
 
Now I wonder, Mr. Minister, whether you can tell us whether you 
have reconsidered your position of a few days ago not to look at 
alternatives to allow for public input into the setting of utility rates, 
and whether you would be prepared to make the review of 
possible alternatives a priority of your government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the priorities have been stated. I would 
strongly suggest to the hon. member, an immediate priority that 
comes to my mind is farm debt and, quite frankly, that would be a 
much higher priority of this government than dealing with the 
Public Utilities Review Commission. I remind the hon. member 
that there was not great support from the New Democratic Party 
for a public utilities review commission during the course of it, 
and the public is fully aware of that. And I think they find it 
somewhat surprising of the change in position. 
 
Finally, I’ve stated the position for the hon. member the other 
night in a previous debate on the matter of the Public utilities 
Review Commission. I would hope to find some options for public 
review that do not carry the cost that the Public Utilities Review 
Commission eventually carried as a result of increasing 
complexity of interventions; the increasing demand for technical 
expertise; the fact, as I’ve said before, that even the Consumers’ 
Association of Canada, Saskatchewan Branch, had written to me 
concerned about the increasing complexity and the need for ever 
more costly expertise. 
 
You complain about the severance for Judge Boychuk. I’ve given 
you the assurance that this was Judge Boychuk’s option, that 
Judge Boychuk was paid and continued his position as a 
provincial court judge while he served as chairman of the Public 
Utilities Review commission. It was at his option that the 
arrangements were made so that he could receive his income until 
his retirement age. I gather he had personal reasons. 
 
Secondly, he felt that it perhaps may not be appropriate for the 
judge to move back to the court after the Public Utilities Review 
Commission. The choice was his. So to argue or imply that there 
was something nefarious about  

that, I think really does besmirch the integrity of Judge Boychuk 
who would not tolerate that. This was at his request, and I thought 
it was a not unfair position for us to honour the proposal put 
forward for Judge Boychuk. As you say, he has served the 
province admirably and the arrangements made were not unfair. 
They do reflect what, as the hon. member knows full well, 
provincial court judges are paid. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, we never said that the arrangement 
was unfair; that wasn’t our statement, and you know that full well. 
 
We were commenting on the fact that the . . . Mr. Boychuk had the 
integrity to follow through on his decisions with the Public 
Utilities Review Commission and that you disagreed with his 
decisions, and that’s the reason why the commission was 
dismantled. And for you to say that farm debt is more important is 
just trivial, Mr. Minister, that’s just trivial because I’m sure that 
you’re capable of making more than one thing in this government 
a priority. But if you’re only . . . If it’s only possible for you to 
look at one thing at a time, then you shouldn’t be on the other side 
of the House. 
 
And with respect to the Public Utilities Review Commission and 
our position changing on it, that’s simply not true because you 
know full well that the New Democratic Party voted for that Bill 
in the first instance, even though we were sceptical of whether or 
not the commission was the right forum or body in which to 
achieve the goal of public participation in setting utility rates. We 
voted against the abolition of the Public Utilities Review 
Commission because you failed to come forward with alternatives 
for achieving the goal of public participation. You failed to come 
forward with alternatives after making a promise to the public of 
Saskatchewan that there would be public input into setting utility 
rates. After making that promise and setting up the commission 
with a great deal of fanfare on your part, you broke that promise 
and you failed to come forward with any alternatives, and that’s 
why we refuse to support you on abolishing the Public Utilities 
Review Commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Just in closing, to hear the hon. member say 
that the farm debt problem is trivial, let me tell the hon. member 
that the farm-debt problem of this province is a severe problem. 
And all you have to do is go out and talk to the farmers of this 
province. And to say that it’s a trivial argument, to say that the 
priorities should be equal and they both should be dealt with, let 
me tell you that the priority of trying to deal with farm debt is a 
much higher priority than the Public Utilities Review 
Commission. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member, I suggest to the hon. member, to 
even imply, to even imply that the difficulties of public utility or 
review of Crown corporation utility rate increases is on the same 
level and is an equal priority with farm debt, I think, ignores, in no 
uncertain terms, a very, very serious problem out there. 
 
Now we’ve had our differences on the Public Utilities  
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3757 
 
 

Review Commission. I think that the public certainly has a right to 
be critical of the provincial government for changing its position 
with regard to the Public Utilities Review Commission, just as 
they are as critical of you for having been critical of a Public 
Utilities Review Commission throughout the course of its 
operation, and then when it is dropped, that you come out in 
support. So to argue that you’ve been a model of consistency on 
the Public utilities Review Commission is also not a fair position 
to take. 
 
I accept the hon. member’s arguments about the desirability of 
having some type of review mechanism. We debated some of the 
options that you raised the other night, and I believe on one or two 
I expressed some reservations that they were, in fact, workable. I 
did express as well, as I did in an earlier answer, my concerns 
about a review process which has the result of becoming as 
complex as PURC (Public Utilities Review Commission), and it 
has the effect of really being a benefit to the large interveners who 
could afford the expertise and the technical assistance that PURC 
did. If there were other ways, I personally would be quite prepared 
to look at them. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve never seen such intellectual 
dishonesty in my life. The comments that the minister opposite 
made with respect to my statements on the farm debt are just 
ludicrous and totally untrue, and he knows it. And I tell you, Mr. 
Chairman, it taints everything that he said here tonight, and we 
can’t believe a single thing he said because he’s shown us tonight 
. . . he’s show this Legislative Assembly that he is prepared to 
engage in intellectual dishonesty and twist our words on every 
single thing that we say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, my 
questions are on a narrow compass and they have to do with the 
corporation which you set up to handle money of pension funds, 
and I speak of SaskPen. And I’d like you to tell me what is 
happening to SaskPen? 
 
I have a financial statement which is well nigh unbelievable. For 
the year end of December 31, 1983, which has a little note on it 
from the auditor saying that there were little subsequent events 
around here: saying that as of December 31, 1986 — and I’m not 
misstating myself — in the financial statement for 1983, the 
auditor is adding some notes as to what happened in 1987, 
indicating that the audit report for ’83 was prepared in ’87. That 
gives us some idea of how this minister is looking after our 
pension funds. 
 
But quite apart from that, Mr. Minister, it seems to say that some 
bonds or debentures, which were issued in 1987, were redeemed 
retroactively. Now if that’s true, that’s a neat trick, and I’m not 
aware of ever having heard of that before. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Live and learn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well live and learn. If any member can 
give me one example that he knows about, of debentures being 
redeemed retroactively, let me join the  

club. Tell me about it because it’s new to me. It’s new to me. 
 
Now I am not so concerned about these remarkable finagling with 
figures which has characterized SaskPen; I’m worrying about 
what’s happened to the money. it looks to me, Mr. Minister, as if 
about $15 million of this pension fund money which used to be in 
some sort of debt instruments, in debentures, or loans, has 
somehow gone and has been replaced by shares. Shares in what, I 
don’t know. Owned by whom, I don’t know. Would the minister 
enlighten us on what has happened to this corporation? 
 
We’re talking about the pension money of a fair number of public 
servants. We have what I can only describe as fairly bizarre 
explanations by the auditor: 
 
(2130) 
 

Pursuant to a share subscription and bond redemption 
agreement dated December 31, 1986, the company redeemed 
and cancelled all bonds and notes, including those issued 
after December 31, 1986, (as I say, it’s not a bad trick) in the 
aggregate amount of $14 million (and) trust deeds are 
cancelled. The company has issued 15 million shares. 

 
Can the minister give us some idea what he is doing with the 
pension money of these public servants? Because I think they’re 
entitled to know what happened to the debentures, what happened 
to the debt, what happened to the bonds. Why were they 
cancelled? Why are they left only with shares? Because all of us, I 
think, I know that shares may or may not have the value that 
subscribe to them. A lot of people have found out lately that shares 
aren’t quite the investment that some people suggested they might 
be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Just so the hon. member understands what 
SaskPen Properties’ Ltd. is designed to do. Prior to 1982, 
Saskatchewan pension fund moneys had invested in a pension 
realty company called Pension Fund Realty. Okay? So, and that 
was a vehicle whereby pension funds, not only in Saskatchewan, 
held shares in a national company which was the vehicle to invest 
in, I gather, real property — the legitimate activity. I gather the 
decision to do the same type of vehicle within the province of 
Saskatchewan was SaskPen Properties, which was established for 
that. 
 
So the shareholders of SaskPen Properties are seven Saskatchewan 
pension funds. They had acquired, as the hon. member knows — 
it was approved by treasury board back in 1981 — that the 
province pension funds acquire interest in the Bank of Montreal 
Building, Victoria Plaza West, Victoria Plaza East, Royal Bank, 
Woolworth’s site, and Victoria Plaza Parkade, all in 
Saskatchewan. For, and I don’t know the reasons, but those were 
acquired by debentures. Okay? And in 1986 as you say, at the 
recommendation of the Provincial Auditor, it was suggested that 
the structure be converted to a . . . it was a debt/equity swap so that 
those debentures were converted into shares owned by the seven 
pension funds. The ultimate question that is: are the shares — 
because 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3758 
 
 

they are now shares as opposed to debentures — lessened in 
value? The advice is that they — the value on the properties — 
they have a valuation that’s accepted by the Provincial Auditor, 
and I gather that came out in public accounts. 
 
I don’t know whether that is an explanation of the history of 
SaskPen properties and what its objectives are and why the 
conversion from debentures to shares, but the shares are held by 
the pension funds and those, I’m told, are still the only five 
properties that SaskPen properties has. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I am 
confused and genuinely confused, the Debentures appear to — on 
these properties you refer to — appear to add up to something 
under $3 million, $2.7 million. Yet, we are talking about some $15 
million, or $14.5 million. I don’t . . . Are you telling . . . Is it your 
position that SaskPen properties has an investment of $14.5 
million in these five properties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There were debentures that had been 
redeemed earlier on these to invest further in the construction, I 
gather, of the Bank of Montreal tower in Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I don’t think I’m with you now. Are you 
saying that the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member 
from Regina South, I know, will elucidate this point since I’m sure 
it’s right on the end of his tongue to explain just how these 
debentures were dealt with in the construction process and how 
they were rolled into shares, but I’ll take it from the minister, if I 
may. 
 
Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that the entire $14.5 million of the 
money from these pension funds is in these — basically in the two 
buildings: the Bank of Montreal building and what is called the 
Victoria Plaza West? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, it’s essentially in the . . . I gather two 
buildings that were constructed is the Victoria Plaza West plus the 
Bank of Montreal; and then the old Royal Bank property in 
Regina is still a vacant lot as the hon. member knows. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Finally, why did you go to the share 
mode? What was wrong with the debentures? Is it that they simply 
didn’t pay? 
 
I noted that they were supposed to pay 3 per cent and be 
participating in profits, and all of a sudden they’re gone. And they 
at least give some sort of a mortgage, on presumably . . . I suppose 
that’s what the trust deed was all about. Now I take it there is no 
mortgage; if we have shares, it’s unlikely to be the case. Is it true 
now that the pension fund doesn’t have any mortgage on the 
buildings but is only participating in the profits or losses of 
operating the five properties including the two main buildings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised that simply what happened is that 
they moved from a very complex trust deed action, which I gather 
set out in complex terms the arrangement of the various pension 
plans on each property so they could vary form property to 
property, the interest, I’m advised that it was an extremely 
complex 

way to go and that the share structure was a much more simplified 
approach that the Provincial Auditor had urged in which the 
officials had . . . were supportive of. But it was really to go from 
an extremely complex to a simplified straightforward system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I won’t 
prolong this. I’m sure that the right to have . . . to get interest has 
got more complicated as you had before and you give that up and 
get a share. I’m sure a mortgage is a complicated thing so you can 
give it up and get shares, but I’m not at all sure that anybody 
whose pension is at stake is worried about how complicated it is. 
He’d like to know that he has some security, and I suspect he 
hasn’t as much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Just to advise that I’m told that each trust deed 
had a separate accounting pool, and again, I’m not standing up 
here disagreeing with what you’ve said, but I gather that it was 
inordinately complex as it developed and as the development of 
the properties progressed that ultimately this was a far more stable 
and straightforward arrangement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to . . . I’d 
like to just make some observations and ask the minister some 
questions, if I could, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Throughout the course of the day, we have seen members on this 
side of the House confirm what has been put forward as a case of 
mismanagement and miscalculations and patronage and 
incompetence of this government time after time. We have seen 
that the case put forward in terms of the deficit where the minister 
has forecast or estimated a deficit that has been out by 200 per 
cent. We have seen the case put forward of countless individuals 
who have been appointed by this government to high-paying 
patronage positions. We have seen example after example of 
incompetence, and we have seen in almost every case that this 
minister and this government has been involved in with respect to 
promises, we’ve seen those promises be broken. 
 
And I’d like to just say to the minister, and remind the chairman 
and members of this House, that there is a real question of 
credibility here with respect to the minister and with respect to the 
Conservative Party. They have made commitments time after 
time, and on every occasion they have broken those commitments. 
 
They have indicated time after time and in election campaigns, 
and the minister himself even went back to 1982, Mr. Chairman, 
and I’d like to do so as well. Because in 1982 the Conservative 
Party of this province made commitments, and I have some 
examples of the literature they put out during the course of that 
election campaign. They made commitments to reduce a number 
of taxes, and we see in this budget not a fulfilling of those 
promises, but we see, Mr. Chairman, a real good example of what 
Conservatives are all about. 
 
In the example of the Premier and his literature, Mr.  
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3759 
 
 

Chairman, he has promised to reduce the E & H tax and eliminate 
it to zero per cent and 5 per cent — the Premier, the member from 
Estevan. And in this budget, Mr. Chairman, we have seen the sales 
tax not be eliminated, but we’ve seen a 40 per cent increase, and 
we are now subjected to one of the most massive tax grabs in the 
history of this province. 
 
We have seen member after member, the member from 
Kelsey-Tisdale, who is a member of cabinet, make commitments 
to produce a 10 per cent reduction in personal income tax. In this 
budget, Mr. Chairman, we have seen not a 10 per cent reduction in 
personal income tax but, in fact, a 28 per cent increase with the 
implementation of the flat tax. 
 
And we have seen, as well, Mr. Chairman, candidate after 
candidate, cabinet minister after cabinet minister, including the 
member from Kindersley, make commitments about eliminating 
the gasoline tax. He promised, as well as every other Conservative 
candidate and every other Conservative cabinet minister in this 
House, to eliminate the gasoline tax. In May of 1982 the Premier 
was up in front of this Legislative Building, when he eliminated 
the gasoline tax, and he said as long as there is a Conservative 
government in this province there will never be another gas tax 
reimposed. 
 
And what do we see from this Minister of Finance in this 
Conservative government but a gas tax that is not only reimposed 
but increased from 6 cents a litre to 7 cents a litre, from 28 cents a 
gallon to 32 cents a gallon. Is that a government or a party that the 
people of this province can rely on to be telling the truth, either in 
this budget or any other statement they’ve made in this House 
today or any day previous? Is that a basis for telling the truth? Is 
that a basis for providing some credibility and some leadership in 
this province? Mr. Chairman, I think there’s a real lack of 
credibility. 
 
(2145) 
 
We see another cabinet minister from the constituency of Maple 
Creek. She’s made a number of commitments as well — a 10 per 
cent reduction in personal income tax. And what have we seen? In 
piece of literature after literature that the Conservatives put out, 
Mr. Chairman, whether it’s the member from Melfort who’s now 
a cabinet minister, or the member from Melville who’s now a 
cabinet minister, or the member from Regina South who’s a 
cabinet minister, or the member from Rosetown-Elrose who’s a 
cabinet minister, or the member from Swift Current who’s a 
cabinet minister. 
 
In Conservative candidate, Conservative cabinet minister after 
Conservative cabinet minister, they have made promises in 
writing, verbally, with respect to reducing taxes in this province of 
all nature and all kinds. And we have seen this budget a betrayal, a 
double-cross, to the people of this province that is unprecedented 
in politics, never mind in this province. I think it’s a glaring 
example of their dishonesty. 
 
We even have the Minister of Finance signing a guarantee, signing 
a guarantee that: 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan is 
committed to continue the medicare system in our province, 
and that we reject any form of deterrent fees or health 
insurance premiums, and that we will abolish the unfair 
deterrent fees of prescription drugs. 

 
This is in writing from the Minister of Finance, who, a few 
moments earlier, got up and quoted, and I quote him, “We expect 
the meet the deficit target, “ he says. Well who knows? I don’t 
know if he’s telling the truth. Everything he’s signed, everything 
he’s said verbally in election campaigns, he’s done the opposite. 
He’s betrayed his word. He’s not a man in terms of keeping his 
word. A man’s word is his bond. This minister and this 
government get up there and mislead people on every statement. 
They always do the opposite when it comes to making election 
promises. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s disgusting what this 
government has done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Conservative after Conservative in this province 
and in this country — you’ve stated this yourself on occasion — 
they say, and they all say in this province and this country that if 
we become government, there’s going to be less red tape, that we 
should do way with all this government bureaucracy and have less 
red tape. 
 
With the gas tax, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we have the 
most incredible example of red tape proliferation, the most 
bureaucratic red tape nightmare in this history of red tape. I don’t 
think they have red tape like this in Russia. 
 
What he’s done with this gas tax, Mr. Chairman, because he has 
now involved 641,000 licensed vehicle operators to save gas 
receipts, if each one of them purchased gas once a week during the 
course of a year, they will save 34 million receipts. 
 
On top of that he’s asked the gas retailers to issue these receipts 
and create more red tape and more bureaucracy for them. With 
regard to propane, he has now levied a tax on propane, and it’s 
such a ludicrous tax that he’s now indicated that with respect to 
propane he’s levying a tax even on the non-taxable portion of 
propane. He’s setting a precedent that is unheard of in this country. 
 
And I guess I could go on and on and on about the promises that 
this member and this government have made, Mr. Chairman, but 
time is running nigh; it’s getting rather late. So what I would like 
to do is ask the minister what he plans to do, in view of his lack of 
credibility, in view of the promise never to reimpose the gas tax 
and the promise to reduce taxes that he’s increased in a dramatic 
fashion, and the fact that he’s signed a guarantee that is not worth 
the paper it’s written on, can the minister tell us in this House 
today what is happening with respect to this bureaucratic 
nightmare of gas tax receipts? Can you please enlighten the House 
and the members on this side of the House what you see and how 
you see this gas tax operating? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The public, of course, has heard the debate 
several times over the last 100-and-some days.  
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3760 
 
 

And the public, of course, as a result of that debate, is becoming 
increasingly aware that: one, not only was the gas tax in the form 
that it was imposed with the rebate for the average Saskatchewan 
citizen necessary in these economic times, but secondly, that the 
average taxpayer will be exempt from the tax providing they keep 
their rebates. And the only way to bring in a program which gave 
that type of benefit so that the business community paid the tax 
was to have the rebate program. 
 
It would be impossible to have two rates at the same pump. Finally 
the public has increasingly become aware that even at 7 cents a 
litre, that’s considerably less than it would be if the hon. member 
was maintaining his sliding scale gas tax that was on prior to 1982. 
 
Having said that, we’ve said and we’ve indicated in the House on 
numerous occasions that the administration is proposed as follows: 
that early spring, late winter, a letter will go out to Saskatchewan 
taxpayers with an application form with instructions how to 
complete it, obviously, include their receipts. They will be asked 
to indicate whether they want to keep their receipts or whether 
they don’t. Then we propose to have a fair deadline when they 
have to have their receipts in, and we then propose to use summer 
students to process the application forms and issue the rebates over 
the course of the summer. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Minister, you’ve indicated that they’ll be 
sent a letter, or at least the licensed vehicle operators will be sent a 
letter requesting that, or asking them if they will be keeping their 
receipts or not. What do you mean by that? That they’ll be able to 
send in photocopies of their receipts, or that the receipts will be 
returned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The receipts would be returned whether they 
wanted their receipts returned or not. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — How do you plan to process 34 million gas 
receipts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, it’s . . . we don’t see it as a big a 
problem as you’re interpreting. I mean, the claims that come 
forward . . . If we get a claim from an average driver that is for 
$5,000 worth of gas receipts, you can rest assured that that claim 
will be looked at in considerable detail. 
 
I mean, we have a fair idea and we’ll have a rough calculation of 
what the average person driving an average number of miles or 
kilometres in a year would use. I think that those that go above the 
average, significantly, will quite quickly be identified and 
reviewed. So, in most cases, we believe that the people of 
Saskatchewan will submit a complete and honest claim form with 
the amount and we don’t expect any great problems. And we don’t 
expect to see problems identifying those that are quite above . . . or 
above the norm. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I’d be interested to know, Mr. Minister, who’s 
idea it was to implement this bureaucratic plan? Question one. 
Question two: in the budget documents you indicate that about 
one-third of the tax rebate will not be claimed but will be retained 
by the government. Could  

you explain why that is so? And I’ll ask some more questions 
later. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well that’s . . . you’re not correct, it’s not in 
the budget. The pay-out doesn’t come until ’88-89. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I’m sorry I didn’t hear the last . . . You said it 
wasn’t in the budget, but . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The pay-out doesn’t come until ’88-89. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Okay. So what is your best estimate of your 
officials as to how much will be retained? Is it 20 per cent, 40 per 
cent, or a third, or what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We estimate it could be between 65 and 75 
per cent will be submitting receipts. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Is there any internal decision made at this point 
as to what the revenues from the gas tax will be used for? If the 
minister recalls, the gas tax in the past was used for the 
maintenance and improvement of our highway system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, the hon. member is wrong again. It’s 
never been targeted; it wasn’t targeted when you had the gas tax 
on; it was not targeted to any specific purpose like highways. It 
was put into the Consolidated Fund for general expenditures and 
that’s what will happen with the revenues. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well I think that the minister here is playing 
some very cruel and costly politics with the people of this 
province with all of the taxes you’ve levied in this budget, not just 
the gas tax but the flat tax and the E & H tax increase and the 11 
per cent increase in hidden taxes with respect to licences and in 
particular with . . . when it comes down to transferring the burden 
of the deficit and the mismanagement. 
 
We have seen very clearly, Minister, that with the gas tax that 
urban and other and rural transportation systems will be forced to 
pay the gas tax. Therefore, the users of the systems will be forced 
to pay which, in effect, is another tax increase on those people 
who don’t drive, for the most part, or don’t use the highway 
system with their own vehicles. 
 
So here we see, Mr. Minister, a tax, another tax increase for the 
very families in many cases who don’t have automobiles, who 
don’t receive tax breaks, but in effect are subsidizing your 
operation and your deficit when perhaps you should be looking at 
individuals and corporations that have the assets and the income to 
be . . . getting it from them and which would make it a fairer tax 
system. What do you have to say about that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’m a little surprised at your comment, 
because it’s the business community, by and large, that will be 
paying the gasoline tax. They will pay the bulk of it. They don’t 
get an exemption. And so to suggest that they’re not paying their 
fair share, I think is wrong — that one of the reasons for the rebate 
system is so that the business community in fact pays the tax. 
They will be the major payers of the tax. 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3761 
 
 

I grant you that there has been some increases with regard to 
primarily urban transportation systems. We should keep in mind 
that not every urban government in the province has a 
transportation system, so it’s not something that is in fact being 
paid by everyone in the province because of urban transportation. 
 
Secondly, I’m advised that at least some of the urban governments 
that have urban transportation systems are looking at other ways to 
manage their urban transportation and save funds, perhaps to 
offset, at least in part, the cost of the gasoline tax. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well you’re just confirming what I’ve said, Mr. 
Minister. If businesses are going to be paying this, where do you 
think they’re going to get the money from? They’re obviously 
going to get the money from people who subscribe to services in 
those businesses. 
 
But you’re missing the point. We have two, three major . . . four 
major centres in this province that have transportation systems. 
The people that use them, use them because they don’t have 
access to automobiles, or they use them because they believe 
that’s the best system available to them. And what we’re seeing 
here is you’re passing on tax increases to the municipalities like 
Saskatoon and Regina, which will mean, over the course of a 
12-month period, for each city between 1 and $1.2 million extra 
they have to spend. 
 
(2200) 
 
And where do you think they’re going to pass that on? And all you 
do, after you pass on this increase to the municipalities, is you 
stand up in this House, with little credibility that you have, and 
criticize these urban municipalities for raising their taxes because 
they’ve got to meet some of the expenses that they have. And you 
always charge mismanagement. What we have here is one of the 
largest examples of mismanagement, and a regular example that 
this government has been providing, that, I think, is unacceptable. 
 
Are you prepared, as a minister, to consider providing the tax 
rebates for school boards who are also being hard hit in rural 
municipalities and urban municipalities, and for providing some 
additional transportation assistance to offset the tax increases for 
the centres that do have urban transportation systems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I was a little surprised to hear you accept my 
argument that business is paying the tax, but then you extended it 
and said, well that’s unfair because they’ll just pass it on to 
consumers, which is completely the opposite of the argument you 
made earlier that, you know, tax the oil companies — you made 
earlier — which would mean higher gas prices, back down . . . 
paid by the consumer. So I suggest to the hon. member that there 
is a rather surprising inconsistency in the argument. 
 
With regard to the revenues, at least one urban government has 
indicated that they expect to see the ridership up as a result of the 
gas tax, which may enhance the revenues on urban transportation. 
Saskatoon had made it clear to us that when the gas tax was 
removed in  

1982, there was a dramatic drop in ridership in the buses, and that 
they expect ridership to be up. 
 
Thirdly, we’re advised that the total cost to local governments of 
the tax is $2.89 million. In other words, $2.89 for every man, 
woman, and child in the province. Certainly an increase. I doubt 
that many would see that as a Draconian increase and an 
unbearable increase. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Which raises a good point, Mr. Minister, 
because the ultimate effect of your budget and all of your tax 
increases this year, means that every man, woman, and child in 
this province has been provided with a wonderful gift, 
compliments of the Conservative government, of a tax increase of 
$250 each. For a family of four, that’s a $1,000 of increased 
provincial taxes in this fiscal year alone. You consider that a 
modest tax? What’s your problem? Do you not understand how to 
work a calculator or do you not have any understanding with 
respect to how families are struggling now in this economy that’s 
very tight? 
 
You talked about what a terrific job you’ve been doing in this 
budget in your budget speech. I have here some economic 
indicators, in terms of jobs, as a result of your wonderful 
management. Saskatchewan has lost 2,000 jobs in the past year, 
while Manitoba’s gained 4,000 and Alberta’s gained 12,000. With 
respect to inflation, Saskatchewan has the highest inflation rate in 
all of Canada. We have, on a regular basis in this year as well, a 
dramatic increase in bankruptcies, both farm, business, and 
personal. And, on top of that, we have the lowest number of 
housing starts, in terms of increase over last year, in all of the land. 
Whose responsibilities are these . . . is this economy? You and the 
Premier obviously divorce yourselves from that responsibility. but 
if you’re not responsible for this wonderful performance, can you 
tell us tonight who is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I could rehash the old debates for some 
considerable period of time. We have indicated what our budget 
revenues would be, what the tax increases would be. but the hon. 
member . . . and I think the public is increasingly recognizing the 
difficulty, and I’m sure the hon. member knows this, that they 
can’t have it both ways. That . . . can’t on one hand argue that we 
shouldn’t have a deficit and, you know, without dealing with some 
tax increases. So to suggest that you can have it both ways is not 
realistic in today’s society. 
 
Again, I could back through page 55 of the budget speech as to the 
relative position of Saskatchewan people, and we’ve indicated on 
numerous occasions, the Saskatchewan people are still the second 
lowest taxed people in Canada, and again, Saskatchewan people 
are increasingly realizing that. So without reopening, to any great 
length, the debates we’ve had for a long period of time, I think 
I’ve responded to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, we could go on with this debate 
for a long time, and I see that, as has been proven throughout the 
course of these last four months, that you’ve been beaten up so 
badly in the debate that I think I’ll resist the temptation to inflict 
further injury. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, with the minister’s indulgence I’ll ask  
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3762 
 
 

him some questions about the fuel tax on propane. I have here an 
information bulletin. And I raised this with the Deputy Premier in 
question period the other day in your absence, but he took notice 
and said you’d respond. So I may as well raise it now. This 
information bulletin was sent to all propane retailers in the 
province, and it’s regarding the 7-cent-per-litre fuel tax. I’ll just 
read a portion of it here: 
 
In order to address the concerns raised by several propane dealers 
and to ensure that the 7 cents per litre fuel tax on taxable propane 
is collected in a fair and consistent manner, the following changes 
will apply. 
 
A fair and consistent manner. Now that’s the goofiest statement 
that you’ve made, or at least that this bulletin has reflected from 
the minister’s department, today. 
 
Now I haven’t read others in the last few days but there are others. 
The reason I say “fair and consistent manner” is goofy, because it 
goes on to explain how the propane retailers who used to pay fuel 
tax once a month on the taxable propane that they sold, now have 
to pay — if they purchase propane three or four times a week — a 
tax on the gross purchase, both taxable and non-taxable portion of 
the propane. Now is that fair and consistent? 
 
It sounds as bureaucratic as the gas tax for individuals and for 
businesses. They’re laughing at you. And they would be laughing 
at you at your face if you’d answer your calls, except they’re so 
darned angry with more red tape that they have to look after. 
 
Now, I was wondering if the minister could comment on that, and 
why his department has undertaken to write this letter, this 
memorandum saying it’s a fair and consistent way to do it when 
it’s such a goofy plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well if it’s so goofy, then the hon. member 
can tell us why it was approved by the Saskatchewan committee 
of the Propane Gas Association of Canada. We had several 
meetings with them and it was at . . . with their concurrence that 
this was proposed. 
 
What was happening prior to the November 1 date was that retail 
propane dealers were allowed to purchase propane tax-free and 
remit the tax collected on their taxable sales. However, several 
dealers complained that some of their competitors were not 
collecting the tax in an consistent manner. So that this 
arrangement was made in conjunction with the Saskatchewan 
committee of the Propane Gas Association of Canada, and they’ve 
supported the changes in discussion with our officials. 
 
Secondly, just to indicate that the local retailer should not have 
difficulties — and probably is in the position of bulk dealers — 
the Saskatchewan committee of the Propane Gas Association of 
Canada have advised us that retail propane dealers have 30-day 
credit terms. Therefore, even if a retail propane dealer sells some 
propane for tax-free purposes, he is not out of pocket because he 
can claim a credit from his wholesale supplier. 
 
So for you to make the statements, it’s contrary to the position of 
the propane gas association that worked this  

out in conjunction with my officials. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, I’d like to know who the Canadian 
association of propane dealers represents. It obviously doesn’t 
represent some of the small retailers in this province that I’ve 
talked to about this. Because the memo also goes on to say, that — 
I mean there’s a number of inconsistencies — but farmers may 
purchase propane tax-free from a card lock or key lock if he 
purchases it in quantities of 200 litres or more. 
 
Well if anybody in your department there had ever purchased 
propane at a key lock, they will know that if you’re a farmer or 
otherwise, you can’t tell how much you purchase because there’s 
no running dial on there that he can see. So what’s he going to do? 
He doesn’t get billed; he gets billed on a monthly basis. So I think 
that’s kind of ludicrous. 
 
I have a bit of a problem with this, Mr. Minister. The propane 
dealers in this city and the propane dealers in places like 
Kindersley and Melfort are really concerned about the red tape 
that you have generated with this memo. And I would like to 
know how your commitment to less bureaucracy and less red tape 
is reflected in a memo like this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I can repeat what I said earlier, that this 
was done with the concurrence of the Saskatchewan committee of 
the propane Gas Association of Canada, and done in concurrence 
with them and my officials. 
 
You ask who they represent. We’re not sure we have the full list, 
but it’s ICG (Intercity Gas Corporation); the Federated Co-op; 
Superior gas and Calgary gas, who I gather are virtually all of the 
main suppliers of gas to the retail in the province. So that, you 
know, they’re the main suppliers. They agreed to this, and they 
advise us that with the 30-day terms that the retailers have, that 
they shouldn’t be out of pocket. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, before I 
turn to the Provincial Auditor, I just want to spend one minute, if I 
may, on the Department of Health, just to draw the Finance 
minister’s attention to a few things. 
 
If the minister would turn to page 47 of the Estimates, I want to 
run through it very quickly. He will note on item 19, payments to 
the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, $10, 716, 
700. That was not in the Department of Health in 1982. 
 
I want the minister to turn to page 48, item 24, grants to hospitals. 
Part of that was not in the Department of Health budget in 1982. 
 
I want him to turn to page 49, grants and allowances for 
ambulance services, almost $7 million. That was not in the 
Department of Health in 1982. 
 
I want him to turn to item 31, grants and allowances for special 
care services, $190 million. That was not in the Department of 
Health in 1982. 
 
Item 32, grants to special care facilities — part of that was not in 
the Department of Health in 1982. 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3763 
 
 

Number 50, number 50, members of the Executive Council, again, 
that was not in Department of Health in 1982. 
 
Mr. Minister, this evening there might be others, but those are the 
ones I very quickly checked, and that amounts to well over $210 
million — about 20 per cent of your health care budget for this 
year that was not in the Department of Health in 1982. So for you 
to say, Mr. Minister, that you increased the Health budget by 63 
per cent from 1982 is not being very honest with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(2215) 
 
I would suggest to you that if you really wanted to have increased 
the Health budget, you should have looked into some other areas 
where you could have maybe increased it by another 500 million, 
and then you could have gone around and bragged that you had 
increased it by 100 per cent. That’s the kind of dishonesty, Mr. 
Minister, that the people of Saskatchewan are becoming very 
critical of, and I think they expect more of their elected officials 
and particularly from the Minister of Finance. 
 
These are notes that I have noted from the Estimates. Mr. 
Minister, you may want to respond later on. I want to turn now to 
the role of the auditor. I want to return to the role of the auditor, 
and very quickly, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. The Provincial Auditor 
isn’t under this vote that we’ve got under consideration in the 
department of . . . on the main estimates. Provincial Auditor is on 
page 73 and it’s . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ll do all under item 1 of Finance and then 
get the rest through, if that’s all right with the chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Is the minister asking leave of the House to go 
into the Provincial Auditor? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Slow down. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well somebody said slow down. Fine, I got lots of 
time. I’ll take a little more time then because I hadn’t planned on 
going through all of this stuff, but if you want me to, great. 
 
Mr. Minister, now that I have more time, I will slow down. Mr. 
Minister, the role of the Provincial auditor and his independence, I 
think is well written out for us in the Office of the Provincial 
Auditor of Saskatchewan’s little booklet. And it states, Mr. 
Minister, the role of the provincial officer is this: 
 

The Provincial Auditor has the sole responsibility to help the 
Legislative Assembly to hold the executive government 
accountable by reporting to the Assembly on matters relating to 
the quality  

of the executive government’s administration of public money. 
 
Mr. Minister, what concerns me is what has happened in this 
province. And when I look at the auditor’s report, and we have 
studied it in public accounts, is that you have interfered with the 
role of the Provincial Auditor and his independence by twofold — 
not by his salary, because that has been established in this 
Assembly, but you have interfered with the Provincial Auditor in 
substantially reducing his staff. His staff in 1982 were 72 people 
and this year it will be reduced to 49. And you have indicated, Mr. 
Minister, time and time again in this House, if the Provincial 
Auditor wishes to supervise and examine further the work of 
private auditors, well, he can do so. I say to the minister that that is 
not possible for him to do if you reduce his staff. 
 
I want to ask the minister right now: do you not think that you are 
infringing on the role and the independence of the Provincial 
Auditor by substantially reducing the staff? Just . . . Would you 
comment on that for a few minutes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I don’t have to comment on it for that 
long. I do not for one minute buy the argument that the use of the 
private sector auditors with the overriding supervision of the 
Provincial Auditor in any way lessens public accountability. 
 
Secondly, the reason for the reduction in the Provincial Auditor’s 
staff is because the Crown corporations now have the option to use 
private sector auditors. 
 
Thirdly, as I had advised the Assembly before, the Provincial 
auditor had made it clear to the government that he would not 
participate in any restraint program or anything of that nature 
because he reported to the Legislative Assembly. We did finally 
ask for, and received, budget estimates from the Provincial 
Auditor. The Provincial Auditor submitted those based on the 
private sector auditors doing Crown corporations, and he had 
asked for, I believe, 3 million — this was his request, okay? — 3, 
256, 200. The amount budgeted for is 3, 230,000, a difference of 
approximately $25,000. 
 
We do have some differences in terms of what we estimate space 
requirements are, but when I look at that differential between what 
he requested and what granted, I think that it’s a very small 
amount. And he took into account things like severance and 
everything else in his amount. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I want to just go on. The Provincial 
Auditor, we, when in public accounts, we looked at some 
statements that were four years old, and there was a debate 
between the Provincial comptroller and the Provincial Auditor. 
And you know when you look at stuff that’s four years old, it 
really becomes irrelevant and no one really cares any longer. 
 
Both the Provincial Comptroller and the Provincial Auditor agreed 
that six months after the fiscal year ends the reports should be 
ready. Does the minister agree that six months to, let’s say, eight 
months is sufficient time for the reports to be ready, and to be 
made available to the  
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3764 
 
 

members of the Legislative Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I suppose that would be the ideal, but 
realistically there are times when the auditors and officials in 
departments or Crown corporations are negotiating on perhaps 
valuation. We had the SaskPen Properties as to what would be the 
value. It’s not uncommon for there to be differences. It’s not 
uncommon for there to be differences in responses to management 
letters which may impact ultimately on the statements. So, sure, it 
would be an ideal if that could happen, but there are some very 
reasonable times where delays are not because of inability to do 
the work, they’re an honest difference of opinion between 
officials. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, in response to the member from 
Arm River, the Provincial Auditor made the following comment: 
 

Government auditors would have to work 12 hours a day, seven 
days a week to produce their report on time because of budget 
cut-backs, says Provincial auditor, W. G. Lutz. He said, 
“Reduced funding for my office results in reducing the 
accountability of the executive government.” 

 
And then he goes on to say where he had 72 staff in ’82; his 
work-load has increased. I know it’s going to be reduced because 
you’re going to appoint private auditors. 
 
The point that the Provincial Auditor wanted to make, Mr. 
Minister, was not the fact that there may be debates and 
differences of opinion, but simply that he doesn’t have the staff to 
do his work adequately and getting the reports in on time. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, it is incumbent upon you to 
provide the staff that is necessary so that the role and the 
independence of the auditor is not interfered with. And I ask you 
again, Mr. Minister, do you not feel that you should re-examine — 
maybe not for this year, it may be too late — but certainly for next 
year in the up coming budget, making certain that the staff is 
adequate for the Provincial Auditor so that he can do the job that is 
expect of him? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well first of all, we provide money, not staff. 
To the hon. member, the Provincial Auditor hires the staff and the 
numbers; we provide the money. I did indicate to you that we 
were within approximately $25,000 of his request on a $3.2 billion 
budget. That was his request, and his request included things like 
severance and out-placement services, actually we’re, in fairness I 
think, virtually on with the Provincial Auditor’s request, and 
again, what he does with the money, he does the hiring and the 
placement of his staff. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you very quickly: does 
the minister agree that we should start moving towards summary 
financial statements? There are three provinces who are now 
doing it: Prince Edward Island, I believe, Alberta, and British 
Columbia. 
 
Right now, Mr. Minister, you know that it is very difficult for 
members to have a knowledgeable look at the books  

of the government and know what is owing and what is owed, and 
I’m just . . . It’s very difficult for one to know that, but if there was 
a summary statement, it would be much easier. Are you moving 
towards providing summary financial statements in the very near 
future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — All right. I gather that the treasury board is 
looking at that. There is a study by Dr. Hopkins. I haven’t see that 
yet, but I haven’t . . . I don’t have any position on it at this time, 
but I’ll wait and see how treasury board . . . And if I get a chance 
to look at the Hopkins report, I’ll take a look at it then. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — One last question, Mr. Minister. Would you make 
the Hopkins report available to us so that we could study it with 
you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, it’s a policy paper. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I’m prepared to wrap this up 
very soon. I’m going to ask you a few questions to which you 
don’t have to give me the answer now as long as you give me an 
assurance that you will provide them to me expeditiously, and I 
don’t mean that by 1988, but within the next week or so. 
 
I would like, first of all, to ask if you will provide for me — 
because you are in the process of appointing private auditors to 
audit the books of certain Crown corporations — and I would like 
you to give to the committee, without any other information, how 
much the fee is going to be; how much you’re going to pay; what 
each Crown corporation is going to pay. And I’d like you to give 
this to me for the Crown investments corporation, SPC, Sask 
Power, Saskatchewan Telecommunications, Saskatchewan 
Computer Utility Corporation, Saskatchewan Water Corporation, 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance, SEDCO, Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, Agricultural Development Corporation 
and the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. I’m not 
interested in what . I’ll ask you another day whether you tendered 
them and all that important stuff. But if you will undertake to give 
me the cost that each of those is going to pay for the auditor, I will 
not pursue it further today and I’ll wait for you to give me that 
information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I will supply to the hon. member, and prepare 
to make it public, the list of the successful proposal for each of the 
Crown corporations, the proposal fee submitted, and a comparison 
with the Provincial Auditor’s fees. 
 
There had been a request that all proposals . . . The Provincial 
Auditor has asked for all proposals. We don’t think that’s fair to 
give the unsuccessful ones. If you want the policy behind the 
choice, overall, we did try and distribute the work. Secondly, 
where there were Crown corporations outside the large cities we 
did want some involvement of a local auditor so that the large 
urban chartered accountant firms didn’t get all of the work. 
 
So with those two policy considerations I will give you that 
information. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay, thank you. I appreciate that,  
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3765 
 
 

Mr. Minister. Since you’re going to be so gracious with that 
information, could you just give it for all of the Crowns? did you 
say that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s what I said. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you very much. 
 
I have another question which I wanted to ask you. In your budget 
on page 8 — and this one maybe you can give me the answer here 
today — you have income from privileges, licences and permits, 
lands, forest, game, fur, fisheries, and water — revenues 13.145 
million. Is that figure the figure before you increased the fees, 
which you did recently, or will that figure change because you 
have now increased the fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That includes the planned fee increases. 
 
(2230) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. What about motor vehicles? 
The $73.5 million you will get in the revenues, is that the correct 
figure after you increased the registration fees and others? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So that took that into consideration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I would like to ask you 
something about revenues further, Sask Oil and Gas Corporation. 
Saskoil is now obviously, as we know, working differently than it 
used to be. How much revenues do you have in your budget from 
Sask Oil and Gas Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We don’t have anything other than what it 
would pay in royalties and taxes. If you’re asking the question, is 
there anything in the budget as a result of the sale of shares, no, 
there is not. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m asking because in days past Saskoil 
used to give from time to time rather reasonable dividends to the 
treasury. You are saying those dividends are no longer available. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Of course any dividends go to Crown 
Management Board, and that’s where they are held. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Will there be some dividends to the Crown 
Management Board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well as a result of it now being a private 
company that will be up to the directors of Saskoil. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s what I was afraid of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I hope so. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I hope so too, but I am sceptical. But that 
just underlines again a bad decision where taxpayers used to be 
assured certain revenues and dividends from  

Saskoil. They no longer can be assured that, and in fact likely will 
not be getting it. 
 
Mr. Minister. let me ask you about PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company). How much revenues do you have in this budget 
estimated to come from the Prince Albert Pulp Company, which is 
now the Weyerhaeuser corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We do expect dividends from Saskoil but 
they’re obviously not in the budget for the reasons I’ve given. 
Secondly, we have nothing in the budget respecting revenues from 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, it is projected that 
Weyerhaeuser corporation will be making in 1987 a profit of $50 
million. I find it rather strange that now with this Tacoma, 
Washington company running PAPCO, though, we no longer 
have access to those kind of revenues other than the normal 
stumpage fees and taxes and so on. And I think that once again 
underlines your whole concept of so-called privatization and the 
impact it’s going to have on Saskatchewan revenues. 
 
Now those are the questions I wanted to ask, Mr. Minister. My 
colleague has a brief question which he wanted to address to you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Can I just respond to the hon. member on 
Weyerhaeuser? It is an income debenture. We are expecting a 
significant payment pursuant to the agreement from Weyerhaeuser 
that would be calculated after their year end. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I had 
indicated to you some time ago that I wanted some information 
about space from the property management corporation, and also 
some information about consultants employed by your 
department. I wonder if you have that information and could 
supply it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I can supply it to you. Do you want us to go 
through and pull it out now or do you want me to just supply it to 
you? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — You can just supply it to me, Mr. Minister, 
will be fine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In the next couple of days. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You don’t have to give it today, but will 
you provide me the names and the salaries of your personal office 
staff? You can send it to me either today or later, what their 
salaries are now, and what they were at this time last year, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — What I can give you immediately is the date 
of their last increase and the amount of that increase. I don’t have 
a comparison. I can give you their . . . and their current salaries. So 
if you wanted . . . In all cases, it’s 3 per cent. So if you deduct 3 
per cent from 1986, you would know what their previous salary 
would be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? That was 1986. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have no further 
questions and we’re prepared to move along with your subvotes 
and different sections here. 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3766 
 
 

I just want to make a summary comment on what we have been 
dealing with here this afternoon, or this morning and this evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, here is what has become very clear. In 1982 this 
government became government and inherited a surplus of $140 
million. In 1987 we now have, because of your misadministration, 
an accumulated deficit of $3.4 billion. Now along with that comes 
the interest on the public debt annually, this year, which amounts 
to $300 million this year alone. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, $300 million is about twice what you’re going 
to spend on agriculture in your budget at $171 million. Three 
hundred million dollars is more than you are going to spend on 
highways and transportation, and if anybody has driven on our 
roads recently they will know the kind of neglect that they’re 
experiencing. Three hundred million dollars is about the amount 
of money you’re going to spend on social services. 
 
Now I give you those examples, Mr. Minister, because before you 
can allocate any money to any program in government, whether 
it’s to municipalities in revenue sharing, or whether it’s to schools 
so that they can provide the education that our children deserve, or 
whether it’s to keep beds in hospitals open, you have to lay out 
$300 million in interest charges to the bond dealers and the 
bankers of Toronto and Montreal and Chicago and New York. 
That’s the legacy that you have brought about, and your 
government has brought about, since 1982. 
 
But as I pointed out earlier, and you confirmed in the questioning, 
we used to have a gross debt in this province of $3.3 million — 
very manageable in 1982. It is now $10.5 billion — and I should 
have said 3.3 billion — $10.5 billion, or $10,000 of debt for every 
man, woman, and child. 
 
The federal government has imposed a $10,000 debt on every 
man, woman, and child, so that now between the Conservative 
Government of Saskatchewan and the Conservative government 
in Ottawa, every single person in Saskatchewan has a debt on their 
heads of $20,000 each. 
 
We have seen the greatest tax increases in the last five years in the 
history of Saskatchewan. Since 1982, every family of four has 
seen their tax load increase by $2,160. Now that is a massive tax 
increase and I suppose people wouldn’t be quite so concerned if 
they thought they were getting something for it. But what are they 
getting for it? They’re getting a dental plan that you have 
destroyed. They’re getting a prescription drug plan which is 
making people pay hundreds of dollars a month, in some cases, for 
their drugs. We’ve got students turned away from our technical 
schools and our universities, as the Minister of Education well 
knows. And we’ve got our municipalities who’ve had to raise, and 
will continue to have to raise, property taxes because you’re 
pulling back on the revenue sharing and capital money that they 
used to have. The city of Regina alone, lost this year — as the 
member from Regina South will confirm — $8 million in funding 
from the provincial government, a massive cut-back in funding. 

Now nobody should pretend that the only . . . that there is any 
other alternative by these municipalities other than take it off the 
property taxes which are already too high. 
 
And finally, Mr. Minister, what you have confirmed for us today 
in your estimates in this committee is what was clear when you 
brought in your budget — that the people of Saskatchewan have 
been betrayed. The dishonesty of this Conservative government 
over the years has become clearer every day as we’ve considered 
the estimates. Every promise — which I won’t repeat, but the 
member from Regina North West outlined them — that you 
people ever made, has been broken. It has been broken. All the 
guarantees you gave, you didn’t keep. Is it any wonder, Mr. 
Minister, that you’re probably lower — in fact, not probably — 
you’re lower in the polls today than any governing party in 
Saskatchewan probably has been for 40 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The people of this province reject 
dishonesty. They want to see fairness from their government. 
They haven’t had honesty and they haven’t had fairness and they 
have been betrayed. That has been clearly shown by the way you 
have answered the questions here today, in many cases not being 
able to answer them, and in some cases not wanting to answer 
them. 
 
One thing I found out today which I was pleased with, and that is 
your commitment that you made that the budget in the next fiscal 
year will be brought before the fiscal year begins. Now we’re 
going to hold you to that, Mr. Minister. We’re not going to look 
for another budget in June or July or as we saw this year, but 
we’re going to hold you to that because we think that’s an 
important principle that must be maintained in order that all of 
those people who rely on government funding know where they 
stand before the fiscal year begins. 
 
Mr. Minister, that’s all I want to say at this point, and I’m prepared 
to let us deal with the different items in your budget book by page. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Pages 40 to 44 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance — Servicing the Public Debt — Government Share 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 12 
 
Items 1 and 2 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 12 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and 
Interest Payments 

Finance — Vote 175 
  



 
October 30, 1987 

 

3767 
 
 

Item 1 — Statutory 
 
Vote 175 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and 
Interest Payments 

Finance — Vote 176 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 176 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and 
Interest Payments 

Finance — Vote 177 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 177 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates — 1988 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 18 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Finance 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 11 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 11 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 12 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 12 agreed to. 
 
(2245) 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Revenue and Financial Services 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 18 

 
Items 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Provincial Auditor 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 28 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 28 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Provincial Auditor 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 28 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

Vote 153 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 153 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Municipal Financing Corporation 

Vote 151 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 151 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Vote 158 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 158 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
take the opportunity to thank my officials for their assistance, not 
only this evening but throughout the year. And I think that the 
people of Saskatchewan can quite properly take pride in the 
professionalism of Saskatchewan’s Department of Finance and the 
former department of revenue which is now in Department of 
Finance, and I want to thank the officials. 
 
I also thank the members of the Assembly and members of the 
opposition. We’ve had some spirited debates on the issue over the 
last few months, and I know I always enjoy them, and I appreciate 
the opposition critic’s contribution to the estimates. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. May I also say a word or two 
about our appreciation for the assistance given to the committee by 
the officials of the Department of Finance. If it wasn’t so late, I 
would make some comment about that the problem is higher up 
than it is, but I won’t say that because it’s late, and we’ve had a 
long day and covered a lot of ground. 
 
I appreciate the minister for his responses to the questions. We 
don’t always agree with him and obviously have not, may not, 
think that the answers are adequate, but we appreciate the time we 
have had here this morning and again this even. And as time goes 
by, we will have other debates and we will have other questions. 
But once again, thanks to the officials. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:55 p.m. 


