


















































October 27, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 October 27, 1987 
 

3543 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and, through you, to the members of the 
Assembly a group of approximately 30 students from St. 
Augustine School in my constituency. These students are in 
Grades 4 and 5. They are accompanied by their teacher, Ms. 
Buchko, and a number of chaperons, Mr. Bernaski, Mr. Eklund, 
Ms. Hailbich, Ms. Cohnstaedt and Mr. MacKinnon. 
 
And I would like the members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming these students here today. I hope to get an opportunity 
to see them shortly after question period. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Revenue Sharing Payments to Urban Municipalities 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Urban Affairs, and it concerns a letter sent to him 
recently by the president of the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association. 
 
The letter deals, Mr. Minister, with your decision to withhold 
millions of dollars in revenue sharing payments to some urban 
municipalities in this province because you forgot to get approval 
for these payments in your last interim supply Bill. The letter from 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) reads in 
part, quote: 
 

It is SUMA’s contention that revenue sharing payments from 
the provincial government to municipalities should not be a 
concern of the budget debate. We therefore request that you 
reconsider your decision. 

 
My question is: will the minister now admit his mistake and 
convince the Minister of Finance to introduce an emergency 
interim supply Bill so that the full amount of all revenue sharing 
payments can now be made to Saskatchewan’s urban 
municipalities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, there they go starting another 
rumour. He quoted from a letter, and he says it deals with 
hundreds of millions of dollars. That was his opening statement. It 
doesn’t, in fact, deal with hundreds of millions of dollars; it deals 
with one isolated city in the province. And if you go and check the 
figures, unfortunately the figures in that letter are incorrect. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. If I was 
wrong and I said hundreds of millions I’d say that I was wrong, 
but it involves millions of dollars to these urban municipalities. 
 

There is a real impact on these municipalities even if the minister 
chooses to minimize these. For example, the city of Yorkton 
should have received a third-quarter payment in excess of 
$308,000 and has in fact only received approximately $112,000. 
The city council in Yorkton is now having to borrow money and 
paying interest to make up for these delays in payments. Mr. 
Minister, can you not understand that this little mess of yours is 
creating problems for municipalities and for their property 
taxpayers, and when are you going to do something about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, let’s put this in perspective. I 
have attended three regional SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) conferences in the last month, and in 
those conferences it was brought up to me one time. So that’s the 
burning issue out there. Even the mayor of the city of Regina says 
it’s no big deal. 
 
So to put the record straight, there are about 370 or thereabouts . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Do you want to listen? I’ll answer if 
you’re prepared to listen. 
 
The facts are this, Mr. Speaker. There are about 370-some-odd 
communities that have received their payments in total for the 
year, all paid. There are 139 communities that have received half 
of their October payment. Now they’re hardly behind any money. 
The city of Yorkton does not have to go out and borrow funds to 
pay their bills — that’s another rumour that you’re just starting in 
this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, at the SUMA conference, who 
was invited there, says now that they’re prepared to debate this 
interim emergency legislation. Four times — four times we’ve had 
the Appropriation Bill here. Not once, after debating all day, not 
one time did any member opposite ever bring up quarterly 
payments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please, Order. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Surely this 
is the first time that the opposition has been blamed for the 
minister’s incompetence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, you can choose to minimize 
this problem; you can say that it is of no consequence; you can say 
that it’s minor, but on top of millions of dollars in cuts to urban 
municipalities, why are you now choosing to nickel and dime 
them? What purpose is there behind that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — If anybody is nickel and diming the 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker, there is not question it’s the members 
opposite. They’ve had ample opportunity, if 
 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3544 
 
 

they were sincere, as they purport to be this day, if they were 
sincere they could have brought it up at any time that they wished. 
But did they? No. 
 
In the meantime, the one-twelfths went by time after time after 
time and, after me consulting with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and attending these conferences, the 
only one that seems to be excited about all this is the hon. member 
who stands up at this time, after missing the boat four times, and 
trying to escape with his life because he promised them he was 
going to do something about it. 
 
I don’t promise people anything. I just do my best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: Final supplementary. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — How about some effective, prompt, and 
appropriate action for a change. That would be welcomed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, how is it that your colleague, 
the Minister of Rural Affairs, can make and meet all of his 
commitments to rural municipalities when it comes to their 
revenue sharing? How come he can do that? Do you not admit that 
that simply proves that you were in error, that you forgot to make 
the adequate provisions in the interim supply Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, there was nothing at all 
forgotten about it. We’re into the . . . what day are we in in the 
Assembly now? 
 
An Hon. Member: 104. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Day 104; normal session, 70 days. 
Thirty-four, that’s, you know, that’s a couple of months past what 
a normal is, and I don’t know why . . . Obviously now, after 
dragging this session on for a couple of months, I suppose if I 
were in opposition I’d start getting excited too. 
 

Cost of Shand Power Plant 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, and it concerns how his government is engaged in 
the spending of taxpayers’ dollars in the province. Mr. Minister, I 
have here the environmental impact statement which SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) filed with respect to the Shand 
power plant, and it’s to be built in the Premier’s riding, as you 
know. 
 
Now you have consistently claimed that the Shand power plant 
will provide the cheapest power option for Saskatchewan 
taxpayers at a cost of something less than $500 million. However, 
Mr. Minister, the environmental  

impact study here puts the cost of the Shand power plant at over 
$1 billion of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money. How can you 
justify spending $1 billion when you have consistently said, when 
you have consistently said a figure which is much lower? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, why it should 
surprise anyone that the Shand power plant would be built in the 
Premier’s constituency because that’s where Shand is; that’s also 
where the coal is; that’s also where the river is. And it all comes 
together there, Mr. Speaker. And so when it was determined that 
we needed an additional 300 megawatts of electricity by the year 
1992, and after studying the economics of Shand versus Coronach 
versus a Manitoba purchase, etc., it was decided to go ahead with 
Shand. 
 
Now as it relates to the numbers that the hon. member uses, I don’t 
know what numbers are in the environmental impact study. I don’t 
know if they’re project dollars. I don’t know if they’re constant 
dollars, 1985 dollars, or whatever. I do know that the numbers that 
I’ve provided to the member in Crown Corporations at his request 
were the numbers that were offered by SaskPower with a great 
deal of accuracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplemental question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
the facts are that this environmental impact study was released 
very, very shortly after you gave me the numbers. The numbers 
are double from SaskPower than what you’ve given us in the 
Crown Corporations Committee, and at a time when you’re 
cutting back on health care spending and when you cut out the 
children’s dental plan, how can you justify us spending $1 billion 
as the cheapest office, and how can you justify the fact that you’ve 
misled the Saskatchewan people by claiming that it’s only half the 
cost than the real costs here is revealed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, nobody is misleading 
anyone on the cost of the Shand project, and I want to make that 
clear at the outset. I think the hon. member probably doesn’t 
understand the difference between project dollars and the constant 
dollars, and I’m just learning about it myself so I can understand 
that. And having said that, Mr. Speaker, so that both of us 
understand the reason for the difference between the numbers in 
the environmental impact study and the numbers offered by 
SaskPower in Crown Corporations and in other forum across the 
province, I will take notice of the question and get the SPC 
officials to explain the difference. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also to the minister 
responsible for SPC, and it has to do with the fact he indicated in 
the Crown Corporations Committee that Manitoba Hydro agreed 
to offer to supply electricity to the province of Saskatchewan for a 
period of 12 years, and this offer was not acceptable. We now 
find, however, from a spokesman from Manitoba Hydro that they 
are prepared to supply electricity to Saskatchewan for a period of 
up to 30 years and that they’ve been very flexible in their offers, 
attempting to meet the needs of  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3545 
 
 

Saskatchewan, and that they are prepared to discuss this with the 
government. 
 
Now I would like the minister to advise us how he can explain the 
discrepancy between his comments in the Crown Corporations 
Committee that it was a 12-year offer as opposed to the 30-year 
offer mentioned by the spokesman for Manitoba Hydro, and I 
want to know if he can table all the offers from Manitoba Hydro 
along with all the material supporting the negotiations, so the 
public knows what the true facts are on the this subject. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the hon. 
member was in Crown Corporations, and I know that she asked 
for the correspondence that went on between SaskPower, and I 
think they call it the Manitoba energy corporation or energy 
agency or whatever it is, and we did in fact, I think, offer to 
provide that, and in the normal course it is filed with the Clerk of 
the committee. And if that was done, and if we agreed to do that, 
that’s where it is. 
 
However, if it wasn’t done, or if I didn’t agree to do it at that time, 
I’d be more than pleased to give you the letter that we got back 
offering a 12-year, a 12-year contract based on 80 per cent of the 
cost of a Minnesota plant. And the Minnesota plant, because of the 
kind of coal that it burns and the kinds of technologies that they 
use, is far more expensive than ours. So they were giving us 95 per 
cent of 80 per cent of the avoided costs of the Minnesota plant for 
a period of 12 years. At the end of the 12-year contract, Mr. 
Speaker, it worked out to 9 cents per kilowatt-hour as opposed to 6 
cents per kilowatt-hour for either a Coronach or a Shand. The life 
of a Coronach or a Shand is 30 years, Mr. Speaker, and we wanted 
longer term supplies, far longer than 12 years 
 
At some point when you consider the lead time necessary to bring 
such a project on stream, at some point you have to make a 
decision. We made the decision. We are well down the road on the 
Shand project, and it’s now very easy for Manitoba to say, we’ll 
give you a 30-year contract for nothing, because they know they’ll 
never have to deliver. But when we were trying to cut a deal, they 
weren’t at the table. Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the spokesman for Manitoba Hydro 
said that they attempted to meet the needs of Saskatchewan and 
that they were prepared to discuss virtually anything with the 
minister from SPC. I want to know whether the minister is 
prepared at this time to return to the negotiating table with the 
officials from Manitoba Hydro and look at the possibility of 
contracting with Manitoba Hydro? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The question, Mr. Speaker, was asked in 
Crown Corporations, because our concerns were that the contract 
wasn’t long enough, firstly; and secondly, that it was too 
expensive. Are you interested in the answer, Mr. Leader of the 
Opposition? 
 

An Hon. Member: — Occasionally. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You might learn something from this one. 
But the question was asked, Mr. Speaker, in Crown Corporations 
Committee, I think by the member from Rosemont, I think, and it 
was something like this: would you reconsider your position as it 
relates to Shand versus the Manitoba purchase if Manitoba would 
come in with a longer term, say 3 cents as opposed to 9 cents? My 
response was, we would sign the deal this very day. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to play these kinds of 
games. But now that we’re well into Shand and have spent lots of 
money at Shand and that decisions have had to be taken along the 
way, there is a lot of cost to be covered to put it on the shelf. And 
so any deal on a Manitoba purchase is going to have to be very, 
very attractive at this point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — I assume from the minister’s comments that he is 
prepared to renegotiate with Manitoba Hydro and will be looking 
into it. But, Mr. Minister, when people are seeing their public 
health care services cut and their taxes increased, I believe that 
they have a right to know when you say that Shand is the cheapest 
option, that it in effect is the cheapest option. 
 
So I want to know whether the minister’s prepared to table all the 
detailed studies that show Shand is the cheapest option and submit 
those studies to a public hearing so the public knows how their 
taxpayers’ dollars are being spent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to correct the preface 
to her remarks. She said that I would be going to Manitoba to 
reopen those discussions. I will not. If Manitoba is interested in 
coming to the table with a deal that is attractive enough to put 
Shand on the shelf, I invite them to town. We’re prepared to talk. 
 
Now as it relates to the numbers and the costing of the Shand 
project, we gave the numbers to the member opposite that she 
asked for in the Crown Corporations Committee. And I have every 
confidence, Mr. Speaker, in the professionals, in people like Bob 
Lawrence and Oscar Hanson and others who have been at 
SaskPower for 25 and 30 and 35 years and have been doing this 
for their livelihood for that government, for previous Liberal 
governments, for . . . almost as long as SaskPower has been 
around, and I have every ounce of confidence in them. Mr. 
Speaker. And no. we will not be putting it before a public enquiry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Care Services in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Social Services, and it has to do with the issue of child 
care in Saskatchewan. I wonder if the minister could tell us if the 
government has come to a  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3546 
 
 

final conclusion at long last about the future shape of child care 
services to be offered in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And could the minister indicate if it’s correct that his department 
has in fact settled upon a private child-care-for-profit proposal, 
and that that proposal is in the process of being drafted now within 
his department? Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, we never come to 
any absolutely final conclusions because the world changes and 
you should be able to be flexible enough to change with the world 
and do what is appropriate. So that’s a rather unusual question 
from a Liberal. 
 
The other question that is asked is: are we prepared to look at 
private child care? Yes, that has happened historically for at least 
10,000 years, and we’re prepared to continue with some of that 
private child care — being parents and those people that parents 
choose — and we are not prepared to say that the government has 
to take care of all child care. And so for that reason I would say 
yes, we are prepared to look at private child care. 
 
And it amazes me that a Liberal would somehow tie profit to 
children and then suggest that profit is a dirty word. I don’t really 
know what’s happening. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My supplementary is 
simply this — I had some difficulty following the minister’s logic. 
Could he indicate specifically whether his department is at this 
present moment drafting a proposal with respect to the future 
shape of the child care program within the province of 
Saskatchewan that would have within it a major component of 
child care for profit? 
 
Is that in the works now, or will the minister specifically today 
rule that out as one of the options he might be considering? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well at this time we are specifically 
waiting to see what direction the federal government will take in 
this field, and when they have indicated their final position, we 
will adjust ours accordingly. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, could I ask the 
minister then when he anticipates some kind of information from 
the federal government. That information was to be available 
publicly, I believe, in the month of June. It’s now many months 
after that. When does he expect a federal government decision in 
this regard? And secondly, would he confirm the gist, I think, of 
his last answer which is that his department is not now drafting a 
proposal with respect to child care for profit. I would appreciate 
his confirmation on that last point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, from the very outset the 
questions of the member are simply too vague to answer. And if 
he could narrow his question down to one point or two points, but 
he’s making a speech and it’s too vague to answer that speech. 
 

Commissioning of Dome Advertising by SGI 
 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I would have wanted to address my 
question to the minister responsible for SGI, but as usual, in her 
absence, I address the Deputy Premier. Can the Deputy Premier 
confirm that SGI has commissioned a local advertising agency, 
specifically Dome Advertising, to produce a series of television 
commercials to sell your idea of selling shares in Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I can’t confirm that, Mr. Speaker, and I 
don’t know if this topic was discussed in cabinet this morning as I 
was in Crown Corporations with the member from Quill Lakes 
discussing trade matters relative to Agdevco, and SaskExpo, our 
excellent Crown corporation that served Saskatchewan so well. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, unless it was discussed in cabinet this 
morning, I have no knowledge of it. However, I will say that if the 
decision is made that there should be public participation in the 
general insurance side of SGI, I certainly hope that they are 
covering all bases to sell the story in a very positive way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Supplementary. I ask the Deputy Premier also to 
confirm that the television time has been booked over the next few 
weeks to run these SGI television commercials. 
 
And would you tell the Saskatchewan people just how much of 
their money is being spent on your political propaganda 
advertising? And further, I ask you to table the cost of that 
political propaganda, table the cost so the people of Saskatchewan 
can see it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, you will recall when I 
answered the first question, I said I didn’t know, and nobody has 
come in and told me anything, so I still don’t know. 
 
Mr. Trew: — New question, Mr. Speaker. At a time when the 
government is cutting back in its health care budget and claiming 
that every dollar counts, how can you justify that you need this 10 
per cent increase in vehicle insurance rates at SGI because of big 
losses at SGI? 
 
But in light of those financial problems, how is it that you can 
always find a few extra hundred thousand dollars for your political 
propaganda to try and con the taxpayers and the people of 
Saskatchewan into buying shares in a corporation that they already 
own? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We’ve had this debate before. The 
member for Riversdale, not in this House but I think on a talk 
show on one of the TV networks, said, Mr. Speaker, that he was 
not opposed to public participation or privatization of SGI. That’s 
what he said. Now the member for Regina North obviously is. 
 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3547 
 
 

The other thing that he said, Mr. Speaker, was all of the policies of 
the Blakeney era would have to be reviewed, and I fully expect 
that he will do that, Mr. Speaker. And it may well include, as he 
says, propagandizing to sell that thing that they already own. 
 
The new leader of the NDP, Mr. Speaker, and this side of the 
House may have a great deal in common when it comes to 
privatization and public participation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, new question. I sincerely 
wish that the minister responsible were here to answer because we 
desperately want to talk to her. We desperately want to find out 
what your position is. And is it your position and that of your 
government that the collapse of the world stock-market is 
something that you and your government can ignore as you 
prepare to sell shares in SGI? Is it so, that you are so ideologically 
blinded in your mad dash to sell shares in a corporation that 
everyone in Saskatchewan owns right now, that you’re going to 
proceed in spite of the stock-market collapse? And further, is it 
your plan to run TV commercials to convince the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers to invest their savings in a very volatile stock-market? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — First, I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how the 
stock-market even fits into his ideology and why. In any event, 
Mr. Speaker, obviously the market is of concern to any . . . and it 
should be a concern to everybody. The fluctuations, mostly down, 
not up as of late, of course will have an impact on the thinking, of 
the timing, etc., of any public offering, and we have financial 
advisers, Mr. Speaker, very good ones that offer us advice as it 
relates to the markets. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, today. Tuesday, normally 
the routine would be for private members’ day, however, the 
opposition House Leader and myself have agreed that with leave 
we should go directly to government orders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 — An Act to provide for the Division of 
Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election of  

Members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin my remarks 
about the proposed Electoral Boundaries Commission Act now 
before this House by reading two short sections from the 
Constituency Boundaries Commission, 1979, interim report of 
April, 1980. The first concerns equality of representation and 
reads as follows, on page 3: 
 

The right to vote is a cherished right, hard won in  

the past through resolute conviction. Stemming from this 
right to vote is the justifiable expectation that one elector’s 
vote should, within reason, weight equally with another 
elector’s vote elsewhere in the province. 

 
The second, Mr. Speaker, the second concerns the quality of 
representation, and again I quote, on page 4: 
 

Government, today, is complex and sophisticated and 
constituents need ready access to the elected representative 
Agricultural Saskatchewan has a relatively large populated 
area with a relatively sparse population. This makes the 
process of contesting elections and the representing of the 
constituency by the successful candidate after the election, a 
markedly different problem from that experienced by 
prospective candidates and the successful candidate in an 
urban constituency . . . 

 
The challenge in designing rules for redistribution in a province 
such as Saskatchewan is to balance the two basic tenets of 
representative democracy — on the one hand, the justifiable 
expectation that one elector’s vote should, within reason, weight 
equally with another elector’s vote’ and on the other, that 
constituents need ready access to their elected representative. To 
put it another way the desire for equality of the voter’s votes must 
be weighed against the access that constituents have to their 
elected representative and thus the quality of representation that 
they receive — equality of representation versus quality of 
representation. 
 
Common sense and history show that under our first past the post 
system can never completely achieve equality of representation. A 
general election consists of a large number of local elections with 
the government in the main being formed from the political party 
which wins the highest number of these local elections. The party 
with the highest percentage of popular vote will not necessarily 
win the election, as we know from the 1986 experience. 
 
Let us take the theoretical simplistic example, Mr. Speaker, as 
follows. Party A and Party B fight an election in this imaginary 
province where there are exactly one million voters in 100 seats of 
10,000 voters each. After the election the results show that Party A 
got 30 per cent of the vote and Party B got 70 per cent of the vote. 
Who won the election? Well in this case Party A won the election, 
and with only 30 per cent of the vote. 
 
And here’s why, Mr. Speaker. Party A won 51 seats with 51 per 
cent of the vote in each, and Party B’s 49 per cent of the votes in 
each of those 51 seats was wasted, so to speak. Party B won 49 
seats with 90 per cent of the vote — 49 seats with 90 per cent of 
the vote in each of those seats, so that the party lost only 49,000 
votes. The aggregate result of this exercise shows that a party with 
only 309,100 votes, or 30 per cent of the total, won 51 seats, while 
party B with 690,900 votes, or 70 per cent of the total, came out 
second with only 49 seats. Thus even though the numbers of 
voters was exactly the same in each seat, the party with the highest 
percentage of popular vote did not win. 
 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3548 
 
 

There are other factors working against the quality of value 
between voters’ votes under the first past the post system. First, 
the voter population is unlikely every to be exactly even as 
between two constituencies. We see that in the l986 general 
election constituencies varied from less than 8,000 to over 20,000 
voters when the constituency boundaries commission had them all 
within 15 percentage points, plus or minus, of a 9,500 population 
quotient a mere five years or so earlier, differences of over 100 per 
cent growing in such a short time from the original differences of 
less than 15 per cent. 
 
Second, the number of candidates varies between constituencies, 
and whereas a candidate in a three-way race would technically 
need a minimum of 33 and one-third per cent of the ballots, plus 
one, to win, a candidate in a five-way race would theoretically 
need only 20 per cent of the ballots, plus one, to win. Again,, we 
have a built-in inequality. 
 
How can this inequality be dealt with? There are basically two 
ways., Mr. Speaker. The simplest, and the way best guaranteed to 
reflect the aggregate popular vote, is to go to a system of 
proportional representation, perhaps with a single transferable vote 
method of voting. Under this system in our theoretical example, 
party B would have formed the government with its massive 
majority — 70 per cent of the seats, to party A’s 30 per cent — a 
very different result that would be obtained under the first past the 
post system. 
 
Though such voting systems have occasionally been tried in 
Canada, they have never replaced our traditional first past the post 
system. Canadians have always believed that the merits of directly 
electing a local representative far outweigh any concerns over the 
exactitude of the value of one person’s vote in another 
constituency. As long as the equality of voting is maintained 
within a given constituency, we tolerate reasonable inequalities as 
between constituencies. 
 
The second way of dealing with inequality in the value of vote is 
to frame parameters within which inequalities are tolerated, but 
beyond which they are not. The system which we use in 
Saskatchewan is a population quotient, which is arrived at by 
dividing the number of electors by the number of seats, and not 
allowing a commission to vary from that population quotient by 
more or less than a certain percentage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this prevents abuse by limiting the variations in 
population size between constituencies, while still allowing a 
commission a certain latitude, to try to allow for population 
growth and differences between communities to have considerable 
bearing on the shape and the size of the constituencies. In such 
ways do we try to ensure the equality of a person’s vote vis-a-vis 
another. 
 
The problem of quality of representation is not so easily solved, 
since the tendency has been to emphasize equality of votes. 
However, all jurisdictions take cognizance of the fact that large 
rural or northern seats are in many ways harder for elected 
members to represent than are the urban counterparts, and that 
these seats have  

special problems and strengths which need to be adequately 
represented. 
 
As a result, in general terms, rural and particularly northern seats 
tend to be much larger in area, but generally smaller in size and 
[population. The smaller rural and northern seat population is thus 
an attempt to equalize the quality of representation as between 
these and urban seats. 
 
And sop, Mr. Speaker, if a redistribution Act is worth its salt, it 
must try to balance these two important principles: equality versus 
quality of representation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take some time to go through the 
proposed Act and outline its major themes. It is an Act which sets 
up an independent electoral boundaries commission which is to 
work within certain rules outlined in the Act and present a report 
to this House suggesting how best to fairly divide the province 
into constituencies that will reflect both equality of voting and 
quality of representation. 
 
The Act first of all establishes a constituency boundaries 
commission whose purpose it is to make proposals to this 
Assembly regarding the areas, boundaries, and the names of 
constituencies for Saskatchewan. The commission is to be 
established before January 31, 1988, and thereafter which 90 days 
of the opening of the first session of the legislature following 
every second succeeding provincial general election. This 
provision, I feel, is a great improvement over the old Act which 
called a commission into being in 1979 and every eighth year 
thereafter. 
 
Because elections are not always held at regular intervals, such an 
arrangement could lead to a report being laid before this House 
very close to an election, and could allow a government to go to 
the polls on the old boundaries if it thought them more 
advantageous to its survival. 
 
At the very least, such an arrangement can lead to great 
uncertainty for both prospective candidates and the voting public. 
Organizing constituencies is no easy task at the best of times, and 
this additional element of uncertainty as to boundaries would be 
an added burden which would serve no useful purpose. 
 
Having the commission sit very soon after every second provincial 
general election will ensure that the redistribution process will be 
completed in good time for the ensuing election. 
 
This new feature will still mean that in general terms a 
redistribution will take place approximately every eight years, as 
before, since the tradition in Saskatchewan is for governments to 
go to the people approximately every four years. But it could be 
shorter or longer, and because of the built-in flexibility allowed 
governments under the constitution as to when they are obliged to 
call an election, we see this is an important feature. 
 
(1445) 
 
The make-up of the Constituency Boundaries  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3549 
 
 

Commission has been changed slightly to ensure that it has even 
more independence than before. Under the old Act, two members 
were appointed in the Act, and one was at the discretion of the 
Speaker in consultation with the Premier and the Leader of the 
Opposition. The new Act removes that discretionary appointee, all 
three commissioners being named in the Act itself, either as a 
person or as a class of persons. And the persons who are to make 
the appointments are also named, these persons being outlined . . . 
outside, pardon me, of the political process and not from this 
Chamber and thus beyond this Chamber’s influence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One commissioner is to be a supernumerary or retired judge of the 
Court of Appeal or Count of Queen’s Bench to be named as 
before by the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan or by the Chief 
Justice in consultation with the Chief Justice of the Court of 
Queen’s Bench if necessary. Another will be the Chief Electoral 
Officer of the province; and the third will be named by the chief 
judge of the provincial court from among the judges of the 
provincial court, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thus, two commissioners will be either members or former 
members of the judiciary, while the third is the person charged 
with the responsibility of overseeing the electoral process in the 
province. This provision brings the Saskatchewan Constituency 
Boundaries Commission into line with the practice of most other 
provincial jurisdictions in Canada which have rules for the 
establishment of commissions to handle redistribution, in that 75 
per cent of commissions have members of the judiciary, and 75 
per cent of the provinces, Mr. Speaker, have Chief Electoral 
Officer as members of the commission. Very few, however, have 
all three commissioners named in the Act in such a way that the 
legislature and the government have no influence whatsoever in 
the appointment of the commission. I am proud that this Bill goes 
that extra mile and removes the redistribution process one step 
further from the political forum, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The commission, once established, selects its own chairman, hires 
whatever staff it might require, makes its own rules for regulating 
its proceedings and for the conduct of its business. The manner in 
which the parameters, pardon me, the manner in which, and the 
parameters within which, a commission is to operate, are very 
similar to those laid down in the previous Act. 
 
The commission must complete an interim report within nine 
months of its appointment, and this interim report must be filed 
with the Clerk of the Executive Council. The commission must 
hold at least two hearings for the purpose of considering oral and 
written representations with respect to its report. 
 
The commission must publish a notice of any and all hearings it 
intends to hold and must, in that notice, include a copy of a map 
showing the proposed division of Saskatchewan into 
constituencies and their proposed names. 
 
The commission, after duly considering notice and all 
representations made to it at these public hearings, must complete 
its final report within one year of its  

appointment and must file a copy with the Clerk of the Executive 
Council and submit a copy to Mr. Speaker, who will in turn lay the 
report before the Assembly within 15 days of its receipt if the 
House is in session, or within 15 days after the first sitting day of 
the next session if the legislature is not sitting at the time he 
receives the report. 
 
If this House by resolution approves, or approves with alterations, 
the proposals of the commission contained in the final report, then 
a new representation Act must be introduced during the same 
session that will establish the new constituencies in accordance 
with the resolution. 
 
These procedures, briefly outlined, Mr. Speaker, are almost 
identical to those laid down for the operation of the commission in 
the previous Act, the changes, where there are changes, operating 
simply to make the procedures clearer or easier to comply with. 
 
For example, whereas under the previous Act a person wishing to 
appear before the commission at a public hearing had to give the 
commission 15 days notice, this has been changed to a 
requirement of giving only reasonable notice. 
 
Another example gives the commission more leeway in 
determining the number and location of public hearings, albeit 
with requirements that at least one of the hearing be held in Regina 
or Saskatoon, and at least one be held in a place other than Regina 
or Saskatoon, thus giving more people access to the commission’s 
public hearings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have dealt with the rules governing the 
appointment of the commission, the time at which it must be 
appointed, the method it is required to employ to present its 
interim and final reports, and the disposition of its final report by 
motion of this House. 
 
I would like now to turn to the rules within which the commission 
must work as far as redistribution is concerned. The rules must so 
carefully try to preserve the balance between equality and quality 
of representation, concerned I addressed in my earlier comments 
today. 
 
To put my ensuing remarks into perspective, I would first like to 
look briefly at the recent federal redistribution. The population 
quotient for Saskatchewan was calculated at 69,165 persons per 
constituency, a figure from which the commissioners were not to 
vary by more than plus or minus 25 per cent. Yet if one looks at 
the country as a whole, we see that the Yukon is guaranteed one 
seat with only some 25,000 people, and Prince Edward Island, 
with a population of about 130,000 is guaranteed four federal 
seats. Prince Edward Island, Mr. Speaker, would hardly qualify for 
two federal seats, and yet they are guaranteed four. 
 
Something else other than straight numerical factors are at work 
here., Mr. Speaker, and that something is common sense and fair 
play in allowing a region’s voice to be heard rather than allowing 
it to be swamped by the voice of Toronto or Montreal. We 
recognize, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Prince Edward Island or 
of the Yukon each have a community of interest and concerns 
which can be very different from those of the people of Toronto or 
Montreal. Canadians realize that these people need and  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3550 
 
 

deserve a voice in our national affairs, beyond which mere 
numbers of people might warrant, and we make appropriate 
allowances accordingly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan have similar problems in giving 
all people with different communities of interest and different 
problems, hopes, and aspirations an appropriate voice in our 
provincial legislature. Half of our province contains less than 
14,000 voters, while the other half has well over a half a million 
voters. 
 
A similar compromise was granted to Prince Edward Island, and is 
therefore . . . I mean a similar compromise to that granted Prince 
Edward Island is therefore justifiable in the northern half of our 
province. And accordingly, the northern half of our province is 
accommodated by having two seats, the population of which can 
vary from the quotient established for the province by up to 50 per 
cent, as opposed to a 25 per cent limit for southern seats. 
 
The province continues to be divided into a northern and southern 
area, as in the previous Act, by the same line used in the previous 
Act, which runs east and west across the province. However, the 
southern portion of the province is further subdivided into urban 
and what we loosely call rural seats.  
 
Urban seats are completely urban by definition, but rural seats 
often contain a mixture of urban and rural. Estevan, for instance, is 
more urban than rural, but it is classed as a rural seat, while 
Melfort, Weyburn, Cut Knife, Lloydminster and many others are 
as much urban as rural, but they are also classed as rural seats 
simply because they are not wholly urban. Thus although the 
designation “rural” is used, it is not meant to be misleading by 
implying that the seat is by any means wholly rural, but rather that 
it is a seat which is not wholly urban as the urban seats are. 
 
Thus there are two types of seats identified under the Act: northern 
seats which are defined as lying north of the north-south dividing 
line, and which can vary from a provincially established 
population quotient by up to 50 per cent; and southern seats which 
are subdivided into urban and rural, and which may only vary 
from the provincially established population quotient by up to 25 
per cent. 
 
The new Act differs from the old, Mr. Speaker, in establishing the 
number of seats into which the province is to be divided, it being 
more fitting that this House decide its size than to abrogate such 
responsibilities and pass it onto a commission. 
 
The previous commission set the size of the House at 64 members, 
two seats being designated as northern and 62 as southern. The 
new Act proposes the House now have 66 members, two from the 
North and 64 from the South. The reason for keeping the North at 
two seats is simply that there was an increase of only 195 voters in 
the whole of the North between 1982 and 1986 elections, whereas 
there was an increase of almost 30,000 voters in the southern part 
of the province during the same period. 
 
The previous commission stated in its report that it believed that 
there should be a community of interest in  

each constituency and that for that reason it decided to use its own 
words to make clear boundary delineations between urban and 
rural constituencies where possible. 
 
The commission, while not designating rural and urban seats as 
such, in fact created 27 seats that were almost entirely urban, and 
35 seats that were mainly rural or at least contained fairly large 
rural areas. The 27 urban seats were Swift Current, The 
Battlefords, Yorkton, which each comprised one constituency; 
Moose Jaw and Prince Albert, which each comprised two; and 10 
constituencies were allotted to each of Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
The present Act designates these centres as now being wholly 
urban seats, the small rural area of Prince Albert-Duck Lake being 
detached from Prince Albert, as is also is that small area of 
Yorkton that lies outside of its municipal boundaries. However, 
two additional urban seats have been created and given, one each 
to Saskatoon and Regina to compensate for the growth and the 
number of voters in those two cities, since between them they 
account for some 23,700. 
 
Of the almost 30,000 new voters registered in the province 
between 1982 and 1986 general elections, rural seats grew by less 
than 2,000 new voters between ’82 and ’86, and so rural seats 
remained unchanged at 35, Mr. Speaker. The relative number of 
people living in northern, rural, and urban seats will, no doubt, in 
future vary, and thus there must be a mechanism whereby the 
relative numbers of northern, rural, and urban seats are adjusted 
over time. 
 
To accomplish this the Act calls for this House itself, by means 
either of standing committee or of an all-party committee 
established for the specific purpose, to recommend to the House 
any changes in the relative number of northern, rural, or urban 
seats that the committee considers necessary. 
 
(1500) 
 
This is another innovative step which allows input by both the 
government and the opposition parties of the day into the 
composition of this House. This procedure is to take place within 
30 days of the opening of the first session of the legislature 
following every second provincial election, so that appropriate 
adjustments can be made prior to a commission being established. 
 
A further refinement allows for the reconvening of a commission 
for the strictly limited purpose of redefining boundaries of urban 
constituencies where an urban municipal boundary has been 
moved such that confusion among voters may result as to which 
constituency they are to vote in. As an example, Mr. Speaker, the 
constituency of Saskatoon Eastview was defined by the last 
constituency boundaries commission as being bounded by the 
municipal boundary of the city of Saskatoon as it existed on April 
1, 1980. 
 
Prior to the l986 election, the city of Saskatoon expanded its 
municipal boundary and a new subdivision was built across what 
had been the old municipal boundary as it existed April 1, 1980. 
As a result, the old  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3551 
 
 

municipal boundary, also of course the constituency boundary, 
wandered through several new homes in such a way that the Chief 
Electoral Officer had to make arbitrary decisions as to which 
constituency a given household belonged. Strictly speaking, this 
was not legally within his power, and had there been a very close 
result in that constituency, the election result may well have been 
questioned in the court. Allowing a commission to be reconvened 
for this very limited purpose should solve this problem in the 
future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The final point regarding the Bill that I would like to raise, Mr. 
Speaker, concerns the provincial population quotient and the 
percentage deviation allowed from it. Under the previous Act, 
there were in effect two separate population quotients within the 
province: a southern quotient, arrived at by dividing the number of 
southern voters by the number of southern seats; and a northern 
quotient, determined by dividing the number of northern voters by 
the number of northern seats. 
 
Under the new Act there will be one provincial quotient calculated 
by dividing the total number of voters in the province, as 
determined from the voters’ list for the previous provincial general 
election, by the total number of seats in the province. There can be 
no deviation from this quotient by greater or less than 25 per cent 
in southern seats, and 50 per cent in northern seats. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that having one population quotient for the 
whole province from which northern seats cannot vary by more 
than 50 per cent is a greater safeguard for the North than might be 
achieved under the system designated in the old Act whereby there 
were two population quotients, as already described, without any 
tie in between them. In other words, there was no remedy if the 
respective population quotients for North and South drifted too far 
apart. 
 
Under the new system, alarm bells will ring if the upper and lower 
deviation limit of 50 per cent is approached, and there is the added 
security of the relative numbers of northern, rural, and urban seats 
being examined by a committee of this House after every second 
provincial general election. These two factors will together 
provide greater assurance to Northerners that their democratic 
rights will be protected than the method which existed under the 
old Act. 
 
The allowable variation from the population quotient in the 
southern seats has been increased from plus or minus 15 per cent, 
to plus or minus 25 per cent. The reason for granting a greater 
discretion to the commission in this regard is basically to attempt 
to avoid the situation that we find in the cities of Regina and 
Saskatoon where constituencies have grown in a few short years 
from being within the parameters of the population quotient 
established by the commission at 9,507 plus or minus 15 per cent, 
to being in the cases of Saskatoon Mayfair, Saskatoon Eastview, 
and Regina North East, 118 per cent, 89 per cent, and 65 per cent 
in excess of the population quotient respectively. 
 
Six out of the 10 Regina seats, for example, have grown beyond 
the allowable 15 per cent deviation established  

under the previous Act by the 1986 provincial general election. 
 
On the other hand, in the province of Manitoba, whose boundaries 
commission set the constituencies for a period of 10 years rather 
than eight years stipulated in the previous Saskatchewan Act, 
managed to keep their highest deviation to some 62 per cent, 
which is almost half of our largest deviation. 
 
The increase in the allowable deviation to plus or minus 25 per 
cent will bring Saskatchewan into line with other jurisdictions 
across the country, including the federal redistribution rules. The 
25 per cent allows the commission greater flexibility in trying to 
achieve an equality of votes as between constituencies at election 
time, allowing particularly those areas of cities which are fast 
growing to be accommodated so as to reduce the possibility of 
constituencies growing out of hand. 
 
It is not a snapshot of the province as of today that a commission 
is charged with establishing, but rather a plan that will achieve as 
close to an equality of voters as between constituencies at election 
times in the future as is possible. 
 
At the same time, it would not be prudent to give a commission a 
completely free hand as to the allowable disparity between the 
number of voters in constituencies, yet a percentage deviation 
broad enough to allow a commission room to manoeuvre is 
desirable. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, this Electoral Boundaries Commission 
Act is designed to respond to the developments taking place in our 
province as Saskatchewan approaches the year 2000. 
 
It attempts to provide Saskatchewan answers to Saskatchewan 
problems in a manner that is fair to all. Whether a voter lives in the 
North or in the rural or urban Saskatchewan, each has unique 
needs, unique problems, and unique expectations of his elected 
representative. Elected representatives must respond to their 
voters’ needs in ways best suited to the type of constituency that 
they represent. 
 
It is a challenge for elected representatives, especially for those 
from the North and from far-flung rural areas, to keep in touch 
with their constituents, to service their many needs promptly and 
efficiently while still maintaining their family life and perhaps 
their business or vocation. 
 
It must be remembered that ours is a representative democracy and 
that as such we must try to balance the quality, Mr. Speaker, of 
representation between constituencies as well as the equality of 
voters between constituencies . . . votes between constituencies. 
 
I believe that this Act achieves that balance between equality and 
quality of representation, and I would urge all members, Mr. 
Speaker, to support this Bill — The Electoral Boundaries 
Commission Act. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3552 
 
 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that every evening 
before my children go to bed I read them a fairy-tale. And I want 
to say that the fairy-tale that was spun by the member of 
Souris-Cannington this afternoon ranks among the best of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And do you know what, Mr. Speaker, I think it 
was wrote by a person named Gerry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t help but feel that the member from 
Souris-Cannington was defensive about his Bill to redefine the 
constituency boundaries in Saskatchewan. And the end. Mr. 
Speaker, he has good reason to be defensive, because this Bill sets 
up the blueprint for a massive gerrymander in this province. 
 
When one introduces a new piece of legislation, one usually does 
it, Mr. Speaker, for the purpose of improving on the old piece of 
legislation, for making substantial improvements. That’s a rule 
usually that people follow in the Legislative Assembly. But as I 
look at the old constituencies boundaries Act, I find it difficult to 
find out what was wrong with the old piece of legislation. We 
already had a commission established under that legislation, and 
this government for some reason felt it was necessary to come in 
with a new Bill, setting new ground rules and setting new 
standards for determining the number of voters in this province. 
 
And I ask, I ask the public of the province of Saskatchewan why 
they’ve done that, and the answer it pretty obvious, Mr. Speaker, 
because they wanted to put forward a Bill that is the blueprint for a 
massive gerrymander in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The old Act. Mr. Speaker, provided for the establishment of an 
independent commission comprised of a judge appointed by the 
Chief Justice of Saskatchewan, the Clerk of the Legislative 
Assembly — and I would like to say the Clerk of the Legislative 
Assembly is a non-political person responsible to all members in 
the Legislative Assembly, unlike their new Chief Electoral Officer 
in the new Bill, unlike the new Chief Electoral Officer, who is a 
political appointment, who will be on this commission. 
 
The old Act also provided for one member to be appointed by the 
Speaker after consultation with the Premier and the Leader of the 
Opposition. This legislation allows no consultation with the 
opposition with respect to these appointments to the commission 
— no consultation with the opposition, but it enshrines in 
legislation the appointment of the Clerk of the Legislative . . . the 
Chief Electoral Officer rather, who is a political appointment. 
 
The old Act provided for the two northern ridings, and then not 
more than 63 southern ridings, and that the number of voters in 
each southern riding should not vary more than 15 per cent off the 
provincial quotient. 
 
Now we see in this new legislation a variation of some 25 per 
cent, which makes a total of 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The 
legislation talks about 25, but when you look at . . . it  

could vary either below the provincial quotient or above it. You 
could have a variation of 50 per cent in ridings in the province. 
 
The member from Souris-Cannington talks about six out of 10 
Regina seats have grown beyond the provincial quotient, and 
therefore we need a larger variation. Is that logic for having a 
larger variation? Is it, Mr. Speaker, if you want to make sure that 
there are fewer urban seats than there are rural seats and that urban 
voters do not have the same vote as rural voters. 
 
The old Act allowed for the commission to have hearings with 
respect to the boundaries that they determine should exist. The 
commission was allowed to have hearings, was allowed to have 
input from people who wanted to come before the commission. 
There’s no difference in this new legislation with respect to that. 
Any difference that may exist is of a highly technical nature and 
there only because the government want to disguise what it’s 
actually doing with this piece of legislation. 
 
(1515) 
 
There is no question that the people . . . The immediate reaction 
from the public in the province of Saskatchewan was one of 
scepticism, and the people of this province are very suspicious of 
this government, and, Mr. Speaker, they have a right to be 
suspicious. If we just look at everything that’s happened over the 
last few months in this province, the people of this province have a 
right to be suspicious. We look at the fact that the provincial 
deficit was grossly underestimated during an election in order to 
ensure that this government would be re-elected. The people of the 
province felt betrayed by that gross misrepresentation of the 
provincial deficit during the election. 
 
We look at Bill 5 that allows this government to dismantle and 
reorganize departments in secret without coming before the 
Legislative Assembly. The people are saying, well what’s 
happened to this agency, or what’s happened to this department, 
and nobody seems to know out in the public exactly what’s going 
on. And for good reason, because they don’t want the public to 
know what’s going on so that they can’t be scrutinized, and so that 
they aren’t accountable to the public of this province. 
 
Let’s look at the appointment of the Ombudsman, another 
example, Mr. Speaker. The Ombudsman was appointed in the face 
of parliamentary tradition that required the input of the opposition. 
They never once placed a phone call to ask the opposition for 
input into the appointment of the Ombudsman — not one. Instead, 
they did it in secret on their own without adhering to 
parliamentary traditions. 
 
Look at the abolishment of the Public Utilities Review 
Commission, another betrayal of the people of this province. Let’s 
take a look at that, Mr. Speaker, In 1982 they promised a public 
utilities review commission with a great deal of fanfare, and a 
great deal of celebration, and then they turn around in 1987 and 
they abolish the Public Utilities Review Commission, which 
according to them, which according to them was set up for public 
input and public participation. So we hear them talking about  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3553 
 
 

public participation on SGI shares, for example, and so on. But 
when it really comes down to real public participation, they’re 
against it, Mr. Speaker. And that was evidenced in the fact that 
they abolished the Public Utilities Review Commission without 
coming forward with an alternative that would meet the standard 
of public input. 
 
And let’s look, let’s look at the tax hikes that we’ve seen in this 
province, one tax hike after another. A hike in the sales tax, a hike 
in the gas tax, once . . . the flat tax, the unprecedented and unfair 
flat tax that’s levied on the people of this province. 
Notwithstanding that this government, that the PC party had 
agreed to eliminate the sales tax in their election promises and to 
get rid of the gas tax, and never again in the history . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. I’m sure the hon. 
member has a great deal that could be perhaps related in a very, 
very indirect way to the Bill. However, I ask her to try to stick to 
the Bill itself. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, once again I’ll just reiterate for you 
the line of argument that I’m making in the event that it wasn’t 
clear. The fact of the matter is the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan are suspicious about this electoral boundaries Act, 
and, Mr. Speaker, they have good reason to be suspicious, because 
this government has engaged in one betrayal after another of the 
province of this Saskatchewan. 
 
And I have just listed a few, Mr. Speaker, not to mention their 
betrayal on medicare promises, the dental plan and the prescription 
drugs. That’s another example of how they’ve betrayed the 
people. That’s another reason why the people of this province are 
suspicious of this government and can’t believe what they’re 
saying with respect to the electoral boundaries Act. 
 
There’s absolutely no wonder that the people are suspicious. And I 
think. Mr. Speaker, I would like to go into a little more detail into 
the present Act that is before us, the one that we’re going to have 
to deal with in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
As I indicated earlier, the commission on this commission is an 
obvious political appointment, and that’s the Chief Electoral 
Officer. And he is now enshrined in this Bill as a member of that 
commission. He was not there in the old piece of legislation, and I 
ask you: is that an improvement? No, it’s not an improvement; of 
course not, because it makes the appointment of this commission 
political. It makes the appointment political, in spite of the fact the 
ember from Souris-Cannington went on about this being not. They 
don’t have any input — I think his words to the effect that they 
have no input now into the appointment of this commission, 
because there it is, enshrined in legislation, they have to appoint 
these people. Well he knows full well that the Chief Electoral 
Officer is a political appointment and that he has input into that. 
 
And we’ll be watching very closely to see who the provincial 
court appointment is, Mr. Speaker, because there are some ex-PC 
MLAs who are political court appointees now. We’ll be watching 
that very closely. 
 

To say that there’s no input by cabinet into the appointment of this 
commission is just ludicrous . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Ms. Simard: — . . . is just ludicrous, Mr. Speaker, and certainly is 
not correct. That is an incorrect statement. The input is there in this 
legislation, enshrined in legislation. 
 
Now if we look at an example of what can happen because of the 
variation, the 25 per cent variation that is allowed in this 
legislation, if we assume the provincial quotient is approximately 
$10,000 . . . 10,000 people, we could have in effect a constituency 
with 7,500 people and another constituency next door with 12,500 
people. 
 
In this legislation we are actually moving further from the 
principle of representation by population; we are moving further 
from that principle. And although we recognize the need for 
looking at the fact that we have vast areas, for example, in the 
North and that we have to compensate to a certain extent by that, 
the fact of the matter is, this Act moves further from the principle 
of representation by population and substantially further, Mr. 
Speaker, substantially further. 
 
If we look at the average number of voters in the . . . if we take the 
average number of voters across the province and divide that by 
the number of constituencies, we run a provincial quotient, I 
believe, that is something like . . . 10,253 voters would be the 
average seat. 
 
Then if you take the rural seats and urban seats — because another 
thing this legislation does, Mr. Speaker, is it specifically enshrines 
the number of rural seats you’ll have and the number of urban 
seats you’ll have. It has already made that determination, and I’ll 
have more to say on that later. But the average number of voters in 
the rural seat would be approximately 9,534 and the urban average 
number of voters would be approximately 11,122. That means 
there will be discrepancy of some 1,588 voters more in each urban 
seat. 
 
Now I’m dealing with averages, Mr. Speaker, and I realize that 
when the Constituency Boundaries Commission gets together and 
starts carving it up, you could have huge spreads, as much as 50 
per cent from one constituency to the next. But on the average, 
we’re talking about 1,588 more voters per urban seat than rural 
seat, which when you look at 29 urban seats — which is what this 
government has said we’ll have in the province through this Bill 
— we’re talking some 46,000 voters in cities who will make up 
that 1,588 in the urban ridings. That means there’s approximately 
46,000 voters whose votes don’t mean as much in their urban 
constituency as they do in a constituency with fewer voters. And 
that comes pretty close to the population of the eligible voters in 
P.A. and Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. That means, if one were to put 
in perspective, the eligible voters in P.A. and Moose Jaw are in 
effect being denied their vote, which is . . . I’m taking it a little 
further, exaggerating it a bit, to make my point. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You are exaggerating it a lot. 
 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3554 
 
 

Ms. Simard: — But that’s exactly what it comes down to. There’s 
46,000 voters more in the cities, in the 29 seats, than there is in the 
rural. Members over there are chirping from their seats because 
they know very well that this Electoral Boundaries Commission 
Act is a blueprint to gerrymander the province of Saskatchewan. 
They know that, and that’s why they’re chirping from their seats. 
And I’ll be interested to see whether the members opposite join 
this debate with respect to this Bill. 
 
So if one were to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. I would ask the member from Saskatoon South to 
please refrain from interrupting. Order. I ask the member from 
Saskatoon South once more to please refrain from interrupting and 
not to challenge the Chair from his seat. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, so if you look at 46,000 more voters 
in urban ridings, one could say that urban . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the member from 
Bengough-Milestone to please refrain from interrupting. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, if you look at the fact that there are 
46,000 more votes in the urban ridings than in the rural ridings, 
one could argue that urban people have been robbed 
approximately four seats. But if you look at the fact that . . . or 
robbed approximately three to four seats. 
 
And I say this to illustrate the huge discrepancies that are built into 
this legislation by the variation, the 25 per cent variation that has 
been built in. I say this to illustrate these huge discrepancies that 
are built into this Bill. 
 
And I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that they’re built in in order to 
ensure another PC victory at the polls in the next general election, 
and that’s why this Bill has been drafted in that fashion. There’s 
absolutely no question that there is going to be an unfair 
proportionment of voters between the various areas. 
 
So we will be watching very closely, Mr. Speaker, to see how 
these boundaries are going to be drawn, and whether or not we 
will end up with ridings that are 25 per cent below the provincial 
quotient and other with 25 per cent above. And exactly how this is 
going to be done will be closely monitored by the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to beg leave of the Assembly to adjourn 
this debate because we have a lot more that we want to say on this 
topic, and I certainly am not finished speaking to the matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting Veterinarians 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the Act that we’re dealing 
with here today respecting veterinarians in our province and the 
repeal of an old Act of 1960 — the  

province of Saskatchewan has had an Act in place respecting 
veterinarians nearly since our inception as a province. Members of 
the House will know that the Act, as we knew it, was last written 
in 1960, and it was amended in 1971, in 1976, and 1980. Members 
know as well that the practice of veterinarian medicine has 
changed with new technology nearly to the extent that human 
medicine has. 
 
Periodically, responsible governments review their existing 
legislation to ensure that it is applicable to the current situation. 
Such is the case with the veterinary Act. This review is different 
than the review of some Acts because it involves a professional 
organization, the Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association. 
The profession of veterinary medicine in our province will 
continue to administer itself under a council elected by the 
Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association. This Act will give 
that council the necessary powers for the self-administration. 
 
The legislative review committee of the association has been 
working on proposed revisions for the past three years, and that 
committee is made up of: chairman, Dr. Ed McCall, of the federal 
government; Dr. Gavin Hamilton, dean of Western College of Vet 
Medicine; Dr. Bryan Wurtz, past-president, Canadian Vet Medical 
Association; Dr. Ken Armstrong, Western College of Veterinary 
Medicine; and Mr. Bob Kennedy, a B.A., LLB., a lawyer to the 
Saskatchewan veterinary medicine association. 
 
(1530) 
 
While different in substance, the new Act before you represents a 
similar format to The Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
Saskatchewan Act passed by the House in 1986, another 
self-administering profession in our province. The new Act 
clarifies definitions, including the definition of veterinarian. It sets 
out exemptions from the Act so that the Act does not infringe on 
those day to day activities carried out by animal owners, like 
immunization, artificial insemination, dehorning, and etc. 
 
The new Act covers new procedures such as embryo transplants. 
There are new sections on discipline. The association has 
requested changes in the discipline section in the old Act — the 
new sections regulate discipline and contain specifics about 
unprofessional conduct. This section follows the precepts of the 
discipline section of The Chartered Accountants Act of 1986. 
 
The new Act provides for an order in council appointment of a lay 
member to the council of the Saskatchewan Veterinary 
Association. This appointment will ensure that the interests of the 
public at large will be represented on the council. 
 
The new Act has expanded by-law making provisions under 
which the association will operate. Liens are covered under the 
new Act — formerly a citizen could leave an animal with a 
veterinarian, not pick up the animal, and the veterinarian was 
placed in an awkward legal position. He could take recourse 
legally for his bill,  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3555 
 
 

but what of the animal? There was no clear established procedure 
for disposal of the animal, but the veterinarians had to house it and 
maintain it — a bit of a dilemma for the veterinarian. 
 
The new Act provides the veterinarian with a mechanism to 
dispose of an unclaimed animal, normally one of limited value. 
Veterinary pharmaceuticals can be sold as they are today. 
 
The new Act, in summary, contains better language, updates for 
modern technology, covers discipline, allows for representation of 
the public at large, provides for self-administration by the 
profession, and solves the problem of liens and unclaimed 
animals. 
 
The new Act does not inhibit the farmer or animal owner from 
performing the normal non-veterinarian activities involved in the 
care and raising of animals. It doesn’t inhibit the traditional sale of 
veterinarian pharmaceuticals. It doesn’t inhibit the veterinarian’s 
right to fair hearing before his peers. 
 
Veterinary services are spelled out under the Act to be performed 
by a veterinarian. A list of animal care activities normally carried 
out by animal owners are also exempted from the Act. The Act 
states in section 17 that only a qualified veterinarian shall engage 
in the practice of veterinary medicine, with exceptions. Those 
exceptions include a list of animal care activities that have 
traditionally been carried out by other than veterinarians. 
Examples — administration of medication, castration, first aid, 
etc. 
 
The new Act has been drafted carefully following consultations 
with the profession and should serve the profession and the public 
well in the years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the Saskatchewan 
veterinary Act. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We do have some 
concerns about this particular piece of legislation, specifically 
section 12 of the Act, whereby . . . Section 12(6) states: 
 

The Regulations Act does not apply to a bylaw made 
pursuant to this section. 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. before the member gets too far 
into his remarks, I would like to remind him that citation 734 in 
Beauchesne’s indicates that: 
 

It is not regular on this occasion, . . . to discuss in detail the 
clauses of the bill. 

 
And I believe, when the hon. members start quoting clauses, we’re 
getting into that area. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I certainly don’t want to break your rules 
that are enshrined in stone for this legislature, Mr. Speaker, so I 
won’t quote anything from the Bill, even though there are some 
concerns with the Bill itself. The principles of the Bill is likely 
quite good. We do have some concerns that we want to look at. 
 

I notice that during the minister’s remarks he referred to the 
accountants in the province having a similar Act, the chartered 
accountants. And in this Bill, The Regulations Act does not apply 
and I’m sure that that was similar to the Act that was set up for the 
chartered accountants. And I know that before the Regulations 
Committee, Mr. Speaker, we are now currently dealing with the 
chartered accountants legislation for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and there have been some concerns brought before 
that particular committee. 
 
And so we wish to look at this Bill in a little more detail. Although 
the principle, we think, is sound, there are some concerns that we 
will deal with in committee. We can appreciate that, and I think 
that if the House Leader opposite would check with our House 
Leader we would be prepared, after getting some feedback on 
some consultation that we’ve done, that we would be prepared to 
deal with this Bill later this week. And I beg leave to adjourn the 
debate at this tie, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure Consumer  
and Commercial Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 4 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce her officials? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with me 
today to my right, Mr. McGillivary, the superintendent of 
insurance; sitting directly behind him is Phil Flory, the director of 
the corporations branch; seated behind me is Al Dwyer, the 
director of administration and personnel; and my deputy and 
director of policy and planning are on their way from legislative 
review, but I think we could probably get started. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Earlier this year the 
minister would be aware that there were quite large increases at 
the corporations branch for registration of corporations, 
non-profits; in fact some of them were raised quite astronomically, 
I believe in the area of 100, 150 per cent. And in times where 
small businesses, many of whom are incorporated in the province 
of Saskatchewan, they find this being a great hardship. 
 
And I’m wondering what the minister’s rationale is in having such 
a large increase through the corporations branch for incorporating 
private corporations, and also what the rationale is for the large 
increases in non-profits. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — With indulgence, I’ll introduce my 
deputy, Ronald Kesslar; and the director of planning and policy, 
Mr. Ron Zukowsky, seated behind him. 
 
In response to your question, I would indicate that most of the fee 
increases reflect more or less the cost of doing business. And we 
also looked at the date of the last changes, and we also looked at 
what similar services were costed out at in other provinces. 
 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3556 
 
 

Many of the fee increase, you know, if you look at the majority of 
them., haven’t changed since 1977, and I’m sure the hon. member 
from The Battlefords would agree that the cost of government has 
increased since 1977. And it just reflects, as I say, the cost of 
doing business and the fact that there hadn’t been a change in 
many of them since 1977. 
 
Mr. Brocklebank: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, some time 
ago, I believe it was in August, I had indicated to you that I would 
appreciate some information with regard to space occupied by the 
department from the Saskatchewan Property management 
Corporation; and secondly, any work done by consultants for the 
department in the previous year and a comparison with the actual 
figures and the projected figures in this budget. And I wonder if 
the minister has that, those two bits of information for me, and if 
she could send them over. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Yes, I have that information for you. In 
our ’87-88 budget we have estimated expenditures at $70,500, and 
that’s for development of educational materials and other special 
projects that may arise, and also has to do with hiring a computer 
consultant. But I’ll send this information over to you — the space 
leased by the department from the property management Crown, 
and the payments to consultants for ’86-87, and it also has a brief 
description of what the consultants did for us. I’ll send this over. 
 
Mr. Brocklebank: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I haven’t 
had a chance to peruse the information yet. Were some of the 
consultant’s assignments that you had in the previous year being 
done in conjunction with other jurisdictions? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — We’re not quite clear on your question. 
Are you asking if we’ve done any joint ventures with other 
jurisdictions? If that’s what you’re asking, the answer is no, it was 
just projects within the province. 
 
Mr. Brocklebank: — Yes, that was essentially the question, 
Madam Minister, because some other departments have had 
consultants’ projects done which they’ve shared with the federal 
government, and therefore they paid part of the cost. But I 
understand from your answer that these are all internal to your 
department and solely for your department and paid for by your 
department. 
 
Thank you, Madam Minister. That’s all the questions I have. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First of all, 
Madam Minister, I’d like to acknowledge that this is the first time 
in the history of the Saskatchewan legislature that both the 
minister and the opposition critic are women. 
 
And we just recently celebrated the 75th anniversary of the 
opening of this building in 1912 at a time when neither you nor I, 
had we been living at that time, would have had the vote. Women 
were not allowed to vote when this legislature opened. And 75 
years later there still aren’t women involved in politics, and 
therefore I believe that those of us who are must be seen to be 
doing  

a credible job. 
 
(1545) 
 
We don’t have to be superwomen, but we must not be completely 
incompetent either, and I’m sure you’ll agree with this. So it is 
with some surprise then that I see that you’re here today to discuss 
the estimates for the Department of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs, because for the last four months as the critic I’ve been 
trying to question you on your department here in the House, and 
you either didn’t appear for question period, or you turned 
your . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Members are not supposed to make 
reference to the presence of non-presence of members in the 
House. I would ask . . . 
 
Ms. Smart: — It’s important that we have this question period as 
part of the ongoing dialogue in our democracy here in 
Saskatchewan, and therefore I do want to express my regret that I 
have not had many opportunities to question the minister because 
many times the questions were turned over the Minister of Justice, 
and later to the Minister of Finance. The questions, particularly 
involving the collapse of First Investors association and 
Associated Investors of Canada, the two companies that failed 
here in Saskatchewan, two companies that were licensed by the 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. This is to me a 
serious issue, and I think the public deserves some answers. 
 
And I want to ask the minister why she was not able to answer, 
whether it was because she didn’t feel that she had the opportunity 
to come and answer these questions, or whether she was being 
muzzled by other cabinet ministers? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the member, 
we have been sitting now 104 days. I have missed question period 
I believe five times in 104 days, so the member has had ample 
opportunity to ask questions on my department. For example I was 
in question period today and had to go out and make a phone call, 
and after I left they decided to ask me a question. However, it was 
amply handled by the Deputy Premier. 
 
With regards to Principal Trust, the Minister of Finance has been 
designated the chief spokesman. There are three departments 
involved: the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs, 
the Department of Justice, and the Department of Finance. In 
Alberta the lead department was designated as the Department of 
Finance under Mr. Johnston, and we chose to go that route also so 
that all information was being funnelled though one person, 
channelled through one person rather than having information 
second- or third- or fourth-hand. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I don’t quite follow the logic of the Minister of 
Finance taking over the area in your department when it was the 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs that licensed 
these two investment companies, and I think that you must take 
responsibility for what’s been one of the major crises in your 
department. 
 
So in terms of the questions from now on, are you taking  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3557 
 
 

responsibility for what’s happened in your department and for this 
major crisis of the collapse of these two investment firms? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Chairman, we’re in estimates, and 
I’m sure the member understands the rules of estimates. My 
officials and myself are here to answer any questions she or her 
colleagues may wish to pose. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well I certainly hope that you will do that because 
so far your department has failed very sadly to protect the 
Saskatchewan investors that invested in those companies. 
 
Madam Minister, I want to focus on the Principal Trust issue in 
these estimates as a priority. In light of that, looking at the 
licensing and investigation branch, the subvote for the 
expenditures for the licensing and investigation branch have been 
reduced. The expenditures have been reduced by 23 per cent, 
represented by a net increase of 16.6 person-years or 29.5 per cent 
personal services and other services, or 29.5 per cent. 
 
Now this is a serious issue because the licensing and investigation 
branch is the branch responsible for looking after things like the 
investment contracts firm, and you have reduced that budget by 23 
per cent. Personal services and other services within that branch 
are decreased by 19 per cent and 46 per cent respectively. 
 
And if you add the total subvote estimates, including 63,000 for 
the 1986-867 Supplementary Estimates, we’re reflecting an actual 
cut in this branch of 25.3 per cent, Madam Minister, how can you 
justify cutting that branch so drastically? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The reason for the decrease, hon. 
member, is that last year’s estimates reflect the amalgamation of 
certain portions of the department of co-operatives that were to 
come to us, and it really reflects some of the efficiencies that were 
realized by the amalgamation. Also, three positions were 
transferred to the newly-created gaming commission. There was a 
reduction in some areas because of the self-administration 
initiatives introduced in the insurance industries and other. And 
also, Credit Union Central has set up an auditing function with 
their organization to audit credit unions in the province. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Those may be changes that you’ve put into place, 
Madam Minister, but I put it to you that one of the main reasons 
why you have cut the licensing and investigation branch so 
severely is your own ideology that means that you don’t support 
regulations and licensing and orderly control of the commercial 
affairs in this province. 
 
You said in the throne speech, this: 
 

From the very first, I brought to this department a very 
strong conviction that, in the market-place, education is 
preferable to regulation, that the people of Saskatchewan will 
be far better served by a department committed to making 
the market-place work, rather than one committed to  

putting an army of government inspectors and regulators to 
work policing the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
You go to that kind of extreme statement about policing the people 
of Saskatchewan to justify cutting 16 staff from the licensing and 
investigation branch and making it more and more a burden on the 
part of individuals to understand what’s happening in the 
investment areas and the other areas that you cover. 
 
And I want, as I said, to particularly focus on what’s happened 
with the Principal Trust collapse, the collapse of First Investors 
and Associated Investors. Because as part of your education 
program that you put forward with such pride is a little brochure 
called Investor Alert Avoiding Investment Problems. And part of 
the money that your department spends is to be spent on this kind 
of material. And I don’t know who picks it up, but it ways here: 
 

The key to avoiding investment problems is to deal with 
reputable business people, sales people, and security dealers 
who are well-known in your community. Always get 
competent help before you buy. Consult with your registered 
stockbroker, lawyer, accountant or real estate agent. 

 
Madam Minister, the investors of Saskatchewan that invested in 
First Investors and Associated Investors went to the Principal 
Trust offices. They did exactly what this dinky little brochure tells 
them they should do. They thought they were consulting with 
people who were trained and would give them good advice. And 
behind that they found that there was no backing from the 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. You absolutely 
had no control over what was happening in this province with 
those companies, and that is totally unacceptable in terms of the 
way governments run their departments. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, I wanted to ask you some specific 
questions. I want to ask you how many Saskatchewan people had 
investments? Do you know the total yet? Have you got that 
information, and what are you intending to do to give people 
information to help them as you said you would do on September 
2 in the House? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I can advise the member that I have been 
in contact with everyone who has written to me, and I have sent 
out letters updating these people on what’s been happening. Also 
each investor has been receiving information from the 
court-appointed receiver, Coopers Lybrand. In Saskatchewan we 
have approximately 4,400 investors involved in the collapse of the 
two companies. 
 
I could advise the member that right up until the day of the 
collapse of the two companies in question, my department did not 
receive one complaint or inquiry from any of the 4,400 investors 
that they were unhappy or worried. So I can’t add any more to 
that. 
 
I think he must understand, as I have stated in the House 
previously, that this company was an extra-provincially  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3558 
 
 

licensed company. And the norm across Canada in dealing with 
extra-provincial licensed companies is to rely on the incorporating 
jurisdiction to make sure that all regulations are adhered to. 
 
I have met with some of the investors after the collapse, and they 
feel that things were done properly. Of course they’re very 
concerned over the turn of events. However, as they stated, they 
are going to pursue legal counsel, which they did, with the thought 
of commencing a class action suit. I think events in Alberta, 
statements made by Premier Getty, that if it’s found that there was 
a breakdown in the regulatory process in Alberta, that the 
government would be responsible to the investors. 
 
(1600) 
 
Ms. Smart: — First of all, Madam Minister, I’m really shocked to 
discover that the total number in Saskatchewan is 4,400; we were 
saying 3,000. So it’s even more than I had expected. 
 
I’m not sure that you haven’t received any letters of complaint 
prior to the collapse of the companies, because people didn’t know 
that they were going under. They had been told and they had been 
reassured by the Principal Trust salesmen licensed by your 
department that everything was fine, and so you wouldn’t receive 
any letters of complaint. 
 
You certainly have since the collapse, because I’ve received 
copies of them too. And I have received copies of letters that told 
me that people did phone your department, not to complain but to 
check on the guaranteed investment certificates that these 
companies were selling, to make sure that they were safe. Because 
almost all of the people who bought those investment contracts 
wanted to make sure that they were not risky investors, that they 
were getting into an investment that was guaranteed and safe. 
 
And by and large those people have been very conservative 
investors. I’ve been in touch with a great number of them. But I’m 
very concerned about the fact that in the House some days ago and 
on September 2 you said that . . . or the Minister of Finance said 
— you weren’t speaking — that it was the government’s intention 
to try to give as much information as possible to the Saskatchewan 
investors, and that would depend on the circumstances — whether 
the information was given as privileged. I can’t judge that. 
 
Now you’ve got a lawyer hired by Saskatchewan taxpayers in 
Alberta to go to that inquiry. Coopers & Lybrand have a list of all 
the investors here in Saskatchewan. The Minister of Finance said 
that the government’s intention was to try to give them 
information, yet the investors in Saskatchewan have heard nothing 
from your department. You don’t even know who they are. And 
here you’ve got 4,400 people in Saskatchewan desperately 
anxious about the loss of what they thought was a guaranteed 
investment. 
 
One of the things that your government has been saying is that 
you’re going to rely on the RCMP report into the allegations of 
false advertising and false  

misrepresentation of the company. I want to know when the 
RCMP is going to report back to you, and I want to know if it’s 
true that the Saskatchewan RCMP have stopped their investigation 
in this province and have turned it all over to the Alberta branch. 
Do you know that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I’m sorry. You’d have to ask that question 
of the Minister of Justice. I know that the . . . I believe the police 
had contacted approximately 350 investors who had made 
allegations of misleading information and that type of thing. 
However, I don’t know if the . . . I think the investigation has been 
completed, but you’d have to ask the Minister of Justice. 
 
As I said, we did not receive one complaint in the department, and 
I have been in contact, continuous contact, with the investors who 
have written to me. The list of investors that we received from 
Coopers and Lybrand, however, just listed names and the amount 
of the individual’s contract. There were no addresses given to us. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well, Madam Minister, this is a major crisis in 
your department. It’s something that you should be taking 
responsibility for. You should know what the Minister of Justice is 
doing with that inquiry from the RCMP. It’s all part of the same 
problem. It’s all part of the same case. It’s all part of the same 
crisis, and the investors would like to know what’s happening with 
this inquiry. 
 
And I put it to you that the investors have received no help from 
your department in this area. And I’ve been told that when people 
tried to find out what the plan of arrangement meant, that Coopers 
& Lybrand sent to them to wind down the affairs of those two 
companies, they phoned your department; they wanted some 
advice. 
 
They wanted to know whether they should vote for the plan or not, 
and they were told by your department and by your government 
and also by the Minister of Finance’s office, depending on where 
they phoned, to consult one of the lawyers hired by those taking 
civil action. So you put it back on the individual people to go to a 
lawyer. 
 
Madam Minister, the consumers department, which is supposed to 
help those people — you’re supposed to help the investors; you’re 
supposed to help the consumers — you provided no information 
or help. In spite of the fact that you say you value education and 
you value wanting to help the consumers, you turned them back to 
a private lawyer. And I know many investors who can’t afford that 
private lawyer. If you go to a lawyer and ask questions, you get 
charged for it. Some of the investors have the money, and many of 
them don’t. 
 
And I put it to you that one of the very major reasons why we need 
a public inquiry into what’s happened is because your government 
has been so negligent. You’ve been negligent in reaching out to 
the investors to help them, and you’ve been negligent in giving 
them information that they need, and that’s why we need the 
public inquiry. B.C. has done something; Alberta has done 
something; Nova Scotia now is saying that they’re going to have a 
public inquiry. What is your stand on having a public inquiry here 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3559 
 
 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I would say to the member that there were 
lawyers appointed to assist the investors. John McNiven of 
Calgary was appointed to represent investors in southern Alberta 
and Saskatchewan. There’s the investors’ committee, also are 
there to assist the investors. They have all been contacted by 
Coopers & Lybrand. I’m sure you know that on September 24 and 
25 the investors voted 99 per cent to accept the Coopers & 
Lybrand plan of — their proposal. 
 
We met with three groups who had come to the department for 
advice and interpretation on the Coopers & Lybrand plan, and 
they were also in contact with their own lawyer. So for you to say 
that the department has done nothing is just not accurate. 
 
Ms. Smart: — You haven’t done very much in terms of 
contacting the investors directly. In fact, you have done nothing to 
contact all those 4,400 investors in this province, many, many of 
whom who have lost their life savings. Now that to me is a serious 
crisis, Madam Minister. It’s an area where you should have been 
working on for the last few months and even before in terms of 
licensing those companies to practise in Saskatchewan. That’s 
your job; that’s what you’re being paid for. 
 
You’re getting a very high salary, and we have people in this 
province who’ve lost everything. I have people in my 
constituency, older women, who have not nothing to live on. I 
found one woman with $30 left because of the money she lost. 
 
You represent a government that feels that people can live on $123 
a month because they can’t find work. That’s what they get for 
food, clothing, transportation, bus fare, the whole bit, and you, 
Madam Minister, are making over 60,000 a year. It is your 
responsibility to look after your department. It is your 
responsibility to protect the consumers. It’s your responsibility to 
make sure that these investment contracts are administered 
properly. 
 
You have three companies to license — three companies under 
The Investment Contracts Act, land two of them collapsed, even 
though there was information available to your department well 
ahead of time that those companies were in great trouble. 
 
But before we get to that. Madam Minister, I want to say that the 
reason why we need, and we must have, a public inquiry, a public 
independent inquiry in Saskatchewan, is to find out how those 
companies happened to be licensed here in this province. We need 
to know what’s been happening in Saskatchewan. Your 
government didn’t need to be so negligent, and you didn’t need to 
be so negligent, but because you have been, we have to get to the 
bottom of this and find out how we can make things better for the 
people in this province. 
 
Now I have here letters I have received from investors. I want you 
to have a public, independent inquiry so that these people can have 
a chance to speak in this province. Because what’s being reported 
even in the news are Alberta investors speaking in Alberta. But 
we’ve got 4,400 investors in this province. 
 

Let me just share some of these letters then with you, to go on the 
record, and because they describe so eloquently the situations that 
people have been in. 
 

What I’m wondering is what part the government (and this is 
a quote from this letter) plans to play in what I firmly believe 
is a crime committed on thousands of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. There are several government consumer agencies 
whose purpose we had assumed was to ensure that 
businesses’ operation in Saskatchewan worked within certain 
guide-lines designed to protect the people. 

 
That’s the essence of what we’re about here. There was obviously 
fraud in the dealings of Principal Trust. But there has been talk 
from the government that it’s up to the individual to deal with this 
fraud through the courts. This, to me, would be comparable to 
suggesting that a victim of a burglary be expected to seek 
recompense through private court action. Of what use then are 
these watch-dog agencies? 
 
Madam Minister, will you answer the question that was in this 
letter, of what use is the watch-dog agency that you’re responsible 
for? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I can reiterate one more time for the hon. 
member that when you’re dealing with extra-provincially licensed 
companies, you have to rely on the incorporating jurisdiction to do 
the necessary regulatory work to see that things are on the 
up-and-up. We had absolutely no information prior to the end of 
June that these companies were in financial difficulty. These were 
companies that had been doing business in the province since 
1954, who really have, over the years, been a benefit to the 
investors. An extra-provincially licensed company is always, has 
always been, and will continue to be the responsibility of the 
incorporating jurisdiction. 
 
I am concerned, I can tell you, that there has to be more sharing of 
information. I am somewhat disappointed in the fact that the 
incorporating jurisdiction, the Government of Alberta, did not see 
fit to keep us apprised of the problems that they were uncovering 
early this spring. We have talked about this at every 
federal-provincial meeting that I have attended in the last five 
years — the need to have a central data base on financial 
institutions and other companies so that there is a more equitable 
sharing of information. Had we been advised earlier that there was 
concern, even that there was concern about the two companies, we 
may have been in a better position to have a closer look. 
 
(1615) 
 
Now you say that we’re doing nothing. I say that’s not accurate. 
Many investors have said that they will go through the normal 
channels. You say we need a public inquiry here. I say we don’t 
need a public inquiry, and also I might add that there are very few 
investors asking for a public inquiry. The majority of the investors 
realize that a public inquiry here would garner no new news. No 
new facts would come to light. I think the facts of the case are well 
know, and there is no need to duplicate what is  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3560 
 
 

being done in Alberta. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Madam Minister, according to The Investment 
Contracts Act: 
 

a certified copy of the balance sheet of the company as at the 
close of its last completed fiscal year and its auditor’s report 
thereon (must be submitted to the superintendent of 
insurance). 

 
The audited report for Associated Investors and First Investors 
was prepared in 1986 and sent to your department then, as I 
understand it. Are you saying you did not receive it? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I can advise the member that there was no 
signed, audited statement for 1986, and this is how the whole thing 
came to light. 
 
What happened was that there was a dispute between the external 
auditor and the company over the evaluation of certain properties 
that the company had listed. Therefore the external auditor called 
in the Alberta regulator, who agreed with the auditor and 
appointed an independent audit to be done on the evaluation of the 
properties. And that’s when it came to light that things were not as 
they appeared to be. 
 
Now they filed a 1985 audited, signed statement in early ’86, but 
that, like I say, that is how the whole thing came to light, is 
because the Alberta regulator did not receive a signed, audited 
statement and sent in another group to do a re-audit. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Are you saying then that the audit that was done 
by Deloitte Haskins & Sells and mailed in May of 1986 did not go 
to your department? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — We have the l985 one. We had that one. 
We received that in early 1986. 
 
Ms. Smart — Well that’s the one I’m referring to, Madam 
Minister. That’s the one that shows that the companies were 
practically insolvent, if not insolvent altogether. And that’s the 
audited report that you were relying on. That’s the one where the 
auditors, Deloitte, Haskins and Sells, say that the loss and the 
value of the owned property and mortgages in our opinion is other 
than temporary, and in such circumstances generally accepted 
accounting principles require that the owned property and 
mortgages be written down to recognize the loss. When you write 
it down to recognize the loss, you come to the fact that the 
company was involvement, First Investors particularly. That’s 
what the balance sheet says. 
 
And you had that audited report, as you’ve admitted, so why 
didn’t you then immediately, in early of 1986, do something about 
the fact that these companies were licensed to practise in 
Saskatchewan and pull their licence? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Because the statement does not indicate 
that the company was bankrupt. Now you’re taking one sentence 
out of a report signed by Deloitte, Haskins. They are in dispute. 
What they are saying is they are disputing the values listed by the 
company. In their  

opinion those properties should have been written down. In the 
opinion of the management, they said that over the life-term of the 
contract, which is seven years, that those values of those properties 
would rise. Now that’s not an unusual statement to be included in 
any audit report. 
 
(1645) 
 
Ms. Smart: — Madam Minister, when the prices were falling on 
real estate in Alberta, and the mortgages were falling and you got 
an audited report like this at your department, you had an 
obligation to look into it. You had a strong obligation to protect 
our investors from losing their money. Why didn’t you do that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I think you should read the whole report. 
You should read the whole 1985 report. The ’85 report does report 
that the loss in value of investments in certain owned property and 
property securing certain mortgages is not temporary. However, 
on the other hand, the statement also shows that the offsetting 
loans by shareholders and the other investments reported are 
reported as undervalued. So there is no statement concluding 
insolvency in 1985. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Madam Minister, there were a lot of reports to 
indicate that the Alberta economy was crumbling, especially in the 
real estate and mortgages. What is the Superintendent of Insurance 
doing and what are you doing in your department if you’re not 
looking after that sort of thing? That’s what Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs is about. It’s about looking at these audited 
statements that you get and deciding whether or not you can 
proceed with letting it be licensed in this province. And it seems to 
me that you’ve done nothing to help the people in this province. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — That is exactly what I’ve been trying to 
tell you over the course of the last four months. It is up to the 
regulator in Alberta to see that the properties which are used for 
security are as they are stated in the company’s books. Now I can 
only reiterate that there is nothing in that audited 1985 statement 
that concludes that the company was insolvent or on the verge of 
insolvency. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well it really amazes me that someone 
representing a party that’s supposed to be supporting business and 
know a lot about business doesn’t even know how to read a 
balance sheet, an audited report, because both the reports from 
Associated Investors and First Investors show that the balance was 
. . . that they were insolvent, that they didn’t have the assets, the 
real estate assets, to guarantee the certificates 100 per cent as they 
were supposed to do by this province’s Investments Contracts Act. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, I want to talk about this province, not 
Alberta, because this Investment Contracts Act licensed the 
companies here in this province, and many, many people believe 
that when the government has got a licence on an investment firm, 
that it’s under control. And so they should. That’s the role of 
government is to manage these companies and make sure that 
people don’t get so badly hurt as these investors have done. That is 
the purpose for the government department. And this belief  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3561 
 
 

in deregulation and this belief in not . . . buyer beware, and this 
belief that you don’t have to do anything, ends up in the kind of 
destruction and the kind of collapse of companies and the kind of 
hurt that people have suffered in this province. And it’s all based 
on the kind of ideology that you and your government support. 
 
You have a lot to answer to, Madam Minister. And I intended to 
share these letters with you to show you just exactly what’s been 
happening to people in Saskatchewan because you haven’t been 
able to take the time, or whatever, to talk to the Minister of Justice, 
to find out about the RCMP investigation because you haven’t 
looked after your department and made sure that the companies 
were licensed properly. 
 
I don’t think you’ve heard one bit what the investors have been 
telling you — people who don’t even consider themselves 
investors in that sense of the word. People . . . you dismiss them as 
risky investors, as people who just had lots of money to play the 
stock-markets, that’s not what these people were about, not a bit. 
 
These people were about the business of putting their money into 
guaranteed investment certificates. They write of their stories this 
way: 
 

A year ago we invested a substantial amount of money with 
the Principal Group. We are a young couple with four 
children and therefore wanted to invest our money into 
something safe. The Principal representatives, licensed by 
your department, repeatedly assured us that the money was 
being invested in a guaranteed investment certificate, and 
was as secure as investments in a chartered bank. 
 
We had the opportunity to invest in mutual funds but we 
were not prepared to take risks with any of our money. The 
representative continued to assure us that money invested at 
a set interest rate with the Principal Group was guaranteed by 
deposits at the Royal Bank and by the Alberta government 
guarantees. 

 
And by the guarantee that’s in our Investment Contract Act, by the 
way, Madam Minister, which says that they must have assets 
equivalent to the amount of money that they take in. 
 
The letter continues: 
 

We strongly feel we were, at the least, misled, and 
fraudulently advised by the Principal Group so as to invest 
with them. At no time were we told that our money was 
being put into First Investors and Associated Investors, now 
two obviously ailing companies. 
 
We feel the Principal Group and the governments have not 
acted responsibly in this matter. These two parties must see 
that the investors receive their investment and interest in full. 
Furthermore, we strongly feel that investigation must be 
carried on into what we perceive to be fraudulent 
representations on the part of the Principal Group  

and its representatives. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the things that confused people when 
they went to Principal Trust was the fact that they were told that 
they would become Associated Investors or First Investors, and 
they thought that was some sort of category of investment 
certificate that they bought from Principal Trust. They had no idea 
what was happening to them. 
 
But you had the information. You had that audited statement — 
you and your officials — that said that those companies were 
bankrupt. You knew that real estate was falling in Alberta. You 
must have done some contact with the Alberta government in 
looking after this sort of thing. Two companies out of three 
licensed by your licensing and investigation branch — how can 
you explain the fact that you did nothing to protect investors? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I will say to the member, as I have many, 
many times in the past, that the companies involved are 
incorporated under Alberta Law. And the standard practice across 
Canada is that the incorporating jurisdiction has primary 
responsibility for regulation. 
 
We have treated these companies in the same manner as they have 
been treated since 1954, when they were first licensed to do 
business in the province. Since 1954 the Government of 
Saskatchewan has relied on the Alberta regulator to see that 
regulations are adhered to. And I might add, we will continue to 
do so. 
 
You know, there are over 500 insurance companies, trust 
companies, contract companies doing business in the province, 
licensed or incorporated in other provinces. And we rely on those 
other provinces to see that the proper regulatory functions are 
adhered to. We have done that since 1905, and I’m sure we will 
continue to do that. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Madam Minister, I’ll make the point once more 
that the purpose of The Investment Contracts Act of Saskatchewan 
was to make sure that those companies were licensed and 
functioning properly in Saskatchewan, and that their audited 
statements were presented to the Superintendent of Insurance prior 
to them getting their licence renewed. That’s part of the process 
here in Saskatchewan. It has nothing to do with extra-provincial 
licensing. The Investment Contracts Act applies to companies here 
in this province, and the procedures are very specifically spelled 
out as to what the companies must do in order to get their licence 
in the first place, and in order to get their licence renewed. 
 
(1630) 
 
Manitoba didn’t license First Investors to practise in Manitoba; 
Ontario didn’t accept them in Ontario. There is no national policy 
regarding investment contract firms. And, Madam Minister, what 
you’re telling me makes me even more worried when I realize that 
in 1988 there’s going to be even more deregulation of financial 
institutions by the kinds of policies that you and your government 
support. 
 
Madam Minister, your government received, I believe, a  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3562 
 
 

prospectus dated March 29, 1985 from First Investors Corporation 
Limited. I think you’ve received it. I want to know if you did. This 
was the prospectus that was presented to the Alberta government, 
and this was the beginning of the concern about what was 
happening to those two companies. Did your department receive a 
copy of this prospectus? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — No, we didn’t. 
 
Ms. Smart: — This prospectus was public information 
apparently. Why wouldn’t your government, why wouldn’t your 
department have been on the look out for this sort of information? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well that would have been filed with the 
Securities Commission, and prospectuses aren’t filed with the 
department, they’re filed with the Securities Commission. 
 
Ms. Smart: — For an investment company like Fits Investors 
Corporation, it would not be with . . . well it would have been filed 
with the Saskatchewan Securities Commission? Well then why 
didn’t they notice what was happening and alert your department? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Are you asking why it wasn’t filed with 
Saskatchewan Securities Commission? 
 
Ms. Smart: — No I understand that you said it was filed with the 
Securities Commission. I want to know what the Securities 
Commission did with it, and why didn’t they alert your 
department that there was a problem with this company, if they 
had the information? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — You’re really muddling things up. The 
department would not know whether that company filed a 
prospectus with the Securities Commission. Now you must 
understand that preliminary prospectuses are filed every day 
across the country with various securities commissions. A lot of 
times those prospectuses are withdrawn for whatever reason the 
company deems. Now that may or may not have been filed with 
the Saskatchewan Securities Commission. And it could have been 
withdrawn. Now the Securities Commission does not advise the 
department on the prospectuses that are filed with them. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well do you have plans in the future, since this 
sort of muddle takes place, to make sure that you are in direct 
communication with the Securities Commission? The Securities 
Commission doesn’t tell you what they’ve got when they’ve got 
evidence here that a company that’s licensed by your department 
is in trouble? You don’t know what the Department of Justice is 
doing in terms of an RCMP investigation into something that 
concerns your department? 
 
Part of this prospectus said this: 
 

The downturn in the western Canadian real estate market has 
resulted in a significant increase in both the number and 
value of mortgages in arrears. As a December 31, 1984 the 
principal and interest outstanding in respect of all mortgage 
loans on which payments were in arrears for 90  

days or for more, represented 63.3 per cent of First Investors 
Corporation’s outstanding portfolio. 

 
The members opposite don’t seem to understand this kind of 
financial statement. That is obviously part of the problem. This is a 
prospectus on First Investors Corporation that you said was filed 
with the Saskatchewan Securities Commission, and it indicates 
that they were in arrears 63.3 per cent, their mortgage loans had 
gone down in the last years. That was information that should 
have gone to your department, don’t you think? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I did not say that it was filed with the 
Securities Commission. You asked me if it was, and I said I 
wouldn’t know if it was. When companies attempt to raise capital 
within the provincial boundaries, they have to, under law, file a 
prospectus with the Securities Commission. Now I don’t know 
whether or not the document you’re referring to was filed in 
Saskatchewan, whether it was filed in Alberta, whether it was filed 
in Ontario. 
 
You say that Ontario refused to license them; that is not accurate. 
They filed a preliminary prospectus with the Ontario Securities 
Commission and withdrew it. Now that is not a refusal to license 
them to do business in Ontario. The company withdrew their 
preliminary prospectus from the Ontario Securities Commission. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Madam Minister, do you know the reason why 
Principal Trust withdrew from Ontario? Do you know why they 
withdrew that prospectus? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — No, I don’t know why the company chose 
to withdraw their prospectus from Ontario, and I think that’s an 
absolutely ludicrous question. I think what you are saying, you 
don’t understand how the Securities Commission works, you don’t 
understand how share capital is raised, and quite frankly, you 
don’t understand the function of my department. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I don’t think you understand much of it, Madam 
Minister, and you’re certainly in a much better position. You are 
the one in control of that department, you are the one that should 
know what they’re doing, and you’re the one that’s responsible for 
what’s happened to these investors in Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s a very serious situation that we have here because you are the 
one that several years ago was at a meeting, a conference, talking 
about investment concerns in Canada and you said there was a 
need for networking. You said there was a need for the 
governments across the country to be in closer touch with what 
was happening with the different areas. Now you’re trying to tell 
me that there’s no need for you to know why a prospectus on a 
company licensed here in Saskatchewan was refused in Ontario; 
no need for you to know why Manitoba didn’t license it; no need 
for you to know why Manitoba didn’t license it; no need for you to 
know about prospectuses that might come to the Securities 
Commission regarding companies that you license in 
Saskatchewan. What are you going to do? Are you going to just 
continue to turn your back completely on the issues that you’re 
responsible for? 
 
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3563 
 
 

Here’s another letter, Madam Minister, that I think you should 
hear. It’s from a 56-year-old single woman: 
 

Over the past 20 years of employment I managed to 
accumulate a few savings. Last summer I enlisted the advice 
of a financial consultant, a specialist, to guide me into 
investments that would allow me to leave the work-force at 
age 60. 
 
I chose the firm of Principal Trust on the strength of 
newspaper advertising offering 10 per cent interest on 
guaranteed (underlined) investment certificates and because 
of the verbal presentation given to me by their consultant. 
 
I informed my consultant that I was not interested in any 
speculative scheme, and she assured me she would direct my 
money into safe investments, and when questioned further, 
assured me my investments were covered by the $60,000 
insurance coverage. 
 
My concerns are: 
 
1. The intention to direct my funds to an uninsured company 
was not explained to me; 
 
2. The word “guaranteed” for the term certificates was 
misleading; 
 
3. The consultant was not truthful under direction 
questioning. 
 
I feel that Principal Trust is guilty of false advertising and 
perhaps fraud. I am asking that you (this is a letter that was 
sent to you) on behalf of the Saskatchewan government 
support the investors in any action necessary to insure that 
we get our investments back. If Principal Trust does not 
make up our losses, I feel it is the duty of our government to 
help us, since proper policing and licensing of investment 
companies should have assured citizens’ protection against 
such a predicament occurring. 
 

She’s asking you to support her in any action necessary. What are 
you intending to do about these investors who’ve lost their 
money? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I would say to the member that after the 
collapse of the two companies there were allegations of 
misleading information. There was allegations of fraud, and that is 
the very thing that the RCMP investigation is keying in on. I 
believe that the Code inquiry which is on now will get to the 
bottom of the allegations of fraud and misrepresentation by sales 
persons of the two companies. 
 
I can only say that once again — and it’s not a matter of shifting 
blame or reneging on the responsibility of the department — 
however, you must understand that these companies, who have 
been doing business in the province since 1954 were incorporated 
in the province of Alberta, and it is the responsibility of the 
incorporating jurisdiction to see that regulations are adhered to. 
It’s  

very, very unfortunate the circumstances that led to the collapse of 
the two companies, and it’s very unfortunate that some 4,000 
Saskatchewan investors were involved. However, to say that 
officials in my department were not doing their job is just not 
accurate. It’s just simply not true. 
 
Since 1954 successive governments, whether they be NDP or PC 
or Liberal or CCF, have relied on the incorporating jurisdictions 
not only with these two companies but with the 500 financial 
companies that do business in the province to see that the 
regulations are adhered to. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, you’ve stated several times this 
afternoon to my colleague here that you had really not looked at 
the balance sheet, or if you had looked at the balance sheet, that 
the balance sheet was to the extent that you weren’t alarmed at the 
insolvency of the company. Yet, Madam Minister, as my 
colleague has pointed out to you, there was certainly signals sent 
in other provinces where the company was not licensed, where 
prospectuses were withdrawn. Would you mind telling us, were 
you aware . . . at what time did you become aware that other 
provinces were concerned about this company, and when were 
you made aware that their prospectus was withdrawn in the 
province of Ontario? When was your department made aware of 
this? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The first indication that we had that the 
companies were in financial difficulty was on June 30 of this year, 
June 30 of this year when the Alberta regulator informed the 
Saskatchewan regulator of the impending cancellation of the two 
licences. 
 
Now as far as prospectuses are concerned, prospectuses, 
preliminary prospectuses are filed in various jurisdictions across 
the country on a daily basis, and in a lot of instances the 
companies filing them will withdraw them, and that is no 
indication of something wrong. In many cases they see flaws, and 
they fix them up, and they refile them. So to file a preliminary 
prospectus and withdraw it means absolutely nothing, absolutely 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, by itself in isolation it may not 
have meant a thing. But certainly, as the minister responsible for 
the protection of residents of this province, surely you must be 
aware that if you looked at the balance sheet of 1985 as you said 
you did — and you said you weren’t alarmed by it; others were 
alarmed by it — and if you knew what the situation was in the real 
estate in Alberta, as my colleague has already pointed out, and if 
you were aware that other provinces did not want to license the 
particular company and prospectus was withdrawn in Ontario, if 
you put it all together, Madam Minister, the alarm bells should 
have rung. But obviously they didn’t in your department, and I 
want to know why; why weren’t you and your officials on top of 
the situation so that you could have alerted the investors of 
Saskatchewan. That is your job. 
 
You are there to protect those investors. But obviously you and 
your officials were simply not aware of the situation and didn’t 
make it your job to be aware. And I’m asking you why, with all 
the signals that there were, why weren’t you aware, why didn’t 
you check into it so that you could have alerted the 4,400 investors 
that there was  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3564 
 
 

something amiss in the Principal Trust company? Why didn’t you 
do that? Or don’t you think that that’s your job? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — We’ll go back to the 1985 Deloitte, 
Haskins audited report, okay? Nowhere in that report does it 
indicate pending insolvency of the companies. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Very close. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — No, it doesn’t. No, it doesn’t. Now the 
audited report would be first filed in the incorporating jurisdiction. 
Now the Alberta regulator accepted the Deloitte Haskins audited 
report of the two financial institutions we’re talking about, then 
it’s filed with us. And we accept Alberta’s acceptance of the 1985 
audited report. 
 
Now I can say to the member from Saskatoon South that the filing 
of a prospectus has nothing to do with whether or not a company 
is good or bad or solvent or whatever. They, I understand, had 
planned to raise share capital and expand their business into 
Ontario, so they filed a preliminary prospectus and withdrew it. 
And that in no way says that the Government of Ontario refused to 
license them; it was voluntary withdrawn. 
 
Now with the Saskatchewan Securities Commission, people file, 
companies file prospectuses, and the Leader of the Opposition 
would understand how that works. They file preliminaries; they 
may withdraw them; they may add information to them, and really 
that has . . . you can’t tie the two together. You simply can’t. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I don’t . . . you’re zeroing in on 
one item and forgetting the total picture that surrounded Principal 
Trust. And maybe that is your problem — you’ve got tunnel 
vision, and you’re looking at one isolated thing. As I indicated to 
you in my questioning, I don’t want to isolate one little thing. 
There were a lots of little things that you should have been aware 
of, and should have . . . the alarm bells should have rung for you. 
 
Madam Minister, I want to ask you, did you get a written report or 
a verbal report from your officials on the 1985 balance sheet of 
Principal Trust? Did you get a written report or a verbal report 
from your officials on the balance sheet of 1985 of Principal 
Trust? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — No I didn’t, to the member from 
Saskatoon South. No I didn’t, and I don’t get a report on the 
500-plus companies that are doing business in the province as 
extra-provincially licensed companies. 
 
You know, there’s . . . you don’t get that information. Your 
colleagues did not get that information when they were ministers 
of Consumer Affairs. You get a report on the number of 
companies doing business in the province; you get a report on the 
number of corporations that are licensed to do business in the 
province, but you don’t get information, specific information on 
each one of the thousands and thousands and thousands of 
companies doing business in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam  

Minister, I think we have already established that your department 
received the prospectus of First Investors Corporation dated 
March 29, 1985, and I trust you don’t deny that. 
 
I want to know, Madam Minister . . . prospectus . . . prospectus . . . 
Your department, which then included the Securities Commission, 
received the prospectus of First Investors Corporation, dated 
March 29, 1985. I’m not stating that’s the date that it was 
submitted to the Saskatchewan Securities Commission. I’m not 
sure of that. I ask you: was that prospectus received, and did it 
contain the following paragraph? 
 

The downturn in the western Canadian real estate market has 
resulted in a significant increase in both the number and 
value of mortgages in arrears. As of December 31, 1984, the 
principal and interest outstanding in respect of all mortgage 
loans on which payments were in arrears for 90 days or 
more, (in arrears 90 days or more, Madam Minister) 
represented 63.3 per cent of the corporation’s outstanding 
portfolio? 

 
Did it contain that phrase? Did your department have that 
information in hand shortly after March 1985? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — No, my department did not have that 
information, to the Leader of the Opposition. The Saskatchewan 
Securities Commission, as you well know, is a quasi-judicial 
commission, independent, independent commission I might add, 
and I think you are fully familiar with that. 
 
I can’t even confirm whether or not that prospectus was filed. I do 
not have responsibility for the Securities Commission. It’s over in 
Justice, as you know, so I couldn’t even tell you whether or not 
that particular prospectus that you’re referring to was, in fact, 
filed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, 
when this prospectus was filed, it was filed with your department, 
with the Securities Commission, and you were the responsible 
minister. Whether you now want to say, I’m not the responsible 
minister any more doesn’t in any way discharge the responsibility 
you had then to have your people advise you if there was trouble. 
And don’t for one moment, Madam Minister, suggest that the 
Securities Commission is independent in a sense that it would not, 
or should not, or does not have a duty to pass on information to the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say to you, Madam Minister, your staff, when you were the 
minister, knew that over 60 per cent of the mortgages of First 
Investors were in arrears 90 days or more. It was the failure of 
First Investors to realize on those mortgages which caused its 
collapse. It was that fact which you had on your files which led to 
all these Saskatchewan people losing their money. Do you deny, 
Madam Minister, that when you were the minister your staff 
received this information indicating very clearly that over 60 per 
cent of the mortgages of First Investors were in arrears 90 days or 
more? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — To the Leader of the Opposition, the staff 
of the Department of Consumer and Commercial  
  



 
October 27, 1987 

 

3565 
 
 

Affairs would not have the information because the Securities 
Commission is a quasi-judicial, at arm’s length commission, and 
you know that very well. 
 
When I was responsible for the Securities Commission — now 
maybe you did things different under your administration — I did 
not interfere in the day-to-day operations of the Securities 
Commission nor should I. I did not order them to rubber-stamp 
prospectuses. They have a very important legal requirement to go 
over prospectuses and vet them and decide, independently of 
government, whether or not those prospectuses are passed or 
rejected. And you know full well. 
 
And I didn’t get a report from the Securities Commission on that 
particular prospectus that you’re referring to. The only information 
that I ever got from the Securities Commission was the number of 
prospectuses filed, the number accepted, the number rejected. I 
didn’t even know who was filing prospectuses because that’s the 
way the Securities Commission, if it’s to operate properly, should 
operate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Madam 
Minister, aside from the utter twaddle which is being emitted from 
the minister now in the suggestion, in the suggestion that 
somehow information about applicants for filing shouldn’t be 
conveyed to other agencies of the government, I am absolutely 
amazed at your suggestion. Obviously you’re not ordering that 
prospectuses be accepted for filing or that brokers be accepted for 
registration; no one is suggesting that. 
 
I am asking you, Madam Minister: when you had the hard 
information that this company was in trouble and when your 
department knew that this very company was out there selling 
investment contracts, do you suggest that it was not the duty either 
of the Securities Commission to tell the investment contract 
people that this company was in deep trouble; or alternately, the 
duty of the investment contract people to ask the Securities 
Commission whether this company was in trouble? Are you 
suggesting that the fact that First Investors was filing a prospectus 
would be totally unknown, totally unknown to the investment 
contract people who were registering that company? 
 
And if you want me to turn it around and say, not to ask you why 
the securities people didn’t tell the investment contract people, 
may I ask why the investment contract people didn’t ask the 
Securities Commission, people, if you want to have it that way? 
 
And, Madam Minister, are you suggesting to me that the people 
who are regulating this company on The Investment Contracts Act 
didn’t know it was trying to file a prospectus in three or four 
provinces in Canada? Is that your suggestion? And if they did 
know, are you suggesting that it was of no interest to them, what 
was in the prospectus and whether or not this company was sound 
or not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The department would not know, Leader 
of the Opposition, whether or not company A, B, C, or Z have 
filed a preliminary prospectus with the Securities Commission. 
And you know that. 
 

An Hon. Member: — I don’t know it all. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Yes, you do know that. The Securities 
Commission does not publish a list of all the prospectuses that are 
filed with the, and you know that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman and Madam 
Minister, may I advise you that when I served as chairman of the 
Securities Commission, I kept in touch with the people who were 
dealing with investment contracts. I know that’s a long time ago, 
and I know the idea of regulating to protect the public has gone 
out of style with this government who believes in deregulation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — But I’ll tell you, it used to be in style. It 
used to be the responsibility of people who were regulating 
investment contract companies — all three of them, Madam 
Minister, all three of them — to keep in touch with what was 
happening in a general way. And they certainly would have 
known whether a prospectus was being filed. 
 
And I ask you again, Madam Minister: are you telling me that the 
people in your department who were regulating investment 
contract companies, all three of them, didn’t know that First 
Investors was attempting to file a prospectus with securities 
commissions across Canada? Are you saying they didn’t know? 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — No, they didn’t know nor would they 
know about the thousands and thousands of prospectuses that are 
filed by thousands of companies every year with the Securities 
Commission. The Securities Commission is an independent 
agency not connected with the department, does not share 
information with us. 
 
But I would say to the Leader of the Opposition that I think the 
whole collapse of the two companies really, in my mind, indicates 
the need for massive changes in the way we treat financial 
institutions, whether they be trust companies, investment contract 
companies, insurance companies, or whatever. And we have 
talked about his at various federal-provincial meetings. 
 
I do believe that there is a need for a national securities 
commission. I think there is a need that the regulation of these — 
instead of doing them in 10 provinces and two jurisdictions, 
maybe there is the need to have a federal regulator rather than 
dealing with 10 or 12 regulators across the country. I might also 
add to the Leader of the Opposition, that under your regime the 
Alberta regulator’s consent — if you want to call it that — or 
approval of the financial statements was also accepted by the 
department as being done properly. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


