


















































June 22, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 22, 1987 
 

581 
 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great 
deal of pleasure this afternoon that I introduce to you, and 
through you to all members of this Assembly, 46 grade 5 and 6 
students from Al Pickard School in my constituency on 7th 
Avenue North. With them are two teachers, Mrs. Verna Taylor 
and Mr. John Lukomski. 
 
I ask all of you to take great interest in the question period, and 
I hope you enjoy your visit to the Legislative Assembly today. I 
look forward to meeting with you at 2:30 for pictures and 
refreshments and to answer any questions you may have about 
government or this Assembly. I please ask all members to 
welcome the students from Al Pickard School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and to the members of the Assembly, some 17 
students, grades 3 and 4 from the new Saar School in Kronau. I 
am very pleased they could join with us. They are accompanied 
by teacher, Shirley Drever; chaperon, Holly Matt; and bus 
driver, Mr. Fred Eberle. 
 
I would ask all hon. members to join with me in welcoming the 
students to the Assembly. I wish them a very enjoyable 
afternoon and a very, very safe summer. I look forward to 
meeting with them after question period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to at 
this time, with great pleasure, introduce to you and through you 
to the Assembly, a group of 32 students from the Osler School 
accompanied by their principal, Mr. Reg Peachey and teacher 
Glen Osmond. It gives me great pleasure at this time to 
welcome the students here. I hope you have an enjoyable visit 
and learn something about our democratic process. And I’ll be 
meeting with you shortly after the question period, 
approximately 2:30. I would just like to indicate that these 
children seem to be carrying on the good tradition. Osler School 
happens to be the school that I spent about four years as a 
teacher myself. So welcome here, students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to introduce to you, 
and through you to the Assembly, 57 students from Judge 
Bryant School in grade 7 and 8, accompanied by their teacher 
Wayne Wilson; by their chaperons Al Chase and Mrs. Astrid 
Thom. I hope these students enjoy the question period. I look 
forward to meeting with them in about three-quarters of an hour 
for pictures, and we’ll have a discussion about what you saw. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a group 
of students from my constituency who are here today from 
Montgomery School. I believe they’re in the gallery, your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. There are 22 of them from grade 5. 
They’re accompanied by teachers Lorne David and David 
Brown, and their bus driver is Mr. Ron Hawkins. I, like the 
other members, look forward to meeting the students and 
learning about all of the problems in Montgomery Place in 
Saskatoon Riversdale. Thank you, sir. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Public Protest at Legislative Building 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, on Saturday an estimated 7,000 people 
from across this province marched to the Legislative Building 
in the largest public protest this province has seen in 25 years. 
And my question to you, sir, is: in the light of the fact that we 
have had what is unquestionably the largest public protest in 
this province in 25 years, will you now listen, and will your 
government reconsider its unfair and uncaring policies 
introduced in the budget, and will you propose some changes 
before we are asked to vote finally on that budget later this 
week? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not so sure that the 
people who gathered outside on Saturday knew that the 
Manitoba government was now sending cancer patients to 
Saskatchewan for treatment because they haven’t got the 
facilities in Manitoba. And if you want to look at the 
demonstrations that were held against the members opposite 
when they were in government putting people back to work, 
you’d find that they were larger than those that were here on 
Saturday. And the hon. member knows that. 
 
The combination of the fact that people in Manitoba, under the 
NDP government there, cannot have cancer treatment, and they 
have to wait up to six weeks, and medical people in Manitoba 
are requesting Regina hospitals to treat them here, seems to me 
as an indication of perhaps some of the talking about of both 
sides of the mouth that goes on in the policies and the programs 
of the members opposite. Maybe they should demonstrate in 
front of the legislature in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, where they do 
need some help in funding health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder 
if I might recall the Premier to the province which he professes 
to be premier of, and to ask him whether or not he does not 
believe that a demonstration of that size which we saw on 
Saturday, including members of the clergy, and farmers, and 
wage earners, and women and children, and representatives of 
native people, and  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

582 
 

people with disabilities and the like, do you not agree, Mr. 
Speaker, and Mr. Premier, that that was an outpouring of 
feeling, an outpouring of concern about your policies, to which 
you should now respond and change the budget which we are 
now debating in this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, 
with our budget we’re going to have to spend a good part of it 
treating people from Manitoba because they are going to be 
coming here. In the paper today it says they’re asking the 
hospitals in Regina and for Saskatchewan taxpayers to pay for 
health care in Manitoba because they won’t fund it. 
 
Now, if we want to talk about Saskatchewan — the hon. 
member asked about Saskatchewan . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, I did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We are going to have to spend it on 
Manitoba people. Plus we go back and look at the fact that 
under the NDP administration there was a stop in the funding 
for nursing homes; there was extra billing in Saskatchewan 
under the NDP; they wouldn’t build enough new hospitals; no 
chiropody programs; no new heritage program for seniors; long 
line-ups — and the former minister of Health would say 
line-ups were a sign of efficiency under the NDP. Health care 
funding was only $742 million in 1982; 1.2 billion this year — 
up 63 per cent in the Saskatchewan . The NDP . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order! The member 
from The Battlefords’ outburst is completely unacceptable, and 
I ask him to please settle down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — In the province of Saskatchewan, the 
people have looked at the NDP in the past and they say, where’s 
the alternatives? Where’s the solution? You didn’t have a 
solution in ’82; you didn’t have a solution in ’86; you haven’t 
got a solution in Manitoba, because people have to come here to 
get health care. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at all the things they didn’t do 
and all the things they didn’t fund, it’s pretty easy for them to 
say, well, call another election because we’d like another crack. 
 
They just finished having a policy convention, Mr. Speaker, and 
they admitted they don’t have any policies for farmers; they 
don’t have any policies for health care; they don’t have any 
policies for anybody. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the 
Premier. I was asking him about whether or not he felt the 
concerns expressed by the many thousands who marched on 
Saturday were worthy of his attention. Apparently his answer is 
no. 
 
May I then focus the question, Mr. Premier, by saying this. I 
have a letter from a woman who writes as follows, and it’s 
about the prescription drug plan: 
 

I am 46 years of age with a 15-year-old daughter, 

completing her grade 10. I have cancer and am 
currently living on two disability pensions which total 
$1,053 per month. This is the total means of my 
support. I’m past medical treatment for cancer which 
means that I’m on morphine, sleeping pills, etc., to 
help cope with the pain and all the side effects until 
my time is up. The last straw is the elimination of the 
drug plan. 
 

This letter is signed by a woman from the constituency of Arm 
River and, Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: are you 
prepared to say to that woman and thousands more like her that 
you feel that the cuts you have made in the drug plan are fair to 
the people of Saskatchewan and fair to a woman like that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health in 
Manitoba has stood in his place many times and said this is a 
very fair program. The NDP talk about the program in 
Manitoba all over Canada. They say it’s the best health care 
drug program you can find any place. Mr. Speaker, as I said on 
Friday — and as I said before — that if the hon. member wants 
to give me the specific information to the Minister of Health 
about some unique circumstance, we’ll respond the same way 
the NDP do in Manitoba and that is, we’ll look at that unique 
circumstance, we’ll find out if there’s some additional things 
that we should be doing. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The question is 
to the Premier. Hundreds of Saskatchewan dental therapists and 
other people involved in the dental plan marched to protest your 
government’s unfair policies on Saturday. You’ve thrown more 
than 411 people out of work by privatizing the dental plan. 
 
My question is this: how can you argue that the people of 
Saskatchewan support your privatization of the children’s 
dental plan, particularly in view of the fact that a petition signed 
by more than 6,000 people from 253 different communities in 
this province was given to the Minister of Health? These 
signatures were collected within a 10-day period, even before 
you announced changes to the dental plan. Do you plan to 
ignore the views of these thousands of petitions, and do you 
plan to ignore the view of thousands and thousands of people 
who marched on Saturday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we are making the right 
changes to the dental program, the correct changes, so, Mr. 
Speaker, that we can provide excellent professional dental care 
for children from five years old to 13 years old — the best in 
the province and the best system in Canada. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, for the teenagers we’ve decided that there is 
something else that is more important in terms of priority. And 
the people of Saskatchewan believe that it’s right. We’ve got 
the best health care treatment, the best dental program in the 
country for five-year-olds to 13-year-olds because the dentists 
are doing it. 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

583 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member didn’t tell the whole story. 
She didn’t say that the dentists are going to be increasing their 
staff; the dentists are going to be employing more people. And, 
Mr. Speaker, when we’ve helped train additional therapists to 
become hygienists, they’re going to hire more of them. But I 
don’t think that she mentioned that. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan know this is the right thing to do 
for health care, the right thing to do for the dental program and, 
Mr. Speaker, the right thing for teenagers with respect to drug 
and alcohol abuse and other information that should be 
provided. Mr. Speaker, this is the right thing for health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Service Cut-backs in Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Premier who is obviously living in a mythical world, because 
the people out there in rural Saskatchewan, farmers who I am in 
very close contact with, many of them participating in the 
march on Saturday, have expressed their concern that the 
government is cutting services to rural Saskatchewan. And the 
children’s dental plan is just one example. Most of the 560 
school dental clinics were located in rural Saskatchewan. Now 
those families will have to drive many, many miles to urban 
centres to get proper dental care for their children. 
 
This is my question, Mr. Speaker: why are you adding to the 
burden of rural Saskatchewan, these rural families, facing . . . 
already facing hardship trying to keep their farms and their 
community? Why are you adding further burden to these 
people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that 
with the NDP coming off their convention they’d have 
something else to offer, some additional new ideas for rural 
Saskatchewan. I read here from the president, the new elected 
president of the NDP: 
 

If there was one place we were weak it was in policies 
for rural Saskatchewan. 
 

With that question, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I would just simply say this. Rural people 
want to see dentists and doctors in rural Saskatchewan, not all 
consolidated in the major cities. I know rural Saskatchewan as 
well as the member opposite. Rural people want to see the 
infrastructure go across rural Saskatchewan. That’s why they 
like natural gas; that’s why they like individual line service; 
that’s why they like the new educational program and distance 
education. Mr. Speaker, we’ve done more for rural 
Saskatchewan than that government or those people did for the 
last 50 years — not only in Saskatchewan, but in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — This month alone, Saskatchewan farmers 
will get $675 million in cash in their pockets. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I again address the Premier with 
this question: I spend an awful lot of time in rural 
Saskatchewan, where a person in agriculture should spend his 
time. You couldn’t convince a doctor in this province to move 
into rural Saskatchewan; what makes you think you’re going to 
convince dentists to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I want to ask you about a letter which comes 
from the principal of the Rockglen School, and states clearly the 
kind of reaction that I have heard in rural Saskatchewan relating 
to the dental plan cuts, and he writes: 
 

The changes to the plan will cause further disparity 
between urban and rural residents. To take their child 
to a dentist, for most urban residents, is at most a 
minor inconvenience to the regular daily routine. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. I will allow the 
member to make a brief quote from the letter, but it is a 
supplementary, so I don’t think he should read the whole letter. 
Please make your point and put your question. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I have one 
sentence left if I am permitted, in my quote. 
 

For rural residents, it is a major disturbance which 
involves the loss of a day’s work, a day’s pay, and 
additional expenses involved travelling to the city. 
 

Does the Premier deny that rural Saskatchewan is the hardest 
hit area, by the decision to privatize the children’s dental plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the NPD in Saskatchewan, 
when they were in government in Saskatchewan, were not 
successful in providing dentists and doctors to rural 
Saskatchewan. They’re not successful in Manitoba. I don’t 
know any place in the world, in fact, where they’re successful at 
doing that. 
 
I will say to the hon. member, if you want to see some dentists 
and doctors in rural Saskatchewan, you just watch this 
administration. There will be dentists and doctors in rural 
Saskatchewan, and you can count on it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Reduction in Chiropractic Services 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, among the thousands who 
marched on Saturday, were those concerned about your plans to 
reduce coverage for certain kinds of medical care, such as 
chiropractic service. I have here a copy of a letter, the original 
addressed to yourself, of  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

584 
 

which I got a copy. Since the Premier seems to have a difficulty 
concentrating these days, let me repeat for your benefit a couple 
of the key sentences. It’s from a lady in Kamsack: 
 

I am a patient who receives treatment twice a week. I 
suffer from severe headaches and lower back pain. If I 
miss a single treatment, the pain becomes, at times, 
unbearable. Belonging to a low-income family, it 
would be extremely difficult to afford treatments. 
Please reconsider your decision to cut chiropractic 
treatments. 
 

Mr. Premier, have you not received thousands of letters like 
this, and how do you respond to the Saskatchewan people who 
say they’re not going to be able to afford the way you’re 
building Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will let the Minister of 
Health respond in some detail. I will just say this. With respect 
to Saskatchewan people, senior citizens have more financial 
assistance than they’ve ever had in the history of Saskatchewan. 
The health care budget in this province is higher than it’s ever 
been, 63 per cent higher than when you were in government — 
63 per cent higher — and the highest ever in the history. When 
we’re dealing with specific projects and specific programs. I’ll 
ask ministers to respond to more detail. Minister of Health, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the question 
related to a letter that the member from Regina Centre received, 
I would ask the member from Regina Centre the following, and 
the public of Saskatchewan: have you seen any changes in 
chiropractic service in chiropractic service in Saskatchewan? — 
that question. Have you? Has anyone over there, with all of 
your inflamed rhetoric, seen any change in the chiropractic 
services in Saskatchewan? Answer that question if you ever 
can, to the public of Saskatchewan — to the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What we have said in our discussions with the chiropractors, 
Mr. Speaker, is the following. We have said this province is the 
only province in the Dominion of Canada that does not have a 
cap on the number of visits by people to chiropractors. 
 
We’ve said that that’s true, and we continue those discussions 
with the chiropractic profession, as we do continue discussions 
with the physiotherapy profession. Those discussions continue. 
There has not been a decision and there has not been a cut in 
either of those things, despite all of the rhetoric of the group 
opposite, despite all of the scare tactics of that group with the 
various people in this province, including some of the people 
involved in the demonstration referred to here earlier, Mr. 
Speaker. Those are the kinds of things that have been going on, 
and just in fairness to the public of Saskatchewan I think it’s 
extremely important that that be put in perspective. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The lady from Kamsack hasn’t seen 

anything. She has heard you announce that chiropractic visits 
will be limited to 10, and that’s the source of her concern. Is the 
lady from Kamsack not to believe anything that this 
government says? Is that the correct approach? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No one in this province has heard me 
announce that the chiropractic visits would be limited to 10. No 
one has heard me say that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary. Is the right figure 12? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No one in this province has heard me 
say that the chiropractic visits would be limited to any number 
— would be limited to any number. What I have said is: we are 
looking at a cap on the chiropractic services. We will look at 
that, and we will continue to discuss it with the chiropractic 
profession as is going on at the present time. And I might add to 
that as well, the physiotherapist profession has also entered into 
discussions with us, and those are ongoing. 
 
So for the . . . What I just want to reiterate again, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s extremely important for the public of Saskatchewan, 
many of whom will write letters to the members opposite, to 
other members of this House . . . Many of my colleagues have 
received similar letters. We will all receive those letters, and all 
I say to the people of Saskatchewan is the following: when 
there is a decision and when the negotiations with those two 
professions are complete, there will be announcements. And I 
would suggest to all hon. members on both sides of this House, 
in fairness to the public out there who receive these services, 
don’t inflame your rhetoric too hot. 
 

Opinions of Clergy on Government Policy 
 
Mr. Calvert: — My question is to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. I 
was happy to be among the group of 7,000 admirers of the 
Premier who were here on Saturday. And frankly, Mr. Speaker, 
I haven’t found so many clergy and church leaders in one place 
since the last clergy bonspiel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clergy and church leaders across the province 
have been eloquent in expressing their concern about this 
government. I can illustrate that with a quote from a letter from 
the Very Reverend Duncan Wallace, Dean of Qu’Appelle and 
rector of St. Paul’s Anglican Cathedral, written to the Premier. 
He says in part in the letter: 
 

The drug plan, the dental care plan, and similar 
programs, have been some of the attractive things 
about life in this province. It has appeared to me for 
some time now, and more so with these latest 
announcements, that your government is in the 
process of purposely destroying much of the social 
fabric so carefully and innovatively built up over the 
years in Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Premier, my question is: do you propose to continue 
ignoring the advice of clergy and church leaders from across 
this province? 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

585 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 
I invited all the church groups from across the province to meet 
with me and my cabinet. And we discussed it with them all 
afternoon. And we had a great deal of support from church 
groups in that meeting, Mr. Speaker — a great deal of support. 
We didn’t have unanimous support, but we had a great deal of 
support. And I would say over 60 to 70 per cent of the church 
groups represented there knew exactly what we were doing and 
said, you have to be responsible in this province, make 
improvements to the dental program, improvements to the 
health care program. And, Mr. Speaker, we said that’s exactly 
what we’re going to do. We’re going to protect seniors, and 
we’re going to provide that program so that we are protected 
into the future and not just let it hang out there in jeopardy like 
we see with the NDP in Manitoba. 
 
Let me add, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member is worried about 
the social fabric of any jurisdiction in Canada, he could take as 
many people as he likes . . . And look at what’s going on in 
Manitoba where they have to send our patients into 
Saskatchewan so that we have to pay for their medicare, their 
social service programs. They have the lowest welfare 
programs, welfare assistance in western Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier seems so enamoured 
by Tommy Douglas and the Manitoba government, perhaps 
we’ll have a new member before long. 
 
Mr. Premier, you see to have some difficulty answering our 
questions. Will you answer the question asked by Rev. Wallace 
in his letter to you on June 12? Rev. Wallace asks: 
 

What will be the next step? Will your government 
next tamper with what is probably the best universal 
hospital and medical care system in North America? 
Will we soon hear of people refused admission to 
hospital because they have no money? 
 

That’s Rev. Wallace’s question. Would you please answer it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, in my response to the 
Reverend I will say very clearly and I’ll give him the facts. So 
as I said to the church groups when they met with us, I believe 
that the church groups want the truth. Right? That’s what they 
want. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order! Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, and the truth is: health care 
expenditures in ‘81-82 were $742 million. And the truth is, Mr. 
Speaker, this year they’re $1.2 billion — a 63 per cent increase 
over the NDP administration — which is the largest in Canada. 
That’s the truth! Now, I’ll say to the . . . 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order! Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — They don’t want to listen to the facts, Mr. 
Speaker. The truth will be in the letter that says that we have 
increased funding and we have the largest health care budget, 
not only in the history of Saskatchewan, but any place in 
Canada on a per capita basis, and we dwarf the expenditures 
that you will find in Manitoba where they have to send their 
cancer patients here. And I would send church leaders to 
Manitoba if they want to find out how you tax poor people, how 
you would tax them for food, and tax them on gasoline, and a 
payroll tax, and tax them on clothes. The poor in Manitoba 
under the NDP are taxed every day, Mr. Speaker, but not in the 
province of Saskatchewan where we have the best health care 
system any place in Canada. That’s what will be in my letter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spending under the Dental Plan 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier, 
and has to do with the arithmetic that the government is using in 
relation to the dental plan and the cuts that they’ve announced. 
 
A newspaper report on Saturday indicated that the 
government’s specific figure for the dental plan for children is 
$8.5 million in the coming year; that last year, the actual 
expenditure under the dental plan was 11.4 million. 
 
The newspaper quotes the Minister of Health as saying the cost 
per student is less for service supplied by dental therapists than 
by dentists. If that is the case, Mr. Premier, if that is the case, 
that the service is more cost efficient when provided by dental 
therapists which the Minister of Health has confirmed in this 
newspaper report, and last year the budget was 11.4, this year 
it’s reduced to 8.5 millions, how in the world can you propose 
to provide the same kind of care to the children who need it 
when you’re using a more expensive service and a less overall 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
should know that when you take out the teenagers, you’re going 
to save $3 million — $3 million. And when you’re going to 
provide the service to young people gong to professionals — 
the dentists themselves — that you’re gong to provide much 
better service. Now the combination of the two will save us, and 
I believe the minister will respond in some detail, over $5.5 
million. And it will be the best professional dental program that 
you’ll find any place in Canada. 
 
Now it’s true, parents will have to take their children to the 
dentist. They’ll have to do that. And for most parents I believe 
that that’s quite reasonable that they do that. And they will be 
provided with completely paid for, best dental program you’ll 
find any place in Canada. 
 
With respect to additional detail, I’d ask the Minister of Health 
to respond. 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

586 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before the orders 
of the day, I wish to rise on a point of order respecting one 
aspect of question period today which I would ask you to look 
into, sir, and then provide us a ruling. That has to do with 
unfortunate habit of the Premier giving an extensive reply to a 
question and then requesting a minister to yet even add 
extensively to the reply, in effect having two answers to one 
question. 
 
I would submit, sir that that is out of order. If it is in order, then 
I suppose what we ought to do in opposition is to ask our 
questions in seriatim and in parts by the same token. 
 
And therefore my submission to you, sir, on the point of order, 
is that the Premier has the choice of asking a minister to answer 
on his behalf or answering the question himself, but he does not 
have the choice of giving partial answer and then asking a 
minister to yet elucidate or elaborate upon that answer. That’s 
my point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I thank the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale for bringing this matter before the attention of the 
House, and I will defer my ruling until I have had an 
opportunity to study closely the transcript of today’s question 
period. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I stand in support of the 
amendment and to oppose the cruel and deceitful budget of 
betrayal proposed by the Minister of Finance last week. 
 
It was clearly a budget of betrayal, Mr. Speaker, and I say that 
because it not only betrayed the election promises made by the 
members opposite and their party — and let us just take a quick 
review of that record of betrayal of promises made and 
promises broken. 
 
We had an election promise by a government that inherited the 
best health care system in Canada and promised to make it 
number one, and on Wednesday of last week that was a promise 
broken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We had a promise made by a party sitting opposite to reduce 
income tax, and on Wednesday last again it was a promise 
broken, Mr. Speaker. There was a promise made by the 
members opposite prior to their election in 1982 to remove the 
gas tax, and on Wednesday of last week, again, another promise 
broken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We saw the evidence of that promise broken as we drove 

through our constituencies since midnight, and as I drove down 
Albert Street into Regina this morning, I noticed over and over 
again the signs of promise broken on that one, Mr. Speaker. As 
I drove down Albert Street, I saw a Shell station that said, 
gasoline, 46.9 cents. And the subtle message there, Mr. 
Speaker, is that you can’t trust a Tory. I drove a little further, 
and I came across a Petro Canada station that said, gasoline, 
46.9. You can’t trust a Tory. I came to another gas station, Mr. 
Speaker, an Esso station and it said, gasoline, 46.9, and you 
can’t trust a Tory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And I listened with interest, Mr. Speaker, to the 
member from Moosomin on Friday, who stood and began his 
debate in this legislature in response to the budget by saying — 
and I quote from the member from Moosomin. He said: 
 

I want to begin my speech today by acknowledging 
the fact that these are not easy times for the 
individuals and the families of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what the member from Moosomin was saying, 
these are tough times, and as people across Saskatchewan are 
saying over and over again, Tory times are tough times, and 
that’s why we’ve got tough times today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — It was a budget of betrayal; not just betrayal of 
campaign promises, but a betrayal of the fabric and the culture 
of Saskatchewan people. We have in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, a culture that is unique in Canada. We have in 
Saskatchewan a people who believe and subscribe and live 
according to the principles of caring and sharing. We have in 
Saskatchewan a people who believe in neighbour helping 
neighbour. This budget was a betrayal of the very culture, of the 
very core, of the heart and the spirit of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Is it any doubt that young people are leaving Saskatchewan 
today in hordes. Is it any doubt that people in Saskatchewan 
today are becoming angry — over 7,000 marching on the 
Legislative Assembly building on Saturday because of their 
anger with the fundamental dismantling of health care and 
social services and education in the province. 
 
Let me give you just an example, Mr. Speaker of what I believe 
to have been a well-established trend that was exemplified by 
the Minister of Finance some months ago. When the members 
of the media said to the Minister of Finance, they said: My 
goodness gracious, you’ve discovered this new financial 
problem. Doom and gloom has hit Saskatchewan. Didn’t you 
know that we had a financial mess before and during the 
election. And what did the Minister of Finance say in response, 
Mr. Speaker? What he said in response was: What do you 
expect? We’re politicians. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, if just for a moment the Minister 
of Finance had a moment of honesty running through his veins, 
he would have said: What do you  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

587 
 

expect? We’re Tory politicians. That’s what he would have said 
if he was being honest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I detest, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
constituents of my riding, the sadistic way in which the Minister 
of Finance has marched out the cuts over the last couple of 
months, and the devastation and the pain and the anger that 
people in my constituency and across the province have felt as 
we had government by ambush. We all recognized the 
government by ambush that we saw, Mr. Speaker, as the 
Minister of Finance would poke his head out from behind 
closed cabinet doors. He’d stick his head out in to the hallway 
and gather the media people and tell them who he was 
hammering today. And after having said that, he’s sneak back 
in behind closed cabinet doors. Government by ambush. And 
the despair that people felt as they . . . there was literally a rush 
of despair in our constituency offices. 
 
I heard people coming in expressing their concern and their fear 
as we heard the announcements about the increase in nursing 
homes rates of $73 a month; as we heard about the home care 
rates being increased by 66 per cent for seniors who wanted to 
live out their time, in their failing years, living in their own 
home without having to move to a nursing home; the rush of 
despair as the transition houses for battered women and children 
to provide protection were cut. 
 
And then we saw the government backtracking, with a bit of a 
public outrage. We saw in Moose Jaw the Wild Animal Park, 
which is the source of visits for families — 165,000 people a 
year, Mr. Speaker, come to the Wild Animal Park in Moose 
Jaw. We see this government threatening to — literally, literally 
threatening to — get rid of the animals and turn it into a picnic 
park. We saw in Moose Jaw the St. Anthony’s Home, a nursing 
home, in which there were promises made with great 
enthusiasm, with all kinds of hyperbole for two consecutive 
years — key campaign planks of the two Tory candidates in the 
last election — that the St. Anthony’s Home would be built. It 
would be built because the local people had raised the money 
— over $1.1 million raised in the city of Moose Jaw and 
surrounding areas — needing to be matched by 1.3 million 
government dollars, and we saw that promise yanked away, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We saw the Saskatchewan Technical Institute, after having lost 
33 instructors through early retirement have 32 laid off 
callously, and six more at Coteau Range Community College. 
 
We felt the frustration the people had with the delay of the call 
of the legislature, and their fear around the announcements, 
contrary to, I believe, the messages that the Minister of Health 
believes he may have been sending about chiropractic care and 
prescription care and dental care. Four hundred jobs lost at the 
supposed saving of $500,000 - a half a million dollars. 
 
And now we’ve seen the introduction of a flat tax in this term of 
office, and that being extended again in this budget. We’ve seen 
the sales tax and the gas tax. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the 
gas tax, with a system that is built  

to accommodate these seats, this is a plan that is tailor-made for 
people of the Tory way of thinking, who can manipulate the 
sales receipts and bring about a greater amount of destruction of 
the solidness of our resources in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that one of the members wishes to 
introduce some students, and I’ll stop for a moment to allow for 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, with leave — I hate to 
interrupt this eloquent delivery on the budget debate — but I 
would like to introduce some students, with leave. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the entire Assembly, 
several young people from the constituency of Regina South 
that are sitting in the west gallery. And they are grade 4 and 5 
students from W.C. How School. 
 
I watched the school being built a long time ago as my children 
were growing up — they didn’t attend W.C. How, but rather 
Deshaye, but a lot of their little friends went to W.C. How. I 
know a lot of the parents in the area. And they are accompanied 
by their teacher, Ms. Jill Ready, who is an annual visitor at the 
legislature with her students. And also with them are their 
chaperons, Pat Hartner, Barb Layton, and Randi Kennedy. I 
would ask all members to welcome them to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, members from this side of the 
House join with the members opposite as well in welcoming the 
students here, and we hope that their stay will be an enjoyable 
and educational one. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, it has been a long 
and agonizing process for the people of Saskatchewan, as the 
Minister of Finance well in advance of his budget trotted out the 
cuts and the hammering of Saskatchewan people And I note 
with interest, and I note with sadness, Mr. Speaker, that as a 
result of the economic management of the members opposite 
and the Progressive Conservative government here in 
Saskatchewan, that we now officially, once again, become a 
“have not” province. 
 
And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that all of this has happened, not 
because of circumstances that are purported to be  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

588 
 

beyond our control. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this plan of 
destruction and deceit has occurred by plan. It has occurred 
according to the plan of the members opposite in an attempt to 
fundamentally dismantle Saskatchewan society and to change 
Saskatchewan society from being a caring and sharing people, 
people who say people come first, to people who are forced to 
consider that possibly profits have become before people. I 
think, Mr. Speaker, that that is the plan that we’re merely seeing 
the symbols and the symptoms of now. 
 
And I ask: if the members opposite were to ask themselves, 
how do you go about changing Saskatchewan people from a 
caring and sharing society, where neighbour helps neighbour 
with joy — how do you change that people? What you do is this 
— and this is the answer — you create such a financial mess in 
this province that no longer can a fiscally prudent people, like 
the people of Saskatchewan, like the responsible people of 
Saskatchewan, can no longer feel comfortable saying that 
people have to come first, and somehow you try to create a 
readiness for them to accept the argument that we have no 
choice. And that’s the plan, Mr. Speaker, that’s been carried out 
with far greater astuteness than many in this province are 
willing to subscribe to the members opposite. 
 
And I ask the members opposite: do you ask us to believe, do 
you ask the people of Saskatchewan to believe, that you are so 
incompetent . . . you are so incompetent that you could take a 
$139 million surplus and turn it into a $3.4 billion deficit in less 
than six years. Do you ask us to really believe that you are that 
incompetent? 
 
(1445) 
 
Now I believe you’ve created a mess; no doubt about that. But I 
do not believe, Mr. Speaker . . . I say to the members opposite, I 
do not believe that you are as incompetent as you look. I do not 
believe you are as incompetent as the people of Saskatchewan 
say you are. I do believe that you have lied and you have 
intentionally acted with deceit to create a crisis. To create a 
crisis intentionally in the hopes that Saskatchewan people will 
put profits before people, and that’s what’s been done. 
 
Let’s just simply look at the track record of budget predictions, 
Mr. Speaker. And what do we find after inheriting $139 million 
surplus? In the first year that this government opposite had to 
manage the economy and the budget of Saskatchewan, they 
forecast a $220 million deficit. And at the end they say, 
whoops! We missed it by seven million; it was a little higher 
than we thought. 
 
In their second year they said we’re going to have a $317 
million deficit; somehow we’re getting better control and at the 
end they say, whoops! We missed this one by 14 million. In the 
third year, Mr. Speaker, they said, we’re going to tighten our 
belts, and we’re all going to pull together, and we’re only going 
to have a $267 million deficit, and at the end of the year they 
said, whoops! Missed this one by 112 million. The fourth year 
they said, we’ve been seasoned in government, and we know 
the operations of government now, and in this fourth year we’re 
going to have a $291 million deficit. And in the end what did 
they say? They said, whoops! Missed it by $293  

million. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it came to the year before the election, and 
we were assured that they had control of the finances of the 
province of Saskatchewan. They say, now we’re only going to 
have a $389 million deficit. And what did they say at the end of 
that one that we heard last week, Mr. Speaker? The Minister of 
Finance stood up and he said, whoops! We missed it by $846 
million. 
 
And then what did he tell us? He told us that in the interest of 
fiscal restraint, because this government has finally gained 
control of the finances of this province, we’re only going to 
have the record predicted deficit since this government has 
come into office, and they’re telling us this year we’re only 
going to have a $577 million deficit, Mr. Speaker. Can you 
believe what they say, when you see what they do? And why 
are people in Saskatchewan saying, you can’t trust a Tory? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — The members of government know, Mr. 
Speaker. They know that Saskatchewan people want good 
government. They want good government that provides high 
quality health care that everyone can have access to, and that 
you pay for according to your ability to pay, not based on how 
sick you are. 
 
They know that Saskatchewan people want access to quality 
education where more than one out of every four students who 
applies to get into post-secondary education has a chance to get 
an education for their future. 
 
They know that Saskatchewan people believe in a system of 
social services which ensure a right to security and dignity. But 
these concepts, these concepts, Mr. Speaker, are foreign to a 
government that is drunk with lust for power at any price and 
obsessed with the dynamics of an outdated notion of unfettered 
free enterprise. They know that Saskatchewan people will not 
accept that concept on their own. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — What did they do? They made some choices . . . 
they made some choices. That’s what public policy is all about. 
They made some choices. And what did they choose, Mr. 
Speaker? They chose over the past five years, to give more than 
$1.5 billion, royalty holidays, to oil companies. 
 
They’ve made other choices. They chose to give patronage jobs 
to defeated cabinet ministers and PC party presidents — they 
chose to do that. What else did they choose? They chose to give 
millions of dollars to Peter Pocklington, that free enterpriser 
from Alberta who sought to be the leader of the federal 
Progressive Conservative Party. They chose to give away a 
$250 million pulp plan to Weyerhaeuser. 
 
They made more choices for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. They chose to give low interest loans to farmers across 
Saskatchewan, whether they needed it or not. They chose to 
give half-prices jacuzzis and hot tubs  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

589 
 

and carpets to people in Saskatchewan without requiring that 
they create a single hour of work. 
 
They chose . . . they chose more. They chose to hire fat political 
staffs for the Premier and the record number of cabinet 
ministers. They chose to send their cabinet ministers around the 
world. And I say, Mr. Speaker, because of their choices they are 
now saying, the government has made its bed, but the people of 
Saskatchewan have to lay in it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And they’ve made those choices, Mr. Speaker, 
simply to try and force, to try and force a caring and sharing 
Saskatchewan people to accept a demented Tory view of the 
world, a view of the province that is causing people across the 
entire, beautiful province of Saskatchewan to need health care 
more and more, because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, the 
government opposite is making them feel sick. 
 
And I say, I say that the people of Saskatchewan will not buy it. 
The people of Saskatchewan care too much to buy it. And I say, 
as we saw on Saturday with over 7,000 people marching on this 
building, that the people of Saskatchewan are madder than hell, 
and they’re not going to take it any more. And that is why 
literally thousands upon thousands of Saskatchewan people are 
saying to the Premier of this province: you don’t have a 
mandate; you don’t have a mandate to dismantle this province; 
you don’t have a mandate to take it apart. And if you are going 
to do the responsible thing you will show the guts to call for 
that mandate by dissolving the legislature and calling for an 
election, so the people can decide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well the deceit goes further, Mr. Speaker. It 
goes into the Department of Social Services, and let me move 
my comments to that for just a moment, if I may. 
 
You will be aware, Mr. Speaker, as will others, that over the 
past months as a result . . . partly as a result of the government 
having said in the Speech from the Throne that it intends to 
review the delivery of social services, so too the members on 
this side of the House said that the delivery of social services 
needs to be reviewed, and we felt that the people of 
Saskatchewan should have some say. And so we formed a task 
force, Mr. Speaker, and toured the province and listened to the 
real people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what did they tell us, Mr. Speaker? They told us several 
things. First, they said that as people come increasingly under 
stress, so too does the Department of Social Services. And let 
me give you just a small example of that, a small example that 
affects tens of thousands of people in this province. In this 
beautiful province, with all the resources that we have, there are 
62,000 people living totally dependent on social assistance as a 
form of making ends meet, Mr. Speaker. And out of those 
62,000, 29,000 of them are 19 years old or younger — they’re 
young people. 

We may say, well what about the children? We found, Mr. 
Speaker, that in Saskatchewan today, 14 years or younger, there 
are 23,000 young people — 23,000 children — living in the 
province of Saskatchewan in families dependent upon social 
assistance. And perhaps saddest of all, Mr. Speaker, perhaps 
saddest of all is the little tykes, the pre-schoolers, the little 
guffers. Did you know, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan 
today there are 10,000 little children, four years old or younger, 
who are living in families totally dependent upon social 
assistance? Ten thousand little tykes living in poverty, without a 
lot of optimism or hope for the future. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, people told us that as they come 
under increasing stress, so too does the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
They told us as well that in tough times — and goodness 
gracious, the first line out of the mouth of the member from 
Moosomin was that these are tough times — we’ve heard it 
over and over again, that in tough times the Department of 
Social Services should be expanding, not contracting. And he 
told us as well that there is a dangerous shortage of social 
workers in Saskatchewan, trained professionals, competent and 
sensitive to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people in need. 
 
When I turned to the budget estimates, Mr. Speaker, and I 
turned to the Department of Social Services, what did I find? I 
found that for the planned — for the year to come as compared 
to last year, there will be 73 fewer staff in the Department of 
Social Services. And I found, when I started comparing apples 
to apples, Mr. Speaker — because the estimates don’t do that — 
I found that when we eliminate the part in the budget that is 
described as payments to the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, because it simply wasn’t there last 
year, so we want to compare apples to apples, I found that when 
we subtracted the amount that appears to be allocated for 
severance payments for people who have been let go, that totals 
just about $4 million. And then when I found, Mr. Speaker, 
when we compare all of that to the actual expenditures of the 
Department of Social Services last year, we don’t have an 
increase in the Social Services budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we compare the plans of this government to the actual 
expenditures of last year, when we compare apples to apples, 
Mr. Speaker, what do we find? We find that there is allocated 
for Social Services this year a grand total of $16.5 million less, 
and a drop, a drop of 4.4 per cent allocated for expenditures in 
Social Services. 
 
And I looked at a couple of specifics, Mr. Speaker, that affect 
those who are most poor and most vulnerable in our society. 
And I looked at the family income plan. Members of this House 
will know that in 1974 there was introduced in this province a 
plan to give some support and security to low income families, 
in particular the working poor. 
 
Did you know, Mr. Speaker, that last year, in 1986, there were 
38,000 eligible to receive financial help, families with children, 
from this plan that provides, on a sliding scale, up to $100 a 
month for each of the first three children, and up to $90 a month 
for each child after that? 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

590 
 

Very significant amounts, Mr. Speaker, for families with 
children. Did you know that in 1986 there were 38,000 families 
eligible to receive help through the family income plan? Eight 
thousand applied. And of those 8,000, 4,000 are receiving social 
assistance and had it deducted, dollar for dollar, from their 
assistance. 
 
I look at that, Mr. Speaker, and I say my goodness, what a 
communication problem the Government of Saskatchewan has 
with its people. We have an excellent program that’s been in 
place for 13 years, that provides support for low income 
families, and we can tell them about it without it costing us a 
penny. Because you see, Mr. Speaker, every year the 
Government of Saskatchewan sends a health card to every 
family in this province, and we can simply include in that some 
information about the family income plan and tell low income 
families about some security that’s there for them., and all they 
have to do is ask. 
 
And so what do we find in the budget plan for the family 
income plan, Mr. Speaker? At a time in which Saskatchewan 
people are hurting like many of them have never hurt before, we 
find that the plan is that the Government of Saskatchewan will 
reduce the amount budgeted for family income plan by 
$444,000 — reduced. 
 
I look at the social assistance, Mr. Speaker. The social 
assistance plan, which is there to provide security for the 
poorest of the poor, for the least fortunate, and for the most 
vulnerable in Saskatchewan today. And what do we find there, 
Mr. Speaker? What do we find there in the Saskatchewan 
income plan, in spite of the fact that many of the poorest of the 
poor have had to bear the brunt of so-called economic 
jurisprudence or fiscal prudence. The poorest of the poor on 
social assistance, Mr. Speaker, in their allotments for rent and 
food and clothing, have not had an increase since 1983. The 
poorest of the poor, Mr. Speaker, those receiving assistance, 
have not had an increase in their household allowances since 
1977. 
 
So what does the plan . . . What is the plan? Is the plan . . . we 
hear this word welfare reform used; I say abused. For those 
people who are on social assistance and not able to live without 
it, is the plan to improve their lot in life, Mr. Speaker? Well, 
let’s look at the facts, because we find that when we compare 
the budgeted amount for social assistance for the poorest of the 
poor in Saskatchewan in the next year, as compared to the 
amount actually spent, as compared to the amount of dollars 
actually spent last year, Mr. Speaker, we find that the budget 
tells us that we’re gong to spend $13.3 million less — $13.3 
million less budgeted to provide for the poorest of the poor in 
our province today. 
 
(1500) 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, the government has to be held 
accountable for making choices, and I’ve outlined in number 
that they’ve made. I say that there are choices that can be made. 
We do not have to make the choices that they are offering to the 
people of Saskatchewan today. They’re saying that you can’t 
afford to provide quality health care. You can’t afford to 
provide quality education. That you can’t afford to provide 
quality social  

services to the people of Saskatchewan, and I say, Mr. Speaker, 
that that’s bunk. Because they can make choices. They can 
choose to implement policies which guarantee a fair return from 
the natural resources of this province, Mr. Speaker. They can 
choose to do that. They choose to cancel them and they can 
choose to put them back. 
 
They can choose to act with faith in the future of this province 
and the people of Saskatchewan with a long-term recovery plan, 
not this knee-jerk kind of performance that we’ve seen from the 
Minister of Finance last week. They can choose to maintain 
Saskatchewan control over our natural resources and 
agriculture, and stop the move to out-of-province control of 
agriculture and natural resources in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — They can choose, Mr. Speaker, to cut the 
political hacks or staff; they can choose to cut them in half, Mr. 
Speaker, to reduce them to the level of political aides that 
existed prior to their taking administration. 
 
They can choose to fire their patronage appointments and send 
their former PC party presidents out to look for an honest job. 
They can choose. They can choose to create employment, Mr. 
Speaker, and I have a suggestion for a mere half a million 
dollars. They can create over 400 jobs by returning the 
children’s dental program to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — They can choose to get to work making work, 
Mr. Speaker, by building nursing homes and hospitals and 
public housing and repairing highways, with a commitment to 
get Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan people working again. 
 
They can choose to press the federal government, Mr. Speaker, 
to honour its commitments for equalization payments in health 
and education. They can choose, Mr. Speaker, to press the 
federal government to carry out real tax reform and cover the 
loopholes that are causing us to lose between 5 and $600 
million a year through the loopholes in the federal tax 
legislation. And they can choose, finally, Mr. Speaker, they can 
choose to put back health and education and social services the 
way they found them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And if it doesn’t want to make these choices, 
Mr. Speaker, if the government doesn’t want to make these 
choices, then can it do one honourable thing? Can it make one 
honourable choice? Can it choose to dissolve the legislature, to 
go to the people of Saskatchewan and ask for a mandate to 
dismantle and wreck the province the way they’re proposing in 
the budget we have today? That’s the final choice, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s the one that the people of Saskatchewan are calling 
for. 
 
And so for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I stand in support of the 
amendment. I stand in support of this amendment  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

591 
 

of non-confidence, because I believe that it is appropriate for 
this Assembly to condemn and reject the budget as one which 
betrays medicare; as one which betrays the people of rural 
Saskatchewan; as the budget that betrays Saskatchewan’s young 
people; as the budget that betrays Saskatchewan’s senior 
citizens; as the budget that continues this government’s betrayal 
of Indian, Métis, and northern people; as a budget that betrays 
all the people of Saskatchewan because it misrepresents the size 
of the deficit and fails to acknowledge that this deficit has been 
caused by the government’s failure to collect corporate and 
resource revenues, and by patronage to the government’s 
friends. Because it’s a budget that betrays the working men and 
women of Saskatchewan, and because it betrays the 
government’s election promises. For those reasons, I will be 
supporting the amendment and opposing this cruel and deceitful 
budget of betrayal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure to join in the debate on the budget debate in this 
session of the legislature. I listened with interest to the former 
speaker, and I must say this: If, judging from the volume of his 
rhetoric, misguided as he may be, I do believe he believes in 
what he is saying. I feel sorry that the poor fellow isn’t on the 
right track and could not come up with some positive 
alternatives. 
 
I listened with great interest to the latter part of the speech, to 
the latter part of the speech where he was going to do all these 
things: to go out and build nursing homes, and to build 
highways, and to continue to spend in the public sector. And 
never once did I hear one alternative from whence he would 
diversify the economy to get in tune with the world we live in, 
to bring about the revenue, to generate the revenue to service 
the needs of the province. He is still in the old school in the old 
socialist mentality of the ‘50s and the ‘40s, to just take from the 
public purse without thinking ahead into the future as to how 
we would use the engines, the economic engines of this 
province, to build a new society, to build a new Saskatchewan, 
to build a Saskatchewan of the 21st century. 
 
And that, my friend, and Mr. Speaker, is the reason that the 
people of Saskatchewan elected the government of Grant 
Devine in October. Because they saw a vision, they saw 
direction, they saw change in building different from the old 
model of just government take-over and government 
expenditure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it’s for that reason that I 
want to congratulate my colleague and a long-time colleague 
and seat mate, the Minister of Finance of the province of 
Saskatchewan, for coming down with what I believe in making 
some of the most difficult decisions, some of the most difficult 
decisions that political people have had to face in the history of 
this province. And I want to say to you and all members of this 
Assembly that my cabinet colleagues and I sat with the Minister 
of Finance and the Premier of this province, and we deliberated 
hours and hours as to how we could best structure a budget to 
meet the needs of our province at this time and  

in the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I say with all sincerity, that was no easy task. 
There were no easy solutions. I refer you, Mr. Speaker, to the 
budget address and to page 2 and 3. And I always say a picture 
says more than a thousand words. And I think if one looked at 
that part of the budget address you see very vividly the situation 
that is facing this province today, where if we look at the one 
graph at the bottom it says total “Saskatchewan Resource 
Revenues.” And you see a tremendous drop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those resource revenues have dropped in price 
globally — not just here in Saskatchewan, not just in Canada, 
but in many cases, around the world except in areas where there 
has been deliberate attempts in the agriculture sector to 
subsidize. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that economies around the world are facing 
a different situation than they did 10 years ago. This is a much 
different world economically than the world that was here when 
I first entered politics. And the solutions that were there in those 
days will not provide the solutions to the problems that are 
facing us today. And I say it is in this vein that my colleagues 
had to make some choices, and I want to say again, choices that 
were difficult. 
 
The simplistic way is to say we won’t change anything. We 
won’t make some hard an difficult choices. We will leave it as 
it is and we will add on extra taxes. That was the solution that 
was made in Manitoba, the greatest tax increase of any 
government in the country of Canada. They did not, the NDP in 
Manitoba, have the courage to address some of the problems of 
expenditure in government in that province. The growth in their 
civil service of their last few years has been in the 
neighbourhood of 40-some per cent; growth in administrative 
costs, about 195 per cent. But what did they do? Did they 
decide to limit or to scale down any programs? No. Their 
decision, the NDP simplistic solution, is to just add on more 
taxes. And as you can see, the Manitoba people are becoming 
near the highest taxed people in the Dominion of Canada. 
 
And the speaker before me spoke about social welfare rates. If 
he would check and do a little homework, he will see that the 
people in Manitoba are far worse off at the lower end of the 
scale on social welfare than they are in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, it was with a great deal of thought and a 
great deal of deliberation that we had to make some choices. 
Yes, we made some choices. We’ve made choices since we 
became government. I remember back in ’82 we made choices. 
We made choices to protect the interest rates that were causing 
people in this province to lose their homes. We made choices to 
use the public purse to shore up agriculture and to come 
forward with programs so that people in Saskatchewan would 
not lose their farms. We made choices to support the senior 
citizens of this province. We made choices to bring in a flat tax. 
We made choices to bring in an educational development fund. 
We made choices to go on the most unprecedented building of 
special care homes that this province or this country has ever 
seen. Yes, we made  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

592 
 

those choices from ’82 to ’85. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We made those choices, Mr. Speaker, and 
I believe they were the right choices. And I think when the 
people spoke in October they said, right on the money. We will 
re-elect the Devine government because you do make choices 
and you make choices in the best interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No I don’t deny that there are people in 
this transitional phase that are having some confusion and some 
concern. And based on the rhetoric of the people opposite, I can 
understand why. I would like to refer back to Hansard of June 
17 when the critic for Finance stood on his feet in this House 
and said: 
 

Our health care programs with this budget are being 
ravaged, so that the people will once again, in this 
province, live in fear. They will live in fear of 
catastrophic health care costs if they happen to get 
sick. This budget begins to turn the clock back (over) 
25 (or 30) years . . . 
 

He says the people in this government “live in the past.” Mr. 
Speaker, I say, who is living in the past? Which side of this 
House is living in the past? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would like to beg leave of the 
House to introduce somebody. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Hon. members, we have with us a guest in the 
galleries today, and it’s just indicative of the keen interest that 
Saskatchewan people have in politics. We know that in 
Saskatchewan we have people of all ages who take a very, very 
keen and active interest in the politics, and the individual I wish 
to introduce to you today epitomizes one of those. 
 
She’s from my constituency. Her name is Mrs. Powells — Mrs. 
Theodore Powells, and she’s 90 years young. She has come 
here today to watch the legislature, and I ask you all to greet her 
in the best way possible. Please welcome her. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think all on 
this side of the House join in wishing your constituent the best 
in the years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying previously, that one has to 
diversify and develop the economy of this province if we’re 
going to provide the money for the programs that we need. And 
I was pointing out about the misleading that is going on from 
the Finance critic on the other side of the House, saying that the 
health care plans of this province are being ravaged. I’ve heard 
speakers on the other side of the House indicate that we have 
taken away the dental plan or that there is no drug plan. This is 
absolutely inconceivable, misleading, and an attempt to mislead 
the people. 
 
Let me indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the drug plan 
changes that have taken place in this province are no different 
than what was taking place in Manitoba under the NDP. And 
I’ve been to Virden and I haven’t seen anybody falling dead on 
the streets in Virden because of lack of drugs. And I’ve studied 
the statistics, and I believe the people live as long in Manitoba 
as they do in Saskatchewan. But here is this opposition opposite 
us, trying to scare people, trying to intimidate the old, trying to 
intimidate the poor, that it’s going to cost X amounts of dollars. 
I looked at one of the speeches from the critic for finance and 
saying possibly $500 for drugs for people in this province of 
Saskatchewan. That is nothing but a deliberate attempt to try 
and mislead people. 
 
I predict, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when the people of 
Saskatchewan see how the drug plan will operate, which is no 
different than Manitoba, in fact an improvement over Manitoba, 
I want to tell them that I think in another month or two they will 
say: those were the right decisions; they were difficult to 
understand at first, but you were right on the money again, 
Devine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are 
the things that it takes courage to do. I know from which I 
speak because I spent four and a half years as the Minister of 
Health in this province. And I know, as my counterpart who is 
occupying the portfolio at this time can verify through everyone 
here, and the members opposite should know, that one of the 
highest escalating costs in government was the drug plan in the 
province of Saskatchewan. So we chose to change it. I make no 
apology. We chose to change it. And we debated and we 
deliberated and we looked at drug plans across the province. 
We changed it, and I can say today that we still have the best 
drug plan in the Dominion of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And, Mr. Speaker, there were other areas 
that we had to look at. We looked at the children’s dental plan. 
We looked at if there was a way that we could deliver that plan 
that would be more efficient, at the same time safeguarding the 
dental health of those people from five to 13 years of age. And 
yes, there is a change, and unfortunately there is some 
disallocation of people  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

593 
 

who were once employed in the drug plan. But there are 
contingency plans to try and have those people reallocated into 
dentists’ offices, to give them training to go back to qualify for 
the needs again of the later ‘80s and ‘90s. And those are 
changes that governments from time to time have to take. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Responsible government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Responsible government. And I say 
they’re taken, not easy, not flippantly, but with consideration 
and with a great deal of thought. Those were some of the 
changes we had to make. 
 
Now what is the alternative, I ask you? If you are running a 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the revenues due to your 
resources, which are on a global basis, on a global pattern, are 
down; if your oil revenues are down; if your wheat revenues are 
down; if potash and if uranium are down, what are your 
choices? Sure, you can choose as our neighbours to the east did 
and put on massive tax increases. We chose not to do that. We 
chose to look at cutting some of our expenditures because, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to me, in my way of looking at an economic 
picture, if it isn’t coming in on one hand, then you’ve got to 
tighten down how it’s going out on the other. 
 
And that is as simple as one could put it, and those are the 
choices that we were to make. But if you listen to the people 
across the House, Mr. Speaker, they say no, you shouldn’t have 
a deficit. The deficit is tremendous; the deficit is terrible. And 
then on the other hand they say: but don’t you dare cut 
programs, or don’t you raise the tax. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, any free-thinking, sensible person 
knows you cannot have it both ways, that you have to make 
some choices, and that you have to make choices that in some 
cases in the transition may be difficult. I don’t deny that, but 
that you have to make choices, and that’s what you’re elected 
for, is to govern and to make those choices that are in the best 
line with the ideals and the hopes and the aspirations of the 
people of this province. 
 
And although there may be those who will demonstrate — and I 
see it’s growing every minute — it was 5,000 when I walked in 
here; the last speaker had it over 7,000; before we finish tonight 
I don’t know what it will be. But there will be those who will 
demonstrate, and in a free society they have every right to 
demonstrate. 
 
But let them have time to see that the significant changes are 
not what the prophets of doom on the other side of the House 
say it will be. To go out and try and scare people and go out and 
intimidate them and incite them into going out there and 
protesting about things that they thoroughly don’t understand, 
and we’ll see in some period of time that it is not near as bad as 
the prophets of doom across the House would lead them to 
believe. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I tell you Saskatchewan. An example of 
where these people are . . . I want to give an example of just the 
other day in question period. And if you’d like to just pay 
attention, I think you’ll understand what it is, even the member 
from Saskatoon. And that was to show just where the 
opposition are coming from. 

My colleague, the Minister of Education, was questioned in 
question period about some cut-backs and some lay-offs in the 
institutes, and he gave what I thought was a very good answer. 
He said that there were programs — and I remember one — he 
said that there’d only been one graduate get a job in that 
program over the last four years. It was some type of 
refrigeration engineering, or something of this nature. He said 
there was only one job. And he said, I believe that it is wrong to 
train young people for areas of work where the economy does 
not demand their skills. This is what he said. The member for 
Saskatoon University jumped to his feet, and his reply was: will 
you today reinstate these 149 positions? Not whether they meet 
the needs of this society today, not whether they build for the 
future, not whether they help us diversify the economy. But 
please, I feel comfortable with the status quo; I want to look 
backwards; that’s where I felt safe; please take me back to the 
‘50s. That’s what he was saying — please take me back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Because with my socialist mentality, I’m 
afraid to face the future. I’m afraid to move into the world, the 
world that the Margaret Thatchers and the people who are 
leading are going to be shaping the destiny of this next century. 
 
The old type of system where the government was in the 
pockets of everybody, where the government was 
all-encompassing, where it was from womb to tomb, that safety 
network is no longer affordable. We are changing in our 
society. We are moving ahead. And you will see more activity 
and more action by individuals, the private sector. I know it’s 
an awful word to them, but more of that is going to come about 
not only in Saskatchewan, not only in Canada, but across the 
free world. Because that’s what it’s all about. That’s where 
we’re living, and that’s what we’ve got to be equipped to deal 
with. And the old solutions, the old solutions of government 
doing it all are not adequate to meet the demands of today. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what are people saying to 
government? 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to ask for 
leave to introduce some students, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to introduce to you, and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, grades 4 and 5 from two schools in Yorkton, St. 
Alphonsus and St. Paul. They number 48 students, and they’re 
accompanied today by their teacher Violet Schneider and 
chaperon Irene Fahlman. I want to wish you well on your tour 
of the building and the Assembly this afternoon, and other 
facilities in Regina. We hope you find the Assembly interesting 
and educational. And I wish you all a very, very happy summer 
holiday. I would ask all members to please welcome these 
guests. 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

594 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems to me that 
when people in this day and age vote for a government, they 
vote for two or three major things. First of all, they vote for a 
vision. “And I think I’ve outlined to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
how we on this side of the House feel that the present 
government has a vision, a vision that will diversify the 
economy of this province. 
 
And I cite, for example when we’re often criticized. I heard the 
speaker before me indicate he was very concerned about Mr. 
Peter Pocklington coming to the province of Saskatchewan. I 
believe that producing bacon here in the province and selling it 
around the country is exactly what we should be doing. I don’t 
se any problem with that. And I think most farmers in 
Saskatchewan agree with that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And we go the Vanguard plant in North 
Battleford. We’ve got the member from there. I’d like to hear 
him stand up on his feet and say it’s a bad thing to come to 
North Battleford. I’m sure your colleagues and your supporters, 
be they few, would say it is a good thing and they support the 
Vanguard plant to be in there because they believe in 
diversification. And to be able to bring plants from British 
Columbia to Saskatchewan to manufacture mobile homes is 
exactly the thing that we should be doing. 
 
We have these sorts of things. We’re producing intravenous 
solutions right here in Saskatchewan, right here in 
Saskatchewan, for the Saskatchewan market and for other areas. 
 
I hear a lot of condemnation of the Weyerhaeuser deal. Well let 
me say, he who shouts too soon often shouts wrong. And I 
believe you will see that in the years to come, when we have a 
paper plant, I will challenge the members from Prince Albert 
when that paper plant is up and going and that pulp mill is 
running, to stand up and say, whoa! — Weyerhaeuser was a 
wrong thing; it was bad mistake. I want to see you stand in your 
seat in this House and say that in those days. 
 
Let me tell you that it is that diversification, it is that building, it 
is that vision that is going to drive this province into the century 
ahead to be a leader in Canada. And it is not the old cocoon 
syndrome of leave me alone; leave it as it was; take me back to 
where I came from because I am safe and secure, even if I’m 
not going anywhere. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The speaker from Moose Jaw who spoke 
just before me, he ended up, he ended up his speech . . . And as 
I say, I believe you believe what you’re saying, as misguided as 
you are, but you believe in it, and there’s some merit in that. 
But he says, please take it back to the way it was in ’82. Well I 
will challenge you to go across Saskatchewan, and you go 
across Saskatchewan and say, yes, we’ll go back to the way it 
was in ’82 with the moratorium on nursing home construction, 
and you’ll be run out of half of the towns in this province, my 
friend. That’s what’ll happen. Take it back to ’82, to the days of 
the moratorium. That’s exactly what they will say. 
 
Now we’ll look further at diversification. I’m going to switch to 
one of the areas, Mr. Speaker, that I am proud to have 
responsibility for in this government. I am proud to have 
responsibility for that because I believe it is one of the 
economic engines that we can really get moving in this 
province— one that was neglected by our former colleagues, 
but something that is a priority with the Devine government and 
something that I believe can cause the cash registers of this 
province to ring and to help the economy and turn it around and 
bring us into this era, the 1890s, in the next century. And that is 
the topic of tourism. 
 
I feel strongly that this province of Saskatchewan has a great 
potential in tourism. We have some of the nicest and friendliest 
people in this country. We have an ethnic origin that many do 
not have. We got the beauties of the North. I see the member 
from the North chuckling. I want him to stand up and indicate 
in this House that he does not think that there’s a great amount 
of potential in tourism in northern Saskatchewan. It could be, 
my friend, one of the things that helps bring about the whole 
economic recovery of that part of the country. And when I bring 
in some initiatives, I expect you to stand in support of those 
federal initiatives, and not use the rhetoric of some of your 
colleagues. Because I believe you’re the kind of man, if it’s 
right, you can stand up and say it’s right. And I will expect that 
of you. 
 
But I can believe that with our tourism and with our hospitality 
institute that we’re going to start . . . because as I said, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have some of the friendliest and kindest 
people in Saskatchewan. But we need to market that. We have 
to become a little more aggressive. And if I were to go to 
anyone’s home in this place, no matter which side of the House, 
or if they were to come to my place, we would be treated to the 
best. That’s what Saskatchewan is made of. 
 
I say then, let’s market this spirit of Saskatchewan, so when our 
neighbours come in from the United States or from other parts 
of Canada or from offshore, that they get that true feeling of 
down-home Saskatchewan. Let’s market some of our legends 
and our stories. Let’s have those things that people come here 
and say, by gosh, it was a nice place to go; the people treated 
me fine. And they’ll go home and they’ll tell their friends and 
neighbours, and more people will come to this province. 
 
Those are the things that we should be doing to help  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

595 
 

diversify this economy — to help have people move in here, to 
visit us, to drive from location to location, to see many of the 
sights and many of the interesting things that we have to offer 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe strongly, and my members on this side of the House 
believe the same way, that we can market the tourism in this 
province so that people will be in Meadow Lake and they will 
be in Maple Creek and they will be in Kamsack and they will be 
in La Ronge, and they will be all around this province enjoying 
the wonderful gifts that we have and the hospitality that we can 
show to them. And we can do that without great expenditures of 
money. That can be done, and that is what we intend to do with 
building a hospitality institute in this province. 
 
Another area that I am responsible for is the whole area of small 
business. And if we think the large smoke-stacks and all those 
things are what build the economy of Saskatchewan — they 
help. But really the majority of jobs come from the small shops, 
those under 10 employees. That is where a great deal of our 
economy is generated. And there is an awful lot we can do 
there. 
 
If I sense anything across this province at this time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that there is a movement, not only here, but across 
North America, where young people are saying, hey, I want to 
try my hand at going into business. I want to start a program; I 
want to start a shop; I want to see if I can run a business, and 
that I can take part in the whole capitalist system, shall we say. 
 
And they’re coming in droves. And for that reason, we started a 
young entrepreneur’s program in Sedco two years ago. We’ve 
doubled that program. And we believe, and my colleague, the 
Minister of Economic Development and Trade, believes as 
strongly as I do, that we should encourage the development of 
young entrepreneurs and that entrepreneurial spirit in this 
province. 
 
(1530) 
 
And to that extent, we’re going to be developing an 
entrepreneurial institute which will show our people and our 
children in this province that there is a way that you can 
develop your talents and your abilities and add to the sum total 
of our society by going the route of the entrepreneur. And that’s 
what we’re going to do to develop those and to diversify this 
economy. And that, Mr. Speaker, is what I believe is the wave 
of the future. That’s what I think the people voted for in 
October, was that vision. 
 
You hear the name of Madsen Pirie kicked around a lot today. 
Madsen Pirie happens to be from the Adam Smith Institute. 
And he said this to the British people who have just gone 
through a very significant election. Madsen Pirie said as he 
spoke to the British people: 
 

We always vote for the future. We vote for the 
government that offers the programs, not the 
government that looks back. 
 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that can be said true of the 
Saskatchewan people. And I believe that’s what they did  

on October of last year, voted for the government that showed a 
path to the future. 
 
And I make no apologies to some of the adjustments that have 
to be made, in some of the programs that we have inherited will 
undergo change because after all, what is progress except 
change? And change sometimes is difficult to understand. And 
we all fear change and we all think it is maybe the worst. And 
then when you have people on the other side trying to frighten 
everyone and say that everything is going to hell in a hand 
basket, then change is frightening. 
 
But I believe that we will see the people of Saskatchewan 
accept the changes that have taken place because we still have 
the best programs, we still have the best health program across 
this country, bar none. We still spend more per capita than any 
other jurisdiction on health, but we have made some changes. 
 
When those changes are understood, and the impacts of those 
are understood and felt by the society. I believe, I believe 
strongly that the people of Saskatchewan will say, well, you 
made the changes, there was some confusion, and sure one’s 
going to have to pay a little bit more, one’s going to have to pay 
a little bit more, but we still have the best drug plan in Canada, 
we still have one of the few dental plans in Canada, and we 
have a government that is going to diversify and is going to lead 
and going to build on this economy, and that will not be by 
buying up more, more things that we already own. 
 
You will not see this government buying up potash mines or 
creating huge Crown corporations as was the mode of the ‘70s. 
I notice in Manitoba today that Manitoba, and as the Premier 
said in question period, Manitoba cannot afford to treat the 
cancer patients. They’re coming to Saskatchewan. But they’ve 
got $185 million to buy a gas company. That’s what Manitoba 
has, that’s their method of diversification, and that is the same 
old socialist philosophy that has hung around for some time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to you that I’m proud to be a 
part of this government. And I make no apologies that at this 
time we are undergoing some serious changes. And we will 
continue to make changes, but we will make changes that we 
believe in the ultimate outcome will be in the best interests of 
the Saskatchewan. That’s what my colleagues and I are in 
politics for. 
 
And we will not try and scare the people or misled the people. 
We will tell them the truth; we will bite the bullet; we will stand 
up and be counted, and we will move Saskatchewan forward so 
that in five years from today, or whenever the next election is 
called, the people of Saskatchewan will look back and say, it 
was maybe a rough time for a couple of months, or three 
months, but by golly you boys had that vision, that dedication, 
that determination to move this province ahead, as Grant 
Devine has since he became the leader of the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m proud to support the 
budget; I could not support the amendment, and I’m proud to be 
a member of the party that is undergoing some difficult times 
but has the vision and a plan for  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

596 
 

where we are going in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is my first opportunity 
to participate in the House since my return in 1986, and I want 
to take this opportunity to thank the constituents of Saskatoon 
South who re-elected me for the fourth time. And I want to say 
to those constituents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I will do my 
utmost to represent them the best to my ability. And I know, 
Mr. Speaker, with the introduction of this budget of this budget, 
that there will be a lot of people who will be looking for some 
assistance in the dental care, in the drugs, in the cut-backs in the 
hospitalization, and so on. And I want to assure them that at any 
time if they need my assistance, my constituency office will be 
available to them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in speaking to the budget debate I want to 
say to the people of Saskatchewan that indeed, as our critic of 
Finance has indicated, that last Wednesday probably was the 
blackest Wednesday that this province has ever experienced. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we find in this budget a government that is 
totally insensitive and totally uncaring to what happens to 
certain individuals in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to, before I get into the budget, 
I also want to say a few words about the decorum in this House. 
I had hoped, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after an absence of four years 
in this House, that the decorum would have improved. In 
talking to elementary students and high school students, one of 
the things that they really were embarrassed about was the 
behaviour of members in the House. 
 
I had determined last fall when I was re-elected to do my 
utmost to try and improve the decorum. I want to say to you, 
sir, in that regard I met with the Speaker last fall and indicated 
to him that I would give him my fullest co-operation in trying to 
improve the decorum. But I must admit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
am frustrated with the process. I am frustrated because the rules 
are not applied equally to all members of the House, and the 
House cannot function unless the Premier also abides by those 
rules. And if, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during question period the 
Premier is allowed to make his speeches in the House and not 
abide by the rules, this House will not function. It cannot 
function. And I ask for the Speaker to please make certain that 
rules are equally applied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to indicate that it is my impression that 
the public out there have become very cynical and bitter about 
politicians. And let me say that I think that they have some 
grounds for this bitterness. They have some grounds for this 
bitterness because politicians nowadays, it seems to me, do not 
know really what the truth is. They don’t know how to speak 
the truth, and when election time comes around we will say 
anything to get ourselves elected — just anything. 
 
And I find that really unacceptable. And I want to give you 
some examples, Mr. Speaker, on this. I’ll give you a good 
example of question period today. Question period today, the 
Premier got up and said that the Health budget, since 1982, had 
increased 66 per cent . . . 

An Hon. Member: — 63 per cent. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — All right. I stand corrected, 63 per cent. But he 
forgot to tell the people of Saskatchewan that in 1982, and I 
have the Estimates here, subvote 29 which says, grants and 
allowances for ambulance services — it was not in the 
Department of Health at that time, it was in Rural Affairs — $6 
million. He forgot to tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
subvote 20, grants and allowances for home care, $23 million, 
was not in Health, but in Social Services. He didn’t tell the 
people of Saskatchewan that Subvote 21, grants and allowances 
for special care homes, $190 million, was in the Department of 
Social Services, not in the Department of Health. 
 
I think that the Premier intentionally, intentionally, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, misled the people of Saskatchewan, like he has done 
since 1982. And I will give you examples of that, as to how he 
has gone around this province and misled the people of this 
province. And he’s done it in the budget, and he’s doing it 
every day in question period. 
 
I note, Mr. Speaker, also one other thing that I didn’t want to 
overlook. I note that the grant for MCIC (Medical Care 
Insurance Commission) has increased $100 million over the last 
five years. For those of you who don’t know what MCIC is for, 
they happen to pay the doctors of this province. They got an 
increase of $100 million over the last five years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I’m saying is when people say to me that 
they are bitter and cynical about politicians, I really don’t blame 
them because I think we have lost a lot of credibility over the 
last five years. And I think it’s about time that we change our 
attitudes and we speak truthfully as the facts bear out to the 
people of this province. And if that means that we have to bear 
some embarrassment, so be it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that I think they’ve become 
cynical because of the dishonesty and the public scandals that 
have happened in Canada over the last little while. If you look 
at the scandals, you can’t help but have some names come to 
your attention — names like Robert Coates, the former federal 
minister, Sinclair Stevens, Roch LaSalle, André Bissonnette, 
and today I hear there’s another minister, McKinnon, I believe, 
or McInnes. Again, I say, Mr. Speaker, that we have an 
obligation in public life, not only to appear to be truthful but to 
be truthful and honest in our doings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I say that people have become 
bitter because of the patronage that takes place in public life 
today. And again I cannot help but think of such names like 
Dutchak, Schoenhals, Hill, Embury, Dirks, Ball, Birkbeck — 
all of these people come to mind, all former Tory supporters, all 
former supporters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1982 the members opposite made a lot of 
promises. Most of those promises they have broken. 
 
They promised that they would do away with the gas tax. And 
I’m glad that the member for Arm River is here,  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

597 
 

because the member from Arm River has told many individuals 
that if the Tory government ever, ever introduced a gas tax, that 
he would leave the Tory Party immediately. I see the hon. 
member still seated in his seat on the other side. Mr. Speaker, 
what I’m saying is that if you make a promise, you have to at 
least attempt to carry it out. These people make promises and 
don’t carry them out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they said that they would eliminate the sales tax, 
the 5 per cent education and health tax. Instead of eliminating it, 
what have they done? They’ve increased it now to 7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they said that they would reduce the income tax. 
So what does the Minister of Finance do? He raises the income 
tax or the flat tax by one and one-half per cent. Is it any wonder, 
Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder that people are becoming 
frustrated and bitter about politicians? Is it any wonder? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier makes a lot of promises. And I was 
rather amazed this past winter when I attended the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention, and the Premier was talking about debt in other 
provinces. And I heard him talk about the Manitoba debt. And 
he said, and I remember him saying, you know the debt in 
Manitoba is either 6 billion, 8 billion or $10 billion, a difference 
of 4 billion. And he said it with a straight face. A $4 billion 
difference and it doesn’t make any difference to the Premier of 
this province? That’s the kind of truthfulness or untruthfulness, 
Mr. Speaker, that we’ve come to expect of the Premier of this 
province. Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, can we blame the 
people for being cynical about politicians? 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people in Saskatchewan in the last three or 
four months were extremely concerned about the reluctance of 
this government in bringing forth a budget. And the government 
was saying well, we were overhauling the government and we 
just simply weren’t able to put the budget together. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is simply not true. It is simply not true. 
 
(1545) 
 
Top civil servants tell me that the budget was ready by the end 
of February. All they would have had to do was to send it to the 
printers, have it printed, and we could have met much, much 
earlier. Then why did the government not present the budget? 
Well there were several reasons. 
 
One, people said, and I don’t know what truth there is to it, but 
that the Premier was having some trouble with some of his 
back-benchers, that they didn’t want to accept the budget as it 
was, and he had to make some changes. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, some people were saying that the 
Premier didn’t want to put the budget forward because he was 
afraid that in the months of April and May, when people are 
still watching TV, that opposition would get too much coverage 
on the budget that they had to present. So let’s present it in the 
summertime when people are gone on holidays, no one is 
watching TV. And  

I’m saying to the Premier, and I say to the members opposite, 
all right, you got away with it this time maybe, but I’ll tell you, 
you are abusing the democratic process that the people of 
Saskatchewan and in this country have become accustomed to, 
and they will hold you responsible for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people have told me: we have to have some 
changes made so that this cannot happen again. We must not 
allow another government to be able to bring in the same kinds 
of abuses. A budget should be brought forward, it should be 
debated in the legislature, and then it should be ratified. 
 
And the people have asked me: how can this government 
govern with warrants? and I explained to them that warrants are 
nothing new; we’ve done it before, but it was always ratified in 
the House. And it was. People come before the legislature, the 
Minister of Finance has run out of money, he asks for a warrant, 
and it’s ratified. 
 
But this government didn’t do that, and there is a fair amount of 
legal opinion that what they were doing was illegal. So the 
people have suggested to me that there should be something in 
legislation. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to tell the 
members here today that during, not this session, but certainly 
during the term, that I am bringing forth a private member’s 
Bill which will, in effect, say that government must bring forth 
a budget either by the end of the fiscal year or within two weeks 
of the fiscal year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I think that politicians 
of all stripes, in my opinion, have abused the right of timing of 
elections. I said in 1971 that I was going to work for legislation 
which, and the Minister of Health said, but very successfully we 
did it. Yes, that’s true. You did, very successfully. But I think 
we need legislation, Mr. Speaker, which again, the intent of it 
would be that elections must be held every four years, on a 
certain date, in a certain month. And I would certainly support 
that kind of legislation if it was brought forth by the 
government. But again, I would like to pursue that and see if a 
private member’s Bill could be brought forward in this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me now turn directly to some of the items in 
the budget. Last Wednesday I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Minister of Finance put the final nails in the coffins of many 
people in this province, and I don’t think that’s exaggerating it 
at all. 
 
As I listened to the address, my heart and my sympathy went 
out to the many citizens who were so callously and so unfairly 
treated by the cabinet opposite — people who had placed so 
much trust in them just a few months ago. I found it 
inconceivable that the Premier and his colleagues could produce 
a document that manipulated so many facts and that contained 
so many outright lies. 
 
But then, Mr. Speaker, the deceit by the Premier and the cabinet 
opposite didn’t begin with the presentation of this budget. The 
deceit began way back in 1982, and the cabinet has simply 
continued it all along. I would suggest,  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

598 
 

Mr. Speaker, that Sir Walter Scott had people like Premier 
Devine and the cabinet in mind when he wrote: “Oh what a 
tangled web we weave when first we practise to deceive.” 
 
And what a tangled mess. And what a tangled mess the Premier 
and his cabinet have brought onto this beautiful province. 
 
Mr. Premier, you inherited a province in 1982 with a surplus of 
$139 million. You had the fastest-growing economy in all of 
Canada. Outside investment was very buoyant; unemployment 
was at about 4.7 per cent; and we had first-rate health, social 
service, and education programs. In five short years, Mr. 
Premier, you have created over a $3 billion deficit. Outside 
investment now is virtually to a halt; unemployment levels are 
extremely high, and in Saskatoon they’re over 9 per cent, and 
you have emasculated our health and social service and 
education programs. 
 
I want to say about health, Mr. Speaker, right now, to the 
Minister of Health, if he thinks that he’s got a first-rate health 
care program, I would like him to come to Saskatoon and talk to 
the 10,000 people who are on the waiting list. People who need 
a hip operation — and I’ve written to him about one particular 
person who has to wait over a year to have her hip operated. For 
two or three months she lay in bed all day long taking 
pain-killers because she couldn’t take the pain. All the Minister 
of Health could tell me was, well, I’ve increased the budget — 
a lot of compassion for a Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the callous treatment of civil servants, and the 
manner in which you have dismissed them, is simply 
unforgivable. They say it’s a voluntary retirement. Some of the 
voluntary people who have so voluntarily retired have told me 
they’d rather play Russian roulette than accept your voluntary 
treatment. Some of the civil servants told me that they were 
simply told, well, if you don’t retire, your job is going to 
disappear next week. That’s voluntary? I notice the Deputy 
Premier shaking his head, yes. That’s the kind of voluntary 
retirement he wants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier — and I want to say to the Premier — 
if you intended to create fear in the people of Saskatchewan, 
you’ve been very successful. You have created a lot of fear out 
there, and a lot of the people simply won’t go public to tell you 
what they feel. But I can tell you one thing: even though they 
may not go public, they are telling us. And come the next 
election, they are going to speak loud and clearly just how they 
feel about you people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — I say to the Premier, as the member from Moose 
Jaw North indicated, you received no mandate last October to 
do the things that you are doing. The people took you at your 
word when, during the last election, you told them that we were 
building for the future; that the deficit was manageable; that we 
are taking great strides, and we were bringing our children back 
to this province. Our children, Mr. Premier, have no reason to 
come home. In fact, Mr. Premier, if you looked at the  

facts, you’d know that we are losing people by the tens of 
thousands from this province. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the Premier, that you were 
well aware during the last election that the deficit would be over 
a billion dollars. You knew that, and yet you went before the 
people, and I say you purposefully deceived them. You said that 
the deficit was manageable. I say that you continued with your 
deceit, and that you deliberately lied to the people of this 
province. You betrayed the people in ’82; you did it again in 
’86, and I say to the Minister of Finance that you and the 
Premier are doing it in this budget. I say that you have 
cheapened, to the Premier, you have cheapened the office of 
Premier and you’ve disgraced that office. And if you’ve got any 
dignity at all, you’ll resign from that position. 
 
As I stated earlier, Mr. Premier, your problem started in 1982. 
You made some irresponsible promises which, if you had 
carried them out, would have totally ruined this province. 
Surely you knew that if you abolished the sales tax and reduced 
the income tax that you would destroy the financial viability of 
this province. Either you were incompetent when you made 
these promises, or you intentionally deceived the people of this 
province in order to form the government. Maybe, Mr. Speaker, 
he’s both incompetent and deceitful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn to the energy area for just a 
few moments. I want to tell the Premier that this major financial 
problem, his major financial mistake, came when he made 
decisions in this particular area. Because of your inane and 
unsound and senseless loyalty holidays from 1982 to 1985, 
when the prices of oil were relatively high and the profits to oil 
companies were also very high, the people of this province 
suffered revenue losses well over a billion and a half. No one 
will argue with you people that you had a flurry of activity in 
the oil fields. But I say to the Premier, and I say to the cabinet 
office, the price was too high and the revenue losses were 
simply too exhortative. Very little new oil was found in those 
years — very little new oil. Much of the drilling was done in 
known fields. The oil companies simply pumped out the oil at a 
faster rate. They took their profits, and when the price of oil 
went down, as you found out last year, the oil companies left 
this province and held you people up for further ransom. 
 
The resources belong to the people of this province. You are the 
custodians, and you have the responsibility as the government 
to extract the best possible deal for the people of this province 
and to just for the chosen few. Because of your policies, you 
lost well, as I said, over a billion and a half. You blew it when 
the prices were high, and now you’re asking the people of this 
province to make the sacrifices through your health cuts and 
your social services cuts and through higher taxes. That simply, 
Mr. Speaker, will be unacceptable, and I say to you that the 
people of this province will not forget that so easily. I say to 
you, Mr. Premier, you have gone too far in support of your 
friends. You’ve gone too far in support of the Pocklingtons. 
You’ve gone too far in support of the Hills and the Schoenhals 
and the Dutchaks and the Dirks. You’ve gone too far in support 
of the oil companies. You are extracting too big a toll from the 
citizens of this  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

599 
 

province, and you’re going to pay the ultimate price in due 
course. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say you are building for the future. I assume 
you mean that you’re building for our young people. What 
hope, what optimism is there for our young people in this 
province when you eliminate hundreds and hundreds of jobs for 
their parents? What opportunities are there for our young when 
scores of educational programs are obliterated in our 
community colleges and technical schools? What opportunities 
are there for our children to educate themselves in this province 
when you force our universities to eliminate programs, limit 
enrolments, and increase tuition fees? What hope? What hope 
do you give our young people to further their education when 
no jobs are available for summer employment, and little 
opportunity to receive bursaries to continue their education? 
 
Where, Mr. Minister, in your budget, do you address the 
problems of our young people? Where are you going to give 
them any hope for optimism in this province? Are you telling 
them, like you’ve told the thousands who have left this province 
in the past five years, that their future is not here but somewhere 
else in Canada? Where, Mr. Minister, is your compassion? 
Where is your sense of dignity? And where is your 
responsibility to our young people? 
 
During tough economic times, Mr. Minister, you don’t need 
less government intervention; you need government to prime 
the economy. You need to provide more jobs by capital 
construction, more opportunity at our educational institutions, 
and you must assist those in need by providing more social and 
health services to help them through these most difficult times. 
 
A caring and sensitive government would fill the gap vacated 
by the private sector during periods of economic slow-down. A 
caring and sensitive government would deal with the deficit by 
obtaining additional revenues from those who benefit the most 
when the deficit was created. You should have looked to the oil 
companies to start paying their fair share. Our financial 
institutions and larger corporations have done well in the past 
five years when you were creating that deficit. Certainly they 
could have been asked to pay more taxes during these difficult 
times. 
 
You don’t stimulate the economy by axing jobs of thousands of 
tax-paying individuals. You don’t stimulate the economy by 
forcing local governments to increase property taxes, and you 
certainly don’t increase revenues by forcing people to leave this 
province in search of jobs and educational opportunities. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Minister, because of your deliberate policies of eliminating 
jobs, because you have driven more people into poverty, and 
now because you have further increased our hopelessness by the 
huge tax increase, this is not the time to decrease funding for 
many non-government organizations. 
 
I will predict that because of your actions in this budget,  

we will see an increase in crime, an increase in child abuse, an 
increase in women battering, an increase in family breakdowns, 
and an increase in the suicide rate in this province. People who 
do not have hope resort to extreme measures. 
 
Now is not the time to eliminate 100 individuals from the 
mental health services branch, or 23 people from the 
community services area. Many individuals and families will 
need these services as they feel the adverse effects of your 
budget. 
 
Now is the time to increase funding to transition houses, to 
family services, to the John Howard Society, and to increase the 
number of family and school counselors, as well as the number 
of social workers in this province. When the people begin to 
feel the effects of this budget, many will need the services of 
professionals in order to work through these most difficult 
times. A caring and sensitive government would have made that 
a high priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I notice that my time is quickly running out, and I 
want to end by citing to the Minister of Health and to the 
cabinet opposite, about four or five cases of how this budget has 
affected individuals. 
 
I have before me here a constituent who has suffered from MS 
(multiple sclerosis) for over 20 years. She just found out two 
weeks ago from the University Hospital, because of cut-backs 
that were asked by the Minister of Health of the university, that 
she no longer will get the required physiotherapy that she had 
been receiving over those years. And if she does not get the 
physiotherapy at least two or three times a week, and I say this 
to the Minister of Health, you will find that she will have to 
enter a hospital or she will have to enter a nursing home. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s untrue . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — It is not untrue. Mr. Minister of Health says 
what I am saying is untrue, and I want to give him another 
example, or two or three examples of cut-backs at various 
hospitals. This lady writes to the minister: 
 

Dear Mr. McLeod: I was very concerned to learn of 
the recent firings of physicians in the city of Regina, 
because of the serious deterioration of medical care 
and services that this represents for southern 
Saskatchewan. I am pregnant and have developed a 
condition known as gestational diabetes. 
 

I can’t read the whole letter because it’s too long, but she goes 
on to say: 
 

Dr. Boctor is the only endocrinologist in the city. 
Since he is leaving, it is obvious that future medical 
care will be of poor quality. I pay my taxes and I’ve 
accepted frozen wages, but why, when I have a 
government need, is it suddenly not  

  



 
June 22, 1987 

600 
 

important? How can supposed job creation, through 
home improvement grants, be more important than the 
health of southern Saskatchewan babies? Please 
evaluate your priorities. Health problems do not 
restrict themselves only to good economic times. 
 

Mr. Minister, I want to read you another letter. This letter is 
addressed to the Hon. Grant Devine. And this letter, Mr. 
Minister, you also received a copy of it and I wrote you about 
these individuals. These individuals do not live in my 
constituency but wrote to me as a former minister of Health. 
And it says: 
 

Dear Sir: (addressing it to Mr. Devine) It is with great 
concern that we view the forthcoming cuts in health 
and education service. The victims, and we use that 
word advisedly, are the old and infirm, the 
handicapped, especially the young, children and the 
intimidated, battered women and their families. 
 
We are particularly concerned with the budget cuts to 
University Hospital. The result of this will be 
disastrous for our daughter. Stephanie was born 
prematurely and was saved by the care and devotion 
she received in the neo-natal intensive care in 
Saskatoon. She was subsequently diagnosed as having 
massive brain damage, which resulted in cortical 
blindness and cerebral palsy. 
 

Now Stephanie’s physiotherapy again has been cut back, Mr. 
Minister of Health, and that is because of instructions from your 
department that they must limit or restrict their budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have two more letters that I wish to refer to, and 
this one again is written to: 
 

Dear. Mr. McLeod: (And I wish the Minister of Health 
would stay and listen to this one.) In the past few 
weeks I have been increasingly upset about policies 
issued by the government. This note and attached 
letter is being sent as a result of much thought and 
much prayer. 
 
I have used the health care system extensively since 
1980. In fact, I was hospitalized for almost three 
months, three years ago in the General Hospital in 
Regina. The conditions in the orthopedic floor at that 
time were near critical. There were patients needing 
intensive care who were kept in this ward because of 
lack of beds in ICU (intensive care unit). The ward 
was understaffed, and the additional 24-hour care for 
these critically ill people added much stress to the 
existing staff. 
 
There were many other situations which taxed the 
staff to the limit. As far as my own health is 
concerned, I have had to wait for six to eight months 
in order to receive health care. An accident seven 
years ago has left me unable to work outside our 
home. 

Where is the hope, sir, when a government can just 
change policies and laws behind closed doors? Where 
is there hope when there is no thought regarding the 
hardship that is being done to the most needy? Do any 
of you know what long-term suffering and/or 
unemployment can do to people? Have any of you the 
slightest idea what would happen to those who will be 
burdened with the yoke of your slavery? 
 
These are strong words, yes, and so are the emotions 
my family are and I are experiencing. We are at your 
mercy. Is this what democracy’s supposed to be? We 
should have an opportunity to fight for our rights. 
Instead, we are reduced to helpless pawns in a game of 
autocratic power. 
 

This is written by a woman who was involved in an accident 
and has been . . . can only now crawl on the floor in her home 
and she needs this extra help. She has written a long letter to the 
Premier, which is much, much too long to read, but which I will 
draw to the Premier’s attention during his estimates. 
 
I want to, Mr. Speaker, now read from what I feel is a letter of 
utter hopelessness. And this guy writes to me and he says: 
 

Where and when is the Devine purge going to stop, or 
at least ease up a little? 
 

And he goes on to say: 
 

Even if this wholesale rape of health care in 
Saskatchewan was to stop today, I believe irreparable 
damage has been done, both emotional and physical, 
to many citizens of this province. Indeed, for one 
former acquaintance of mine, it literally would be too 
late. Recently the acquaintance was found dead from a 
drug overdose. Why? He was so depressed over the 
fact that he had no job, no foreseeable prospects of 
finding one, and the final straw, no money even to get 
out and go to a coffee shop and have a cup of coffee. 
 
Prior to his death he had been a functional individual 
who had hopes for the future. His strong self-control, 
desire, and hard determination to succeed was slowly 
drained away, just as if he had had terminal cancer. It 
is truly a human waste and tragedy to see someone as I 
described slowly fall away in the manner he did. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, these are actual cases of 
people who have been fundamentally affected by cut-backs that 
this government has put into effect, and these were cut-backs 
before the budget came into effect. You people can say all you 
want, that this is all stirred up by the opposition. These are 
actual cases, and I have many more in my office, in my 
constituency office, that I could relate to you, and will relate to 
many of you ministers during your estimates, of people that 
simply do not have hope. 
 
I see the member from Biggar just simply sloughs it off.  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

601 
 

And I say to him that you will also feel the ultimate effect in the 
next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, what we need is a compassionate 
and a sensitive government, a government that will look to the 
needs of individuals and to the needs of the people of this 
province and then come to grips with them. Mr. Speaker, 
because the budget does not meet the needs of individual 
people, does not come to grips with the problems that are facing 
this province, I have no choice but to support the amendment 
and vote against the main motion. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to enter the budget debate at this time. I’m very 
pleased with this budget and would like to congratulate my 
colleague, the Minister of Finance, for a job very well done. He 
has delivered a fair and honest budget, a budget which tackles 
the economic difficulties of our province. 
 
I’m proud of this budget because it has taken the fiscal 
responsibility of our province seriously, something which 
previous administrations have not had the courage to do. It 
clearly demonstrates that this government has the integrity and 
conviction to do what is right in planning for our province’s 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on October 29, 1986, the people of Saskatchewan 
voted for a Premier and a party whose first priority is to provide 
the people of this province with a means to build a more 
prosperous future for themselves. The people of Saskatchewan 
wanted a government willing to look realistically at the 
challenges which face us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is at the crossroads in its 
development as a province. The world economic situation has 
forced us to take a hard look at where we have been ad where 
we are going. As your government, we have come to realize 
that we can no longer rely on our agricultural sector and our 
resource base to provide for an ever-increasing number of social 
programs and services that give rise to ever-increasing 
expectations. 
 
Our current shortfall in revenues brought about by a serious 
drop in world prices for our resources and our commodities 
such as grain, oil, potash, and uranium, has left us vulnerable at 
our economic base. Traditionally resource revenues have 
supported essential services such as health and education. In the 
coming year all of our revenues from oil royalties, sales tax, and 
personal income taxes, would not be enough to cover health 
care expenses alone. Clearly Saskatchewan is in a battle to 
protect its future. Government alone can no longer be the single 
solution to every issue or difficulty that the people of 
Saskatchewan face. All of us need to pull together if we are to 
meet our challenges head on. 
 
As we strive to protect our social institutions and the  

ability of our people to take advantage of opportunity in these 
difficult transitional times, we have also remained continually 
aware of our responsibility to ensure that the services provided 
are needed, effective, and efficient. 
 
In many instances this responsibility has necessitated the 
application of innovative changes and the constant questioning 
of old solutions and assumptions. We have had to question the 
structure and organization of government itself. This process 
has not been easy. We have taken the necessary time to ensure 
that our review has been thorough and that the solutions posed 
are not only sound today but will remain sound into the future. 
There is not only a desire, but a critical need for the government 
to get by with less. It is not a pleasant reality in a province that 
has, at times in the past, enjoyed a degree of prosperity 
comparable to anywhere in the western world. This reality is 
affecting all of us, and all of us are seeing things that we would 
rather not see. 
 
(1615) 
 
At the same time as we are undertaking this massive 
restructuring of our government and the services it provides, we 
must keep in mind a fundamental economic truth. If we are to 
be successful in our efforts to build a Saskatchewan that can not 
only survive, but prosper in the 1990s and beyond, we must 
concentrate our energies on diversifying our economic base. 
The world economy is undergoing drastic changes, and we must 
be prepared to keep pace. 
 
Education, training, retraining, and technology are the keys to 
our success. We must stay abreast of new developments in these 
areas. We must be prepared to support areas of significant 
potential economic return, such as tourism and advanced 
technology. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to focus the attention of this 
Assembly on the work, the progress, and the government 
commitment to the future of science and technology. I support 
the budget address because during this challenging economic 
time, the strong performance of the advanced technology sector 
is welcome news. 
 
Let me begin by emphasizing that more than ever before we 
need to maximize the opportunities and benefits generated by 
the advanced technology sector. This industry has demonstrated 
its strength by creating employment, generating revenue, and 
providing many social and economic benefits. It is working to 
diversify our economy by expanding our industrial base, and it 
is helping to make our traditional resource sector become more 
competitive and making business and the service industry more 
efficient. 
 
Today the world is rapidly changing. Future wealth and job 
creation depend on the growth of knowledge in intensive 
industries, on the application of a technology to keep 
established industry competitive. It is within this context that 
our Saskatchewan government has recognized the need to move 
quickly and decisively to make science and technology a pillar 
in our strategy to ensure economic growth and employment in 
tomorrow’s world economy. 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

602 
 

The pioneering and innovative spirit which settled and 
developed our province some 100 years ago is now developing 
our science and technology frontier in Saskatchewan. Prior to 
1982, there was little support for the development of advanced 
technology. Fortunately for the vision of our Premier and his 
government, a strategy for the development of this industry was 
developed. That decision has been an astounding success. As an 
example, the number of advanced technology firms has 
quadrupled, from 30 active companies to over 170 today. 
 
In 1982, virtually the entire industry was based in Saskatoon. 
Today, although Saskatoon has experienced rapid growth, an 
advanced technology community is emerging in Regina, and the 
balance of the industry is widely distributed throughout other 
Saskatchewan communities. The annual sales figures, Mr. 
Speaker, have also increased dramatically from $81 million in 
1982 to over $550 million today, with estimates of close to $1 
billion for the coming year. 
 
This phenomenal growth in advanced technology has meant 
jobs for the people of Saskatchewan. Direct employment has 
almost doubled in the past five years to nearly 3,000 jobs, 
providing our young people with career alternatives and 
opportunities of a world-class nature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike past administrations, we have been able to 
deliver these results because we are committed to the 
development of advanced technology in this province. We have 
turned commitment into action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of these results traditional Saskatchewan 
industries are benefiting through enhanced productivity and 
competitiveness, reduced costs, and by improved safety in 
agriculture, mining, and the manufacturing and service 
industries. Saskatchewan’s advanced technology industry is 
working partnership with government, our universities, and 
research facilities to create new innovative products which 
strengthen and diversify our traditional industries. 
 
There can be no mystery about what this means. Today’s 
technology is transforming the world. It is creating a second 
industrial revolution. We are a resource rich trading nation in a 
race for technological survival. But where does Saskatchewan 
fit into this? Surprisingly, Saskatchewan is a leader among 
Canada’s provinces in this technological revolution. Space 
technology, telecommunications ad biotechnology are leaders, 
just to mention a few. 
 
However, there is always much more to do, and for that reason I 
am especially proud of the announcement by the Minister of 
Finance to establish the $22 million economic diversification 
and investment fund. This fund will combine the efforts of 
Tourism and Small Business, Economic Development and 
Trade, and Science and Technology. This fund will increase the 
efficiency and effectiveness of these three government 
departments by eliminating overlapping programs, and by 
multiplying their efforts on co-ordinated priorities in areas such 
as technology research and development, trade and tourism 
promotion, and entrepreneurial and industrial growth. 

Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister also announced that an 
entrepreneur institute will be established, which I feel is 
welcome news for young people in this province, and especially 
in Saskatoon which had a record number of new business starts 
in 1986. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s emphasis on the tourist industry 
has sparked phenomenal growth in my home town of 
Saskatoon, which attracted over 170 conventions with over 
50,000 delegates in 1986. And it is this focus on tourism which 
has helped to bring Saskatoon’s retail sales close to $1 billion 
annually. Tourism promises to become one of the primary 
sources of revenue for the province of Saskatchewan, benefiting 
centres both large and small. 
 
While we are committed to looking at new economic 
opportunities through diversification, containing our deficit and 
exploring more efficient ways of providing protection to 
individuals makes it necessary to examine some of the specifics 
of this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the last while I have spoken to several 
constituents of mine. Concerns have been raised about certain 
programs such as the drug plan, the dental program, some social 
programs, and programs for seniors. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
greater issues are not proposed changes that might be taking 
place, but rather the scare tactics and circulation of 
misinformation by some members of that bunch opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition members like to think they are the 
great defenders of the sick, the elderly, the handicapped, and the 
young, but they continually put them down and treat them like 
second-class citizens. There’s nothing wrong with being 
advocates for certain groups of people, but why use scare 
tactics? 
 
All one has to do is compare the record of this government to 
their administration and consider the accomplishments achieved 
during the last five years when the economy hasn’t been nearly 
as rosy as it was during their 11 years in power. They’re 
bankrupt of ideas and lack the sense of direction required for 
today. 
 
I think Elwood Cowley, a former NDP cabinet minister, 
summed it up nicely in the book Canada, What’s Left?, when 
he argued that the NDP’s vision at present has somehow either 
narrowed or vanished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few comments now about 
our record as it relates to health care, education, the 
handicapped, and senior citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1982-83 we have increased real health 
spending by 15.7 per cent. During their last five years, they 
increased it by 7.2 per cent. Under the PCs, real growth in 
health expenditures, that’s averaged 4 per cent per year over 
and above inflation. Saskatchewan has increased health 
spending more than any other western province — 15.7 per cent 
compared to 9.4 per cent. 
 
Hospital and special care construction, $180 million compared 
to $160 million by that government — 14 per cent more. What 
about the replacement of special care beds? The NDP 192 new 
and 151 replacements; the PCs 1,357 — four times as many as 
they did. And they are the  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

603 
 

defenders of our health program. 
 
What about the area of acute care hospital beds? In 1986-87, 
350 more than the NDP in 1981-82. Home care. The NDP spent 
$13.6 million in 81-82; the PCs today, more than 23 million. 
What about ambulance services? We’ve increased those 
services by an average of 28 per cent per year in the last five 
years. 
 
And we can consider a few other steps that this government has 
taken over the last five years, Mr. Speaker. A new cancer clinic 
in the city of Saskatoon, a new pediatric unit at the University 
Hospital, new hospitals built or planned — Nipawin, 
Lloydminster, Maidstone, Saskatoon, Hudson Bay, Watrous, 
and Watson. Expansion . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I would like the remarks 
to please slow down on this side of the House — my left side. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Further expansion of facilities of the 
Pasqua Hospital in Regina, the University and St. Paul’s 
Hospitals in Saskatoon, and at Melfort, and in Yorkton; a new 
Wascana Rehabilitation Centre in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are not the actions of a government that does 
not have the health needs of Saskatchewan citizens at heart. We 
have one of the best health care systems anywhere, but over the 
years it has been allowed to evolve with an number of inherent 
flaws. Over the past five years these flaws have become 
increasingly apparent as costs continued to escalate. 
 
One such area is the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan. Over 
the past 11 years, the annual costs have risen from $16 million 
to $83 million — an increase of more than 400 per cent. At this 
present rate the cost of the program would rise to $125 million 
by 1990. Clearly, we feel a responsibility to bring the costs of 
the drug plan under control. 
 
In doing so, difficult choices were made. Safeguards have been 
built in for those special circumstances in protecting those most 
in need without placing them under undue financial stress. 
Senior citizens that I talk with feel an obligation to pay a small 
fee for this valuable program if it means ensuring protection for 
future years. They understand that the present rapidly escalating 
costs cannot be allowed to continue. Although the changes to 
the drug plan are fundamental ones, Saskatchewan will still 
have the best plan in Canada. 
 
Another area of health care in serious need of revision was the 
Saskatchewan dental plan. This has been a good program, but 
an expensive one. It will still be provided for those children 
ages 5 through 13 — the critical years insofar as good dental 
habits and prevention are concerned. Because we are in a time 
when difficult choices are necessary, if we are to remain able to 
meet our most pressing youth health needs, our government 
chose to redirect resources to meet what has been described as 
the number one problem facing adolescents, today: the threat of 
alcohol and drug abuse. This program will still remain the best 
in Canada. 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been recognized for many years 
as having a top-quality education system. This government has 
been, and is, committed to ensuring that this long-standing 
tradition continues. However, changes were necessary to bring 
our education system up to date, to meet the needs of a rapidly 
changing society. Our educational system must be relevant 
today and tomorrow. The process of updating our education 
system began with a thorough review, involving consultation 
with all participants of the province’s K to 12 system. In 1984 
that review resulted in a visionary document called Directions, 
which lays out a 10-year plan to bring about necessary changes 
while maintaining a stability and previous growth and 
development of our system of elementary and secondary 
education. The establishment of the education development 
fund provides for the financial resources to carry out this 
strategy. This was one of the most positive steps to be taken in 
education for many years. It makes a lot of sense, Mr. Speaker. 
But because of tough economic times, these moneys be spread 
out over a longer period of time — $14.5 million is still allotted 
to the education development fund for the 1987-88. This 
funding is over and above the $330 million in operating grants, 
and the $31 million to capital assistance for the construction 
and renovation of schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we just heard one of the members opposite talking 
about cuts in education. We find that the only cuts to education 
this year in the budgets were a 1 per cent cut in operating 
grants. That, surely to goodness, is not too severe when we 
consider the times that we’re in today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is also equally committed to 
quality post-secondary educational programs. Changes have 
been made to the structure of technical institutes and 
community colleges, again to bring them up to date so that the 
challenges of today and tomorrow can be more adequately met. 
What about this government’s record in post-secondary 
education, Mr. Speaker? Well, let me tell you about it. Since 
1982-83, the number of spaces in technical schools have been 
increased dramatically, by 1,700 spaces. Financial assistance 
for students has been increased and made more accessible. 
Between 1982-83 and ‘86-87, Saskatchewan increased total 
government funding to universities by a greater percentage — 
38 per cent — than any other province in Canada. The current 
level of capital funding provided to the universities is more than 
three times what it was when our government took office in 
1982. As a result of these increases, total government funding 
per student in ‘86-87 in Saskatchewan was the second highest 
in Canada. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are not the actions of a government that does 
not place a high priority on the education of Saskatchewan 
young people. We will continue to make every effort possible to 
see that our education system retains the high standard that 
people of Saskatchewan have come to expect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite often make reference to our 
treatment of handicapped or disabled. Our record over the past 
five years speaks for itself. In regard to  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

604 
 

special education programs in our school systems, funding for 
programs has increased substantially each year. At the school 
for the deaf in Saskatoon during our administration, a 
deaf-blind program has been implemented. Transportation 
allowances have been vastly improved to allow greater 
opportunities for handicapped children. More handicapped 
children are receiving service today than ever before. The 
number of spaces in group homes and workshops has been 
increased. General funding has been increased in these areas. 
The trend today is for greater integration into the community. 
The closure of the North Park Centre in Prince Albert is in 
response to this feeling and was the recommendation of the 
Saskatchewan Association for the Mentally Retarded. Mr. 
Speaker, this government has also taken steps to bring in 
legislation that will provide greater accessibility for 
handicapped individuals — something members opposite were 
requested to do on several occasions, but failed to act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to meet the needs of those who 
are less fortunate than others, by providing services through the 
above, plus direct funding to organizations such as the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres, Canadian 
Paraplegic Association, Saskatchewan Association for the 
Mentally Retarded, the Canadian National Institute for the 
Blind, and services for hearing-impaired persons. And we often 
have a lot of criticism from members opposite today, Mr. 
Speaker, about cut-backs to the Voice of the Handicapped. 
From what I’ve just said, it’s very obvious that we’re very 
committed to those groups that provide service to the 
handicapped. And they all are spokesmen for any of those in 
different individuals. 
 
As well, the move to have the Saskatchewan Abilities Council 
administer the aids to independent living program will increase 
the number of outlets in the province. They’ll provide quality 
service, and they’ll also provide the council with additional 
funds and an enhanced role in the province. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment briefly on this 
government’s record with regard to seniors. Over the past five 
years, Saskatchewan’s seniors have enjoyed a significantly 
improved standard of living due to the government initiatives in 
health care, housing, income supplements, and tax concessions. 
Apart from foregone taxes and universal programs, the 
government spent an average of $2,300 per senior in 1986-87. 
 
The following new initiatives have been introduced by our 
government since 1982. A chiropody program, rural community 
therapy program, seniors’ heritage grants, non-profit housing 
grants, Saskatchewan Pension Plan, plus expansions in other 
areas such as 600 new special care home beds, 135 per cent 
increase in total special care funding, a 73 per cent increase in 
home care funding, increased non-taxable seniors’ income plan 
payments of 160 per cent for single seniors and 133 per cent for 
couples, and 71 per cent increase in aid to independent living. 
Further protection is being provided through changes in 
provincial income tax rates for low income tax seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our seniors understand tough economic  

times because of their own experiences in the Great Depression. 
They realize more than most that governments can only do as 
much as finances permit. They recognize that increased deficits 
are no longer acceptable. They also want to be part of the 
solution and not part of the problem. Because of this belief they 
are supportive of what our government is doing to provide 
fiscal responsibility as well as protection for Saskatchewan 
families. They understand how this province and this country 
were built on the basic principles of individual initiative; of 
hard work by people with a vision for a better future. This 
government shares that vision and is committed to moving our 
province forward in spite of tough economic times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget debate what we are really 
discussing is how Saskatchewan will prepare for the future. I 
realize that the opposition were, and still are, unable to grasp 
this fact. When we consider that during 11 years in power, 
government expenditure increased on an average of 17.9 per 
cent per year, they never once looked at reducing their own 
spending, but rather they always forced the Saskatchewan 
people to pay for this socialist ideology of bigger and bigger 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the world is entering a new era. We must be ready 
to meet this challenge and protect our province’s future. All 
governments have a responsibility to protect their citizens with 
a basic standard of services in areas of health care, education, 
and social services. However, our government also believes that 
strong social institutions must provide the basis upon which the 
people of Saskatchewan can take advantage of economic 
opportunities to diversify our economy and create new wealth. 
 
Government also has a responsibility to be frugal with 
taxpayers’ dollars. That is why a review of all government 
expenditures was conducted and new priorities set that are in 
step with the times. This is never an easy task. But only a very 
cynical and foolish government would pretend that it didn’t 
have to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has the courage and conviction to 
do what is right for the sake of the province and our children’s 
future. Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the opposition 
amendment, but am proud and pleased to support this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me pleasure once again to raise in this Assembly to be able to 
direct my comments to yourself and to the members on the 
other side regarding actions which have brought disrepute to 
their party, to their caucus, and to this province . . . to this 
province in terms of its history and tradition of, as my 
colleague, the member from Moose Jaw North says, sharing and 
caring. 
 
I want, before I begin addressing the subject of the budget, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to pay a vote of thanks to the Progressive 
Conservative party which I understand recently featured myself 
in an issue of their Tory rag called The Saskatchewan 
Viewpoint. And I want to say right now how much I appreciate 
the publicity given to  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

605 
 

me by Saskatchewan Viewpoint, although I must say, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m disappointed in the member from Weyburn. When 
I rose in this House to speak in addressing the Speech from the 
Throne, he promised to distribute 1,000 of my speeches to his 
constituents. Now I understand constituents in Weyburn have 
called his office asking for copies of that speech. They tell me, 
because they’ve called my office, and I understand he hasn’t 
done that; he hasn’t distributed the speech. Mr. Speaker, just 
another broken promise — just another broken Tory promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been interesting listening to the debates. It’s 
been interesting listen to the debates put forward by members of 
the other side in regards to the kind of statistics they’re putting 
forward. I walk in from visiting the great town of Weyburn 
today just in time hear, I believe it was the Premier, talking 
about how they’d increased health spending by 66 per cent — I 
think it was 66 or 67 per cent — talking about what a great 
increase it was. And yet, when I just stay one or two hours later, 
I hear the member from Saskatoon Mayfair talking about an 
increase in health spending of 15 per cent. Mr. Speaker, they 
can’t even get their statistics right. They can’t even get their 
statistics right, because there’s one thing in common that all 
liars have, Mr. Speaker, in that they are not able to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Order, order, order. I think the 
hon. member should be reminded that the term “lie,” “liars,” 
any such thing, is not permitted in this House. It is one of the 
most provocative statements and accusatory statements that any 
member can make and is always deemed as unparliamentary. 
So I remind him now to not to use that term any more. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about in the general 
sense of one common thing that people who do not tell the truth 
have in common, is that when they tell an untruth at one time, 
they’re not able to remember what that untruth was a little later 
on. And in the case of the members opposite they’re not even 
able to remember one untruth from one hour to the next. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to begin, because when I listen to the 
members opposite we hear a great number of statistics that 
they’re deriving from this budget. And as Benjamin Disraeli 
says, and I want you to pay attention, Mr. Speaker, to this 
closely, because I’m quoting Benjamin Disraeli. Benjamin 
Disraeli says: “There are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies, 
and statistics.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to add another category to that — 
Tories. Tory budget: lies, damned lies, statistics, and Tory 
budget. I think Mr. Disraeli, after listening to the budget speech, 
would certainly include that category in his book. 
 
There’s another quotation, Mr. Speaker, it says: “Statistical 
thinking will one day be as necessary for efficient citizenship as 
the ability to read and write” — H.G. Wells. I’m quoting, Mr. 
Speaker, from Bruce Johnstone’s article in the Leader-Post of 
June 3, 1987. Mr. Johnstone says: “(There are) two little pearls 
of wisdom are contained in the foreword to a little book full of 
similar gems, entitled How to Lie With Statistics.” 

And I realize, Mr. Speaker, that we have a book here How to 
Lie With Statistics, and it’s called the -Saskatchewan budget. 
It’s called the Saskatchewan budget, because the Saskatchewan 
budget, as presented by the Minister of Finance, doesn’t deal 
with the economic reality of this province in one fashion or 
another. 
 
The budget introduced by the Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, 
is, I would submit, nothing more than a political document. It is 
nothing more than a political manifesto of the Conservative 
Party. It is a political manifesto of the Conservative Party. It is a 
political manifesto which says . . . And if you don’t believe me, 
if you were listening very carefully to the former minister of 
health, now the Minister for Tourism — if you were listening to 
him closely, it’s the political manifesto of Thatcherism brought 
to Saskatchewan. The political manifesto of Margaret Thatcher 
brought to Saskatchewan. He said it, he said it himself. He said, 
we’ve got to follow great leaders like Margaret Thatcher. 
We’ve got to go forward into the future with great leaders like 
Margaret Thatcher and, by implication, Ronald Reagan and all 
the other members of the Conservative international — all of 
the other members of the Conservative international. 
 
It’s a political document because it changes the fundamental 
direction of the province of Saskatchewan. It says, we are going 
to move. We are going to move from a province in which the 
government plays a leading role in providing services to the 
people. We are going to move from a government constructed 
in which the governments that we elect, or that the people elect 
and are responsible to us, will play a leading role in providing 
us goods and services that we want. We’re going to move from 
that kind of province to a province which is open for business 
and which is there, up for sale as a playing field for the rich, the 
wealthy, the corporate citizens, the international capitalists. I 
believe the word the Minister of Tourism used, the international 
capitalism, that that’s what this province has become. It’s a 
playpen. 
 
And it’s a political document, this budget, because it is built on 
two untruths. Didn’t use lies, I said untruths — two 
fundamental untruths. And the first of these fundamental 
untruths, Mr. Speaker, is that everything in Saskatchewan is 
going down the tubes, that the economy is totally in ruins, that 
we’ve got grasshoppers, and we’ve got plagues, and we’ve got 
lotuses, and we’ve got low prices for this and high costs for 
that, and so on and so forth and so on and so on. 
 
That’s the message that this Conservative government has been 
trying to put forward for the last while — that everything in 
Saskatchewan is going down the tubes and that we, together, we 
all must suffer it; that we all must tighten our belts; that we all 
must endure the slings and outrageous fortune of the 
international . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you very 
much, thank you very much. I’d like to thank the member from 
Turtleford — the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. In 
this case, the slings and arrows of the international market 
place. But that we’re all suffering, without exception. That’s the 
kind of picture that this document tries to paint, and that’s the 
kind of message that this government is trying to put forward. 
 
But you know it’s not true, Mr. Speaker. It’s not true.  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

606 
 

We’re not all going down the tubes. Certainly senior citizens 
are getting squashed under their heel when they raise the rents 
at the special care homes. 
 
(1645) 
 
Certainly senior citizens are getting hurt, and everybody else in 
Saskatchewan is being hurt when they hit us with the drug plan. 
Certainly the children of this province are being hurt when they 
go after and rip away the dental plan. And one can go on and 
on. 
 
And we’re all getting hurt because of their taxes. We’re all 
getting hurt because of their taxes. We’re all getting hurt 
because they’ve taken away things like the property 
improvement grant. Saskatchewan people are being hurt, real 
Saskatchewan people. But we’re not all suffering. Not all of 
Saskatchewan is suffering by any means. 
 
There are those in this province who are doing very well, thank 
you, in this times of slings and arrows of outrageous 
international fortune. The oil companies in this province are 
doing very well, Mr. Speaker, I happened the other day to pick 
up a copy of the financial report for North Canadian Oils. North 
Canadian Oils, as you know, is a subsidiary of Hees 
International. Hees International is a multinational — they call 
it washing operation. They try to clean the cash up in 
companies that they feel have potential, and do a financial 
laundering operation, I believe is the technical term that they 
tried to use. 
 
Heess International is the owner of North Canadian Oils, and 
we all see the North Canadian Oils building down on Victoria 
Avenue. Now the members opposite have tried to pain a picture 
of the oil industry as being suffering, of being at the mercy of 
the slings and arrows of outrageous international fortune and oil 
prices, that they’re all hurting, that they all are just crushed, 
crushed by the international situation. 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, when you look at a company like North 
Canadian Oils, not the major player in oil operations in this 
province or this country, but one of them — when you look at 
the balance book, you will see, among other things, that they 
made a profit last year; an after-tax, after-dividend profit of $17 
million — $17 million, Mr. Speaker. Here is one . . . the 
12th-ranked oil company in this province makes an after-tax 
profit of $17 million — not hurting. 
 
In fact, they make an interesting statement in their financial 
report, Mr. Speaker, in terms of how they view what’s 
happening in the province. I want to read what they say about 
land position, their land position. That’s the acquiring of 
Saskatchewan land. That’s land that belongs to the province — 
Crown land — belongs to every citizen in this province. Let’s 
see what North Canadian Oils says how badly they’re’ hurting 
in this international recession when they acquire land. They say: 
 

During 1986 North Canadian Oil acquired 226,097 
gross acres, 137,550 net acres, the majority of which 
was purchased at Crown land sales at a cost of $5.3 
million. Average prices paid were $38 per acre in 
Alberta and $36 per acre in  

Saskatchewan, down from 74 and 67 per acre 
respectively, for land acquired in 1985. Much of this 
acreage was purchased in prime exploration (get this) 
. . . prime exploration and development areas backed 
by seismic information. The depressed economic 
environment in 1986 provided the company with an 
opportunity to build a quality land portfolio at a 
relatively low cost. 
 

Here we have a subsidiary of Hees International, a 
multinational financial conglomerate, who’s acquiring 
Saskatchewan land, quality prime land. And why? Because 
we’ve go the world economic downturn. Seventeen millions in 
prime Saskatchewan land at half the cost of what they paid in 
1985. Really hurting, Mr. Speaker. The oil companies in this 
province are real hurting. 
 
And let me tell you, let me tell you right now, let me tell the 
people of Saskatchewan one of the reasons why they’re hurting 
in the way that they’re hurting. They’re able to pull over the 
$17 million, the 17 million or 20 million or whatever, whatever 
company happened to be looking at profits out of this province 
because that government over there made a choice — made a 
choice after the 1986 election. They made a choice to make a 
cut, and the first cut that they made were cuts to oil royalties — 
cuts to the oil companies. Money which could’ve gone to fund 
the dental plan in this province, they gave away to their friends 
in Hees International and the oil companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, they made that choice. Right? The 
oil companies are not hurting. Sure, there’s trouble out there in 
the oil patch, but you just ask the oil companies, take a look at 
their financial statement, and you’ll see what kind of trouble 
they have. Their trouble, Mr. Speaker, is they haven’t got the 
armoured cars big enough to take our money to the banks of 
New York and Toronto. That’s the kind of trouble that they’re 
suffering from. 
 
And you think, Mr. Speaker, that well, maybe that’s just an 
anomaly; that’s just the oil companies; that they’re not hurting. 
Well, the Premier and the other members of the party like to 
picture themselves as the champions of the agricultural sector, 
the champions of farmers, the champions of rural Saskatchewan 
and of rural life in Saskatchewan. And what they try to do and 
what they have tried to make as a justification for this budget is 
that things are totally bad in rural Saskatchewan, things have 
gone down the tubes for Saskatchewan agriculture, things are 
being wiped out for the rural way of life. 
 
And in many cases, it’s true. If one looks at their record of 
trying to save family farms in this province, they will see that 
they have lost 1,000 permit-book holders a year, who have left 
Saskatchewan, have gone off the land — 1,000 a year, 1,000 
farmers down the tubes a year. 
 
And the farmers are hurting, and the rural communities in this 
province are hurting, but somebody isn’t hurting. Now let me 
tell you who’s not hurting, because I don’t  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

607 
 

think you have to guess very much. While ordinary people who 
live in rural Saskatchewan, who live on the farm are hurting, 
people like Cargill — Cargill, the giant, integrated agri-business 
corporation which sucks money out of Saskatchewan like a 
vacuum cleaner picks the dirt up off some people’s floor, 
Cargill reports 66 per cent increase in 1986 profit — 66 per cent 
increase in 1986 profit. Very, very nice. We have a giant 
multinational agri-business firm which for years has been in the 
Saskatchewan market-place reporting a 66 per cent increase in 
the profit — 66 per cent increase. 
 
Now that’s a totally different picture of what’s going on in 
certain segments of the agricultural community than what’s 
going on for most people. So things aren’t all bad if you’re an 
oil company, or if you’re a giant, multinational agri-business 
firm, or if you’re Federated Co-operatives. 
 
Federated Co-operatives last year enjoyed the highest record of 
profits in its history. Federated Co-operatives, which is based in 
rural western Canada, which derives most of its income from 
operations in western Canada, enjoyed the highest level of 
profits it’s ever had. Things aren’t going badly for Federated 
Co-operatives Ltd. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the things like the financial 
page of the Globe and Mail, or if you read the Financial Post 
and the Financial Times, you will see that these are not isolated 
examples. You will see that in fact that company after 
company, whether it’s in Saskatchewan or across Canada, 
aren’t hurting. They’re not hurting. They’re in fact enjoying 
record profits while we are suffering, and we’re suffering at the 
hands of a Conservative — a mean-spirited, narrow, 
Conservative government. And that’s the lie, that is the untruth, 
that this budget is based on. And that is why that they have the 
political, that it’s a political document, cause it doesn’t tell the 
truth in what’s happening in the economy. In fact it tries to 
picture exactly opposite, a mirror image of what’s happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a document that’s built on untruths of 
reinforce a government of untruth tellers. It doesn’t quite ring 
right, does it? I think Benjamin Disraeli term would suit the 
members opposite much more. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s Benjamin Disraeli’s term? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well Benjamin Disraeli talked about lies, damn 
lies and statistics and statisticians; and then I guess there’s the 
Tory — the Tory, that’s right; it was just the face we forgot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, besides being an illegitimate document that’s 
being presented to this House, we’re dealing with a government 
which is an illegitimate government. It’s a government which 
doesn’t have a mandate from the people of this province to do 
what they’re doing. It’s a government which was elected 
because it kept its agenda hidden in the closet, did not bring it 
out, did not dare bring it out because they knew that they would 
never in a thousand years get elected in Saskatchewan on their 
political program. They didn’t have the guts, quite frankly, they 
didn’t have the guts. They didn’t have the courage of their 
convictions. They wouldn’t put their convictions up front. 
They’re political cowards and each  

and every one of them will pay for that political cowardice, 
because they’ll be rooted out like the malignant lilies of the 
political field which they are, and they’re going to be rooted out 
by the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. Let me tell you that 
right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, when I talked in the throne speech 
— I had the opportunity to speak during the throne speech 
debate — I said that the people were silent now, and this was 
back in the winter, but come the spring the legislature of the 
streets would be speaking. And on Saturday we saw that 
legislature, we saw the vanguard of tens of thousands of 
Saskatchewan people gathering here in front of the legislature, 
saying, you have done us injustice and we demand redress. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, the major, major chant, the major slogan 
that was raised by those demonstrators from across the province 
— you know what it was? It was: dump Devine; down with the 
Tories; call a new election; get rid of them. Get rid of them. 
That was what the protesters were saying. They were hurt. They 
were feeling that hurt. But most of all, they were feeling the 
hurt of having been lied to. That’s what they were saying, Mr. 
Speaker: we’ve been lied to and we don’t like it very much and 
we’re not going to take it. 
 
The member from Moose Jaw North talked about people being 
as mad as hell. Well, I was at the demonstration on Saturday, 
and I think that’s an understatement. I think that’s an 
understatement, Mr. Speaker. They were more than made as 
hell. They want one thing and that’s just this: that’s just to get 
rid of that government. They don’t want these people in here 
because they were lied to. These people are illegitimate. They 
have no moral right. They have absolutely no moral right to 
govern this province. Oh, sure, they have the legal right because 
they had Brian Mulroney buy the election for them with his $1 
billion campaign promise. But they’ve got no moral right to sit 
there and govern this province because, as political cowards, 
they kept their hidden agenda in the closet and wouldn’t bring it 
out until well after the election, because they knew the people 
of Saskatchewan wouldn’t elect them. That’s why they’re an 
illegitimate government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one question, though, that we haven’t 
addressed yet. I notice the time, so before I get into this, I was 
wondering should we maybe adjourn the debate until this 
evening, given the . . . I notice the time. Or call it 5 o’clock? 
 
No. Okay. Fine, Mr. Speaker. I guess there’s one question that 
hasn’t been answered in this. They haven’t been answered in 
this, and I . . . and that’s the question: why are they doing it? I 
mean, why are they doing it? They say that they’ve got fiscal 
problems. They say that there’s a deficit problem. And we have 
time and time again — and the member for Regina North East 
in his excellent reply to the budget address — pointed out that, 
in fact, the document doesn’t speak the truth in telling the 
people of Saskatchewan that there are alternative sources of 
revenue; that in fact they can tax the oil companies, they can put 
back the oil royalties structure and be able to deal with the 
deficit in a fair way that affects all Saskatchewan, instead of the 
kind of mean-spirited way that they’re  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

608 
 

attacking people. 
 
Some people say to me that they think these people are bad or 
evil. Well, some may be. I don’t happen to think that. Some 
people say that they’re incompetent; and some are. We’ve seen 
the Minister of Finance for this government, time after time, 
bring in budgets which are totally out of line with reality, and 
that’s nothing more than political or fiscal incompetence. 
 
Some people say that these people over on the opposite side are 
fools. Well I’ll tell you what, they all are. They’re all fools if 
they end up voting for this budget because what they’re doing is 
voting for the end of their political future in this province. 
They’re all fools if they think that the people of Saskatchewan 
are going to forget what they’ve done. They’re all fools if they 
think that the people of Saskatchewan will forgive them. For 
while the people of Saskatchewan are caring and sharing, they 
won’t countenance one thing, and that’s being . . . having the 
truth, they won’t countenance the deceit. They won’t 
countenance the deceit that the members on the opposite side 
practice. So those people are fools . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: —. Order, order. Order. It being 5 o’clock, this 
House does not stand recessed until 7 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	ORAL QUESTIONS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS

