













































October 5, 1987 Debates Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 5, 1987 

 

 

3103 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 

Item 1 (continued) 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, prior to 5 o’clock this 

minister went t some length to tell us how he and his 

government had in fact increased the budget for Health over last 

year. I want to dispel that little fairy tale propagated by the 

Minister of Health because it’s simply not true, and I want to 

lay out for the public how it’s not true. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 1987-88 Health budget 

proposal represents an actual cut of more than $18 million 

below the 1986-87 level on a straight and fair comparative 

basis. And I want to show you how I arrive at that conclusion. 

 

In the 1986-87 blue book the total ordinary expenditure for 

Health was 1 billion, 136 million, point six. The health capital 

fund through property management was 75.4 million, and the 

supplementary estimates, Mr. Chairperson, were 31.3 million, 

for a total in 1986-87 of 1,243,300,000. 

 

In 1987-88, Mr. Deputy Chair, the total Health ordinary 

expenditure estimated is 1,173,500,000. If we take out the 

payments to the property management corporation of 10.7 

million and 4.6 million, and we add in the health capital to the 

property management corporation of 66.5 million, we have a 

total expenditure of 1,224,700,000. The difference, Mr. 

Chairperson, is $18.6 million — a cut of $18.6 million. 

 

Mr. Minister, in view of the information I’ve just given to you, 

how can you stand in this legislature and tell the people of this 

province that there’s been an increase in your Health budget? 

That’s simply not true, Mr. Minister, and I want you to show us, 

show us in very clear terms how you, Mr. Minister, and how 

your government arrived at a conclusion that you’ve increased 

the budget when in fact that’s simply not true. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the comments that I 

made are related to page 50 of the blue book, in the Estimates. 

Estimate over estimate last year $1,136,685,440; this year 

$1,173,471,400 — a difference of $36,785,960. 

 

You know, the member raises the question of the property 

management corporation money, some other special warrant 

money. The point that I made before and that I will make again, 

is that to listen to the comments — and this is the point that was 

being made before supper, if it wasn’t clear, I could make that 

point again. The point that needs to be made clearly and over 

and over again — if one was to listen to the comments from the 

member opposite, and you know, over a long period of time, to 

suggest that money is not being spent, that there are major  

slashes in the Health budget, and that there is no money being 

spent on the various programs for the health and well-being of 

our citizens, one would believe, listening to that only, that there 

is very little being spent on health care. 

 

What I say again is that there is close to $1.2 billion being spent 

this year, estimated in this year’s budget. Last year’s estimate 

was 1.1. That’s an increase, and we’re . .  You know, who’s to 

predict? I mean, I can’t predict exactly if there will be special 

warrants this year. We’re hoping not; we’re hoping that we can 

hold to the budget, and we have an intention to do that. To the 

extent that we can do that is basically unforeseen. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re stretching the 

truth, and the truth is that, yes, you can put whatever figures 

you want to into your budget estimates, but it doesn’t 

camouflage the fact that you in fact, Mr. Minister, have cut the 

Health budget by $18.6 million. 

 

And I don’t care how you try and stretch our imagination and 

how you try and mythicize the truth; that is in fact what 

happened. And you can put whatever you want into your budget 

estimate books, but we’ve had a cut of 18.6. And just so that 

you’re clear, I’ll say it to you again: in 1986-87, it is true, 

according to the budget books, that we had a $1,136,600 worth 

of estimates. That’s true; that’s true. But you had a health 

capital fund under property management of $75.4 million, and 

if you take into consideration the supplementary estimates, Mr. 

Speaker, you had 31.3 million, for a total of $1,243,000, Mr. 

Minister’ that’s the facts. 

 

In 1987-88, you were budgeting for $1,173,471,400; that’s true; 

you are doing that. But you’ve also put in payments to the 

property management corporation of some $15.3 million. If you 

take that out, Mr. Minister, and you add in the health capital 

fund of 66.5 million, your budget for Health, including property 

management payments, is 1,224,700,000. That, Mr. Minister, is 

a cut of $18.6 million, any way you slice it. 

 

So you can no longer parade around this province telling the 

people of this province that you have increased health spending 

because it’s simply not true. It’s an untruth, Mr. Minister, it’s an 

untruth, and you better start telling the truth because the people 

of this province aren’t stupid. And when you look at what’s 

happening to hospitals in this province, if you look what’s 

happening to home-care boards and nursing homes and every 

other kind of health care service that’s delivered in this 

province, people know what’s going on. They see what’s 

happening in those health care work places and in those health 

care facilities. They know there’s been a cut. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, do you deny that you’ve played a lot of 

jiggery-poker with these books, and will you now come clean 

and tell the people of this province that you haven'’ increased 

the health care budget 1 cent, and in fact, you’ve cut it $18.6 

million? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, let’s be clear about a 

couple of things. The member talks about health care. She 

talked about hospitals. I just heard her mentioning  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3104 

 

hospital care is cut; she said there’s cuts to hospital care. 

 

Mr. Chairman, let me just reiterate in what’s happening in the 

very basic elements of the health care budget. SADAC, 

Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission, increased 

$5,402,050 — a 68.9 per cent increase in that area, basically 

related to the — we’ll get into that in more detail later — but 

basically related to the initiatives, the Premier’s initiatives, 

announced in September last year. Hospital services plan, 

hospitals, payments to hospitals, increased 10,352,610 — a 2 

per cent increase to hospitals in Saskatchewan Special care 

homes, $15,227,970 increase — an increase of 8.7 per cent. 

 

Mr. Chairman, those are the kind of areas: special care homes 

— very large areas; hospitals, payments to hospitals — a very 

large area. And the member . .  and we’ve heard various things 

from her speaking about the base hospitals and so on. But these 

numbers are very impressive numbers when one considers, and 

we should consider it because you can’t consider the budget in 

this department or any other department without considering it 

in the context of the circumstance which we find ourselves in as 

a province and within the economy in which we all must 

operate. And within that context we still have these kinds of 

impressive increases that I’m talking about. Those increases are 

extensive increases, major, millions of dollars. We’re not 

talking about a few hundred dollars. And I hear them talking 

about nickeling and diming people. I heard that phrase from 

opposite a while ago, earlier, before supper. 

 

Ten million dollars more for hospitals; five million more for the 

Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission. Those are not nickels 

and dimes; those are millions of taxpayers’ dollars in this 

province. We’re proud to put those dollars forward for those 

very essential services, and we’ll stand by the budget which we 

present to the House here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re messing around 

with the truth again. The truth is that you’re not putting an extra 

$5 million into SADAC. If you take into consideration the 

supplementary estimates for last year and you add it on to your 

estimates for last year, in fact, you had an expenditure of 

10,037,000. That’s what happened, Mr. Minister. And in fact 

you’re only increasing SADAC by some $3 million. So once 

again you’re messing around with the truth and not telling the 

truth. 

 

And the same thing applies to hospitals, Mr. Minister, because 

you haven’t taken into consideration your own supplementary 

expenditures for the year ending 1987, which in fact grants to 

Saskatchewan hospitals required an additional 7,700,000. So 

quit jiggering around with the truth. 

 

The truth is that you cut the health care budget by $18.6 million 

— that’s the truth. And why don’t you just come clean and tell 

the people of this province that that’s what you’ve done and 

quit messing around with the truth. Tell us that you’ve cut that 

budget by $18.6 million because that’s what you’ve done. 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The numbers that I have laid out are the 

numbers which are, for comparative purposes, between the 

estimated ’86-87. And let me just say to the hon. member, if 

you take . .  let’s go to the Alcohol and Drug Abuse 

Commission, for example. The numbers on page 48 of the blue 

book will indicate 7,837,950 for that commission. And if you 

look at the supplementaries which the member has raised here, 

the supplementaries of 2,400,000, even with the supplementary 

of last year’s actual expenditure, there’s a significant increase in 

the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission. There’s no question 

that there’s an increase, the areas that I’ve said, there’s an 

increase. There’s an increase in payments to hospitals, 

including this estimate from ’87 to ’88, this estimate over and 

above the actual expenditure of ’86-87 which includes special 

warrants. There’s still an increase in payments to hospitals, and 

I stand by what I said earlier. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well I’m glad that you will finally admit 

that, contrary to what you earlier said, there wasn’t a $7 million 

increase or $5 million increase in expenditures on SADAC, the 

alcohol commission. There was only a $3 million increase, and 

I’m glad that you admit that you neglected to take into account 

the $7.7 billion in additional money that was spent in 1986-87 

for hospitals. 

 

I guess what we really need to point out here, Mr. Minister, is 

that you neglect a lot of things. You want us to believe there 

was a $5 million increase, and there wasn’t a $5 million 

increase. There was only a $3 million increase. And you want 

us to believe that there was a $10 million increase for hospitals, 

when, in fact, there was only a $3 million increase on a very 

significant and large amount of money which represents 

one-half of 1 per cent in increase to hospitals. 

 

You want us to believe that there is a $36 million increase in 

health care spending when, in fact, that’s not true. There isn’t a 

$36 million increase to health care spending; there’s an $18.6 

million decrease in health care spending — 18.6 million. And I 

simply want you, Mr. Minister, if we’re going to have any kind 

of dialogue in these Health estimates, to come clean and tell the 

truth. Tell the truth, Mr. Minister. 

 

Will you now admit that there’s an $18.6 million decrease in 

your health spending when you take into consideration all of 

your capital funds from last year and your supplementary 

estimates for last year and your estimates for last year? And 

when you compare that to what you have budgeted for this year, 

Mr. Minister, will you now admit there was $18.6 million cut? 

And then the question is: how is that improving health care by 

cutting health care, Mr. Minister? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, while the minister is conferring 

with his help in order to obtain an answer to my colleague’s 

question, I’d like to introduce, with the leave of the Assembly, 

some Cubs who are here tonight. 

 

Leave granted. 

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3105 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to introduce 

the DeShaye Cubs who are here this evening to see the 

proceedings of the legislature. They are ages 8, 9, and 10 years 

old, and I believe there are nine Cubs here this evening. And 

accompanying them are Mr. Bert West and Mrs. Judy West,, 

and Mr. Bill McGill and Pauline McGill. And I’d ask the 

members of this House to join me in the appropriate way and 

welcome these Cubs. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member will make 

the comparison of the close of ’86-87 compared to the estimate, 

which is what we will deal with here and must deal with just by 

the nature of the way the process works, of ’87-88. 

 

Now I’ll make those . .  If we make the comparison of the 

actual, it is very difficult to, you can’t . .  there’s no actuals, 

there is no close of ’87-88. There is no actual, and we are 

hoping that the actual will be very, very close to this, and I 

believe it may well be. I’m hoping it will be there. 

 

It is very difficult. We’re dealing now with a differential of a 

few million in a budget of a billion two, one billion two. I 

believe that the estimate that’s presented here of 

$1,173,471,400 is close to what the close will be, but that’s . .  

we don’t know that. And certainly the comparative numbers 

that are here and presented in the estimate book are the numbers 

which I have been dealing with and which, I, you know, 

because I’m comparing apples and apples and not apples and 

oranges, but I know we can get on and on with this for a long 

time. But I’m just telling you, and I went through some of the 

areas — hospitals, special care homes, drug and alcohol 

initiatives, all of those very basic areas, there are increases in 

whichever way you make your comparisons. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s quite obvious that 

you don’t want to acknowledge reality, and reality is that you 

and your government, your Progressive Conservative 

government, contrary to what you try and lead the public to 

believe, have cut our health care budget in this province by 

$18.6 million. You’ve cut it. 

 

You say you’ve increased health care and you cannot show this 

House how you’ve done that, Mr. Minister. You cannot show 

this House how you’ve increased your health care budget by 1 

per cent. And so, Mr. Minister, the truth is you’ve cut health 

care; you’ve cut it by $18.6 million. And that means, Mr. 

Minister, that there isn’t money to start dealing with those 

hospital waiting lists in the city of Saskatoon. In fact, St. Paul’s 

Hospital had a budget cut. It had to close more beds this 

summer than  

they ever had for a longer period of time, yet we have over 

11,000 people on the hospital waiting list. 

 

You, Mr. Minister, with your budget priorities have decided to 

change the prescription drug plan to such an extent that there 

are some citizens in this province that have to make a decision 

whether they put groceries on their table or they buy their 

needed medication. And you, Mr. Minister, are responsible for 

the choice that they are having to make because of your changes 

to the prescription drug plan. 

 

And you, Mr. Minister, eliminated coverage for children 

between the ages of 14 and 17 when it comes to their dental 

health, and you have radically altered the delivery of dental care 

in this province by privatizing the dental plan and firing 411 

health care workers, or dental care workers in this province, and 

eliminating, eliminating dental care services in our province in 

338 communities. 

 

You, Mr. Minister, have done that, and yet you want the public 

to believe that you’re improving health care; that you’re 

spending more money on health care; that your government is 

doing more for health care than any other government in the 

history of this province. And I simply point out to you, Mr. 

Minister, that that is a falsehood, that is untrue, and that you 

have cut the health care budget by $18.6 million, Mr. Minister. 

And you, Mr. Minister, if anything happens to any single citizen 

in this province because of your changes to our health care 

system, if anything happens in terms of their quality of life or if 

anything jeopardizes their life because of what you’ve done, 

your conscience, Mr. Minister, is going to have to deal with 

that. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government makes choices. You’ve chosen 

to cut the health care budget by $18.6 million. You made that 

choice, yet you’ve got $10 million for Peter Pocklington and 

you’ve got $20 million for political advertising and you have 

$10 million for your political aides and you have money to give 

to Weyerhaeuser so they can come in and take out our natural 

resources without ever having to pay for a cent. Well, Mr. 

Minister, those natural resources help pay for some of these 

social programs; those natural resources help pay. And you, Mr. 

Minister are selling out and giving everything all over to the 

private sector and our people don’t have access to proper health 

care services in this province because of your choices, your 

government policies. 

 

You told the people of this province in 1978 that you would do 

everything to improve our health care system and you said the 

same thing in 1982 and 1986 and it was a total falsehood. You 

never once told the people of this province that you were going 

to introduce a deductible program or deductible system for their 

prescription drug plan — not once did you tell them that. In 

fact, you had told them you’d improve it, and that, Mr. 

Minister, wasn’t true. 

 

You never once said that you were going to change the dental 

plan and fire 411 dental workers — not once did you say that. 

And, Mr. Minister, you never once said that you were going to 

cut funding to hospitals — hospitals, Mr. Minister, where 

cancer patients can’t get in for six weeks because of your 

underfunding. You’ve got money  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3106 

 

for your big PC buddies; you’ve got money for your big 

out-of-province corporations; you’ve got money for your 

American friends. But you don’t have money for health care in 

this province, Mr. Minister, and that’s a shame. That’s a shame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I haven’t finished. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I’ve had to sit in this legislature and listen to 

you and all your other buddies. Well you’re going to sit here 

and listen to me and what I have to say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now I go back, Mr. Minister. Just answer the 

question, just answer it. Did you cut health care by $18.6 

million? Did you or didn’t you? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod; Are you finished? . .  (inaudible 

interjection) . .  Okay. Mr. Speaker, a couple of things here that 

should be pointed out. The member persists in talking, and she 

used examples of . .  and I heard her very clearly say that there 

was a cut to St. Paul’s Hospital, that there’s less money for St. 

Paul’s, less money for University Hospital. She mentioned the 

major hospitals in the cities. And I just want to point out some 

actual numbers so that the member opposite will know what 

those numbers are, and we’ll see that there has not been a cut in 

the number of dollars available to the hospitals. 

 

Mr. Chairman, since ’81-82 — the member will not like to hear 

this because it’s been laid out to her before, and to other 

members of her caucus — government spending in the area of 

health care has increased by 63 per cent. During the same 

period, government spending overall has increased by 55 per 

cent, which means that the increase in health care has been over 

and above what’s happened in the other areas. 

 

Now let’s just go through some of the hospitals that the member 

mentioned. She said there was a cut to St. Paul’s Hospital in 

terms of the number of dollars available to them. St. Paul’s 

Hospital in ’86-87, total payments — $33,122,472 (’86-87); in 

’87-88, total payments or the payments which have been 

approved and which the hospitals are very aware of — 

$33,220,608, an increase of $98,136. So that’s an increase of 

$98,000. University Hospital, an increase of $1,366,008 to the 

University Hospital. Saskatoon City Hospital, an increase, 

$1,162,200, an increase in the payments to the hospital. Regina 

Plans, an increase, $538,608; Regina Pasqua, an increase, 

$702,696; Regina General, an increase of $729,696. 

 

Every one of those major base hospitals has an increase in 

funding. And as I said before, Mr. Chairman, it’s extremely 

important that we recognize the time that we’re in. When that 

increase can be there for each of those hospitals, Mr. Chairman, 

that is the record that we’ll stand by, not the record of what the 

member has talked about and said. 

(1930) 

 

She continues to use the words, “cuts.” She says them — there 

were cuts to the dollars available to St. Paul’s. We’ve all heard 

it. She says there were cuts to the dollars available to University 

Hospital, and to City Hospital, and to Pasqua, and the General, 

and the Plains. She says there are cuts there. She has said that so 

many times, Mr. Chairman, I believe she start . .  she has begun 

now to believe her own rhetoric herself. I think she believes it. 

And some of her troops over there actually believe what she 

says. That is what is the scary part of all this, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the numbers I’ve laid out are the numbers as it 

relates to those hospitals, and yet we’ll continue to hear this. 

The member once again, as we talked about before supper, says, 

oh, there are people in the province of Saskatchewan who are 

not able to have access to the drugs they need for their 

well-being. Mr. Chairman, that’s just not the case. It is not the 

case, let me repeat that. People in Saskatchewan have access to 

the most generous — even though we’ve changed it as of July 1 

— they have access now, right now, to the most generous 

prescription drug plan that exists in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, when you say there’s been an 

increase of all of these dollars for these hospitals, as you know, 

at the end of the year hospitals negotiate final settlements, and 

I’m wondering if those increases take into consideration the 

final agreements that all hospitals in this province negotiate 

with the Department of Health, and whether these are 

make-believe numbers again based on estimates for last year 

versus estimates for this year, or are these actual increases, 

actual dollar increases based on that final negotiated set of 

dollars? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to tell the 

member that the numbers that I’ve given do not reflect the final 

settlements, and so those are clean numbers. They do not . .  

The final settlement process is in process right now, so those 

numbers that I’ve given you are the numbers that the hospitals 

have before them, and they are not a reflection of those final 

settlements. And as you will know, I think the final settlements 

are now being negotiated and then once they’re completed there 

will be adjustments given here. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well that’s what I thought, Mr. Minister, 

because when I talk to hospitals in this province, they advise me 

that they’ve either received no increase, Mr. Minister, over last 

year in what they anticipate in their final settlement, or they’ve 

received a cut. And I am told by people at St. Paul’s Hospital, 

and we have some documents that confirm that, that they only 

received 97 per cent this year over what they received last year, 

in anticipation of that final settlement. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, once again, once again we see some 

jiggery-pokery with the figures. Once again, you play out 

figures in front of this legislature and we find out that they 

don’t include the final settlement that the SHSP negotiates with 

those hospitals. 

 

You know, I can’t believe you. I can’t believe you. You  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3107 

 

know, you say there’s a $5 million increase to SADAC, and 

there isn’t. You say there’s a $10 million increase to SHSP, and 

a few minutes later you back down. You say there’s an increase 

to hospitals, and then you say that that doesn’t take into 

consideration the final settlement. I say there’s an $18.6 million 

budget cut; you look to the blue book and say that there’s a $36 

million increase. But you don’t take into consideration 

supplementaries or Health funds or anything else. We can’t 

believe a thing you say. 

 

And when the people in this province learn what you’re up to, 

Mr. Minister, and they will, they will conclude that you’re a 

Health minister, a Health minister that has undermined and 

underfunded medicare in this province. And you try to pretend 

that you’re doing something to enhance medicare, and it’s 

simply not true, Mr. Minister, it’s simply not true. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the numbers that I have 

laid out as it relates to those hospitals . .  and I don’t know how 

the member would suggest that there could be final settlements 

already completed — they aren’t. I’ve not misled you in any 

way at all in these numbers. There they are — St. Paul’s 

Hospital, increase of $98,136. 

 

Now the member . .  There’s one thing there that sort of would 

suggest to me that the member may be several months behind in 

terms of when she’s talked to anybody at a hospital, because the 

number 97 per cent, which would mean a 3 per cent decrease in 

that first two or three months, was a number that was done . .  

and the hospitals knew that was coming. They knew that the 

budget was coming down in June — we had told them that — 

and that when the budget did come down, we said prior to that 

for the months of April, May and June, you will be paid 97 per 

cent of your level. I recognize that some of them at that time 

felt some consternation and say, well, hey, this is going to be a 

3 per cent decrease. We said no, don’t worry about that, but 

here’s the number for now and there will be adjustments 

upward. And, in fact, adjustments upward came. 

 

The numbers that I reiterated to you here a few moments ago at 

the base hospitals, those actual numbers that are now a matter 

of record are the actual numbers, and those are the numbers that 

have . .  those are the numbers that the hospitals have available 

to them in each individual case. The 97 per cent number that 

you give us is one that’s, at the very latest, was a number that 

they talked about in maybe early June, but not since the early 

part of June. And if any administrator was still talking about 

that, you know, in the latter part of June or into July, well then I 

would say that these aren’t the numbers. So these are the 

numbers, and those are the numbers that I’m sure will be 

confirmed by whatever administrator in whichever hospital you 

want to try. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to move these estimates now into a very 

specific health care issue and a very specific part of your 

department and an extremely important part of your 

department’s work, and I refer to the Saskatchewan Alcohol 

and Drug Abuse Commission and the work that they’re doing 

— SADAC. 

At the outset, I don’t think we need to spend a great deal of time 

in discussing the problem that exists out there. I think members 

on all sides will agree that a real problem does exist. 

 

We know that alcohol and drugs are being abused in 

Saskatchewan. We know it’s a growing problem and we know 

it’s one of the most significant health-related problems in the 

province. And we know full well the human consequences, the 

tragic human consequences. We know of the lives of the 

families that are destroyed. WE know of job loss and work loss. 

We know of the injury and death on our highways. We know of 

the crime. We know of the marriage breakup. We know of teen 

pregnancies. 

 

Perhaps worst of all, we recognize the lost human potential. 

And then in all of that we also have the financial cost of alcohol 

and drug abuse. So I think all members will agree that we’ve 

got a problem, and it’s a problem at any age, but it’s 

particularly tragic, I think, when it involves young people. 

 

Now on one of the few occasions I have agreed with the 

Premier of this province, it was on that occasion when during 

his throne speech last December he said to this House and to the 

people of Saskatchewan that drug and alcohol abuse among the 

young people of Saskatchewan is a rising tide. He described it 

as a rising tide. And in response to that problem as he identified 

it, a year ago now the Premier introduced the special initiative. 

 

Mr. Minister, to begin these discussions with you, I would ask 

you to reflect as Minister of Health, and I’m sure you have 

some thoughts on this issue, I would ask you to reflect for this 

House and for the people of Saskatchewan some of your 

understanding why this problem currently exists, and why, to 

quote the Premier, we are seeing among the young people of 

Saskatchewan a rising tide of abuse. 

 

I would like you to just reflect for us on those two questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, we could go for 

some good long time on this, and I know the member has some 

strong points of view, as I do, as it relates to this. I’m not sure 

what we can . .  Well I think it’s a reasonable thing for us to talk 

about because, you know, there is a major amount of money 

being spent in this area. It is a problem . .  a problem of abuse of 

alcohol and drugs is a problem which some have talked about 

and used terms like epidemic proportions, and you’ll be aware 

of many of the statements that have come out. It’s a problem 

that has it’s root, I would suggest, in a society that’s moving 

very, very quickly for a lot of people. There’s some social 

stresses; there are all of those kinds of things which we often 

hear about. It’s a problem which is even more severe now 

because it seems that there are younger and younger people 

becoming involved in the abuse of these substances and of 

alcohol. 

 

Now to be able to wax eloquent about why that’s the case — I 

don’t know. I honestly don’t know why, except to say that we 

are in a world in transition, we are in a world that travels faster 

than many of our young people and many of  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3108 

 

us, at whatever ages, are able to cope with. 

 

I believe that there are more and more substances, and the kinds 

of things that are available to young people. There are more and 

more of these kinds of things available to them than there were 

when you and I were young, let’s say. And I think of examples 

that we see now, and they’re examples that are not confined to 

the large cities of North America; they’re everywhere, including 

our own province. Things like crack, and all of the various new 

“innovations” which some of the lower-life types in our society, 

frankly, will come up with in order to make a profit and so on, 

at the expense of the lives of young people, and not-so-young 

people. 

 

(1945) 

 

So sure, there is a large social sort of a root to this. And 

whenever we get into the discussion, or whenever any one . .  

What I’ve found, being in this portfolio for this short period of 

time and to some extent in my profession prior to coming to 

politics, is that when you discuss the abuse substances in 

alcohol with a lot of knowledgeable people across this province 

and elsewhere, a couple of schools of thought which come to 

the problem, one of them is the school of thought which says, 

this is a societal thing, which I’ve reiterated to some extent 

here. In other words, big, bad society made this guy take the 

drinks to the extent that he has, or she has. 

 

There’s another school of thought that says the individual has a 

responsibility for what they, he, or she will do with, you know, 

and what they will introduce to their body. And I think that, you 

know, the jury is still out in terms . .  and I don’t think that you 

can make a definitive line and say this is where it’s society’s 

problem and this is where it’s the individual’s own problem 

when they get involved in this sort of thing. But there is an 

element of both of those sides, no question about that. 

 

I do know this. While there was a great deal of concern 

expressed by a lot of people for a long time, across the 

province, people form, well just the whole spectrum of our 

society, there was little done for a long time. I’m not sure that 

even with the major increases . .  and I don’t want to get this 

into the discussion of the major increases in dollars and how 

many dollars you throw at the problem, because even with these 

increases and with the initiatives that we’ve undertaken after 

recognizing the problem, it won’t be enough. It won’t be 

enough to deal with the problem that’s out there especially as it 

relates to the young people. 

 

All I can say is that you must be pragmatic enough to say 

regardless of the times we’re in, regardless of the other 

pressures which are on the health system — and you hear some 

of them — regardless of the other pressures which are on the 

wider system of running a government in these circumstances, 

we must address this problem, and we have, and we will 

continue to do that. 

 

We can get into some specifics. I know you will want to, and 

you haven’t asked this in this first foray into the subject, but . .  

I don’t know that I can add much more unless we’re going to 

really get into the philosophy of this for a long period of time. I 

don’t know if I can add much  

more, but I will say that I share with you and with a good 

number of other people across this province and across this 

country a major concern about several things — the availability 

of these drugs and substances, the level of abuse of these drugs 

and substances. I just share that concern with a lot of people, a 

lot of responsible people in our society. And I hope that we can 

. .  if you have some suggestions on how we can do more, then 

let’s hear them and we’ll get into it on that basis. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I intend, I fully intend during the 

course of our estimates to indeed offer you some suggestions. I 

do think it is important at the very outset that we do have some 

discussion about the causes of the problem. It is appropriate that 

we treat the results of the problem, but I think it is also 

appropriate that we look at the causes of the problem and 

attempt to deal also with those causes and not simply the tragic 

results of the problem, Mr. Minister. 

 

And so I would like to ask you, in my experience of working 

with young people it has been my experience that young people 

often turn to drugs and alcohol, and I think more often and 

particularly alcohol, that young people will turn to those 

substances when they wish to . .  for two reasons perhaps, two 

broad reasons. One may be an attempt to escape reality. To 

escape the reality of a given situation, they may turn to alcohol 

when they lack some vision or some hope for the future. And 

secondly, they may turn to alcohol when influenced, when 

influenced by others, when influenced by media. 

 

So I would ask if you would agree with me that we might look 

to the kind of employment picture that young people are facing 

in the province right now, the kind of employment picture that’s 

so bleak for them. Would you see that as at least partial cause of 

some of the problem we have among our young people today? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of things. And you know, I’m 

reminded here by my officials, and I think this is the sort of 

position taken by the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission and 

by professionals across the country, frankly, that we have got to 

remember that much of what we talk about in terms of the 

problems experienced by some individuals is that this is a 

disease, first and foremost — it’s a disease. It’s not necessarily 

a social problem that they have, whatever, but it is a disease for 

which, given the proper intervention at the right time and so on, 

that there is some potential for recovery. And nobody would be 

involved in treatment programs if we didn’t believe that there 

would be potential for recovery. 

 

Some of the factors, I’ll just get back to a couple of the things 

that we said earlier. Many of the institutions in our society, the 

society that we’re all, you know, that’s very interrelated, 

haven’t adjusted to this problem and some of the things that we 

talked about earlier. Institutions like the one that I was formerly 

associated with, the school system, institutions like the one that 

you’re associated with — in terms of the Church, whatever 

denomination it is — I would submit that those institutions have 

not adjusted either to this world in rapid transition that we’re in. 

And you know, we can talk about that as it relates to the 

individual institutions, and because of that many of the factors 

and the positive forces, we’ll say, that were  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3109 

 

there, are not there as they once were. 

 

Communications have changed in a major way, in terms of just 

the . .  and transportation, the way young people get around. I’m 

emphasizing young people here more than anything, because I 

believe that’s where we must put our major thrust so that we 

can salvage the youngest of lives, because there’s more to 

salvage, frankly, in many of these cases. 

 

There are many international sort of factors in terms of the way 

this, you know, some of the materials and the substances are 

transported around the world, and the borders, and the way in 

which they move them across the borders. Family pressures and 

so on — now we're getting into some of the area that you've 

talked about in terms of the way in which the society in the new 

economy, as you will have heard from my colleague, the 

Minister of Education, and others in here . .  But regardless of 

what we call it, whether it’s the new economy or the economy 

in transition or the world in transition, whatever it is, those are 

facts of life. 

 

And those things, those things are contributing to, you know, to 

a major change in the way in which we work, the way in which 

we need retraining, the pressures on dad at home, the pressures 

on mom at home, the pressures of both parents working — all 

of the kinds of things which are part of the society we now are a 

part of. 

 

So I would only say to you that, sure, all of the social things can 

have some influence. And you know, I believe that if we go 

back to my earlier suggestion, that there are two schools of 

thought in this area — one which says it’s big, bad society that 

forced the individual X over here to become an abuser of drugs 

and alcohol and whatever else X is involved with. I would 

believe that you would be, you know, I just . . And I don’t 

know, you can say not, but I would believe you believe that you 

say, it’s society that’s doing it to him. And I would say that . .  

while I recognize there are societal pressures, I don’t believe 

that to the extent that I believe you do. Okay, so we’ll just leave 

it at that. But I know that there are significant pressures on 

young people. I’ve seen it in my former profession, and I see it 

now in the widest sense in our society. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, then I submit to you, 

indeed, there are pressures, and I agree with much of what 

you’ve said, but indeed there are pressures on Saskatchewan 

young people, and part of them are related to their future and 

what they see as their future, and that has much to do with the 

employment prospects in the province and so on. 

 

I dug up just a little . .  a few statistics related to youth and their 

employment in Saskatchewan. Since 1982 — comparing 1982 

to 1987 — in 1982 there were 112,000 people between the ages 

of 15 and 24 employed in Saskatchewan. In 1987 there are only 

98,000 in that age group employed. That’s a decrease of 14,000 

people, or a 12.5 per cent decrease. 

 

Our unemployment rate among people between ages 15 and 24, 

our unemployment rate in that age group has risen 23 per cent 

since 1982. Between 1982 and ’87 it’s  

risen 23 per cent. The unemployment rate for people ages 15 to 

24 in 1982 was 10.4 per cent. The unemployment rate today for 

that same age group is 14 per cent. That’s a 34.6 per cent 

increase. 

 

Mr. Minister, I use those figures to illustrate the situation that 

many young people in Saskatchewan are facing . .  and I submit 

to you that indeed that is an influence on them and a pressure on 

their lives. And so as a positive direction, as a positive 

suggestion for dealing with some of the cause — and I’m 

saying some of it, not all of it — but for some of the cause, 

would you not see it wise for your government as a total — not 

your department — but your government, total, to be looking at 

this need in Saskatchewan for youth employment? This would 

say to me, we should have now a winder works program in 

place that Saskatchewan young people could be looking 

forward to employment this winter. 

 

So I offer that, Mr. Minister, as one course of direction not just 

your department but your government as a whole could 

undertake to begin to deal with some of the cause of the drug 

abuse problem in our province. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of things here, now, and 

certainly we’ll get into the whole concept of, you know, 

encouraging employment and, well, like I say, encouraging 

employment in a time of change and so on. We can into that. 

 

I think it’s important, just the one point that I didn’t make last 

time and I should have, and this is a fact as it relates to the 

abuse of substance and alcohol and so on. There is as much 

abuse among the economically advantaged, if you could call 

them that, as there is among the economically disadvantaged, or 

those that are feeling the ravages of unemployment and some 

other things which would show that it’s that sort of life-style 

that we’re now leading. 

 

And I don’t know what all of the answers are, and if I knew 

them, I would probably write and book and make more money 

than you and I do here. I don’t know them. I have thought about 

this. I will say to the hon. member, I’ve thought about this a 

good deal prior to coming to this portfolio but certainly, since 

coming to this portfolio, this is an area which one cannot avoid 

thinking a good deal about. 

 

You know, I hear what you’re saying and I know what you’re 

. .  You know, you’ll say, well if we had a winter works 

program, that would help us with the factors which lead to 

alcohol and drug abuse. I’m going to say to you that that’s a 

very narrow sort of approach. And I don’t want to say that in a 

derogatory sense or anything; I just want to point this out. 

 

If you have listened carefully to some of the debate leading up 

to and dealing with some of the changes which are taking place 

in the Department of Education, and not only the department 

because that’s just a reflection of education, but the changes 

that are taking place in the training programs in education 

across this province are a part of a multi-pronged thrust at 

dealing with just some of these kinds of societal pressures. And 

what they have done is said, look, we are in this transitional 

economy. We’re moving toward a new  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3110 

 

economy. Whether we do anything or not it will be upon us. 

That’s the fact. 

 

There is change upon us whether the government, as one 

institution in the society, or the church, another one, or the 

school system, or all of the other institutions in our society want 

to recognize it, or are able to keep up with the change, or want 

to do any of those things. The fact is that change is upon us, and 

it’s coming more quickly than some of us would like to think 

because none of us should believe that we’re ready in a total 

sense. 

 

(2000) 

 

So that’s the kind of thing, retraining, addressing youth 

unemployment through that way. I mean I have often said, and I 

believe this to be the case, a winter works program as a “fix” 

for unemployment problems, where you pay somebody to 

shovel the snow out the rink, it’s either going to be shovelled or 

they won’t skate, or it’ll melt anyway in the spring, is not the 

kind of program that should be. 

 

The one program which has been, you know, the subject of 

much derision from many of your colleagues — the home 

program where the people have been fixing their homes and so 

on, and the kind of people are working in many, many, many, 

many small businesses, has been a job-creation program in the 

greatest sense of job creation in this province. And I don’t have 

the numbers before me, and you wouldn’t expect to have here 

in the Health estimates. 

 

But the kinds of things that this government has tried to do . .  I 

mention education. I mention the major theme which can be — 

if to put a label on it, and it’s hard to do — diversification of 

this economy. That’s a major thrust that must take place 

regardless of what the naysayers will say. It must take place 

because it addresses the very thing we’re talking about in 

education, in these very estimates as we talk about the pressures 

upon our citizens, young or old. 

 

So you, know, without reiterating it any longer, I just want to 

say to you that I believe that the trust we have in diversification, 

the thrust we have in encouraging new industry here, new jobs 

created in whatever long-term and viable sort of operations that 

can be there, are positive things. And I don’t know . .  I mean 

I’m not here to talk about whether there will be or won’t be 

winter works, but I would tell you that winter works in the 

oldest sense of shovelling the snow off the rink is not what I 

call meaningful job creation. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, my point is simply this. I 

have statistics here that would indicate to me we have a rising 

tide of youth unemployment in Saskatchewan. I think those 

statistics are fairly clear and unarguable. The Premier says, I 

agree, we have a rising tide of drug and alcohol abuse among 

our young people. Now it seems to me there may be a 

relationship between the two, and if we sincerely want to deal 

with the one, then we sincerely need to deal with the other. 

 

There are other influences on Saskatchewan young  

people. One in particular that I will wish to discuss a little later 

this evening, Mr. Minister. 

 

I would like now to move to some specific undertakings by 

your government. And I placed on the order paper way back in 

December a number of specific questions about the announced 

initiatives of last fall, of last September. I put them on the order 

paper last December; we debated them in this House some 

weeks ago, and I as yet do not have an answer to these 

questions. And so perhaps through the estimate process, some 

of these questions can be answers . .  (inaudible interjection) . .  

Yes, they’ve been ordered. So maybe we can do it right here 

and that will solve it. 

 

So in regard to the initiatives announced by the Premier last 

September, a year ago now, in regard to the alcohol and drug 

abuse program, my first question is this: I would like to know 

the amount specifically of that $4 million, approved, that has 

been spent in ’86-87. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I just want to clarify something with the 

member; I’m not trying to avoid it in any way. Just to go with 

the process in the House, if this is a specific question that was 

asked during the process of orders for return, and they have in 

fact been ordered by the House, and we’ve undertaken to 

provide the answers in a written form — if that’s the case, Mr. 

Chairman, I want a point of clarification if we should go 

through this or if we should just . .  I just give the undertaking 

to the member that they’ll be provided in a short time . .  or 

what? 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I’m unclear if the minister was 

addressing a question to you or to me. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I guess the chairman is looking up the 

answer. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So he’s now looking up the answer. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Chair finds the questions in order. It’s up to 

the minister whether he wants to answer the question or not 

from this form. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, I don’t have any . .  My question 

was just a point of clarification if that’s the case. So they’re in 

order. 

 

What I will say to the member is that all of these questions that 

he referred to have been ordered. All of those questions will be 

answered, and we’ll answer them in, I don’t know how long, 

but I will undertake to say they won’t be long from now, a 

matter of . .  it won’t be months, it’ll be weeks. We’ll be sure 

that you have the answers to them. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, you have, I’m not sure all of 

your officials, but certainly a good number of your officials 

here in the House tonight. These are extremely straightforward 

and simple questions, and so I will ask you these questions, 

questions that also spring from them. I mean, they’ve been 

around for so long that some of them are out of date anyways; I 

won’t bother asking them. If I wait for answers for who knows 

how much longer, months or years, the questions could be 

totally out of date. 

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3111 

 

So initially then, Mr. Minister, how much of the $4 million 

promised in the program has been spent in the fiscal year 

1986-87? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I don’t want to get into, you know, a 

harangue here about this. I just say to the member, I’ll give you 

just some rough numbers because I don’t know that all of the 

answers have been prepared in the form for the . .  but I’ll give 

you the rough numbers here. 

 

The initiatives, I think, were announced 4,080,000. Is that the 

number you have? Okay. And the actual expenditure was two 

million three, and the . .  you know, in anticipating your next 

question, the shortfall in that is almost all related to what was 

budgeted for Whitespruce. And I can go into some explanation 

about Whitespruce and the track that it’s on and why most of 

the expenditures are this year, will be in this year rather than 

last. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Precisely the track that I want you on, Mr. 

Minister. That’s my next question, having to do with 

Whitespruce. Simply this, Mr. Minister, Whitespruce being the 

youth alcohol and drug treatment centre announced a year ago 

now. An announcement I think that welcomed by . .  I don’t 

know if there’s a person in the province of Saskatchewan who 

didn’t welcome that announcement that we were to have a 

youth treatment centre right here in the province. 

 

My fundamental question, Mr. Minister, is: the announcement 

was made a year ago — that’s 12 months ago. The centre is not 

yet open, functioning, and receiving Saskatchewan young 

people. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Let me . .  I just want to go through the 

process as it relates to the development of Whitespruce and I 

think the hon. member will understand clearly. 

 

First of all, as we talked earlier about dealing with . .  and what 

Whitespruce will deal with is the treatment of youth any time, 

and we’re breaking new ground here, as the member will know 

as well, and this is absolutely new ground in this country. There 

is no youth treatment centre in Canada, anywhere like this one, 

or anything even comparing to it. We looked for a . .  

 

Let’s just go through the process. We appointed a board with a 

chairman, whom I believe has done a very excellent job in 

terms of dealing with not only the professionals but the 

concerned people in our society out there, and that member . .  

that board chairman is Gordon Currie, a former member of the 

House, and so on. 

 

And I hear the member from Regina North East, representing 

Regina, who will want to say that Gordon Currie was a terrible 

patronage appointment and so on. Not many people in Regina 

would suggest that, and I don’t think that the member’s own 

constituents would suggest that. The fact is Gordon Currie has 

done an excellent job of this and is doing an excellent job of 

this. That’s number one. 

 

It’s very important to have the right people in place in  

terms of assessing what shall be the most appropriate treatment 

program to develop or to introduce to the province. They looked 

extensively at programs which are available in the United 

States. The one that they chose to deal with is the one which is 

in place in Mandan in North Dakota. Heartview, and for various 

reasons it was seen by the board and other people involved as 

being the best system. 

 

They then contracted with Heartview to put the treatment 

program in place here in Yorkton, at Whitespruce. All of this, 

as the member will know, takes a good deal of time, and the 

part that will take a significant amount of time and which is 

under way now, well along, is that the training of the staff, the 

people who will be actual counsellors and in the centre, is 

taking place now at Mandan. 

 

So we have people on training there now, and when they have 

done . .  You know, and there were kind of two schools of 

thought on this. There was one which says we can train the 

people for a certain module, a period of time, a couple of 

months, and then perhaps have them trained at Whitespruce 

with some professionals from Mandan. And as the time goes 

on, the decision as I understand it was made, and I believe a 

good and valid decision, to take the full six-month modules at 

Mandan and put the people there, into Mandan for six months 

and they deal with it. And that’s what’s going on at the present 

time. 

 

We now have an executive director who’s now hired, so that 

Mr. Curries role will be just that, as a board chairman, and not 

so much as on a hands-on basis as he has over the past number 

of months. That executive director is in place and now living in 

Yorkton, as I understand it. 

 

Oh, what else? The process is under way, in terms of through 

the property management corporation, of upgrading some of the 

buildings which are the former Whitespruce forces base, to fit 

this system. There has been a decision to made in terms of how 

appropriate some of the buildings that are there are, and the fact 

is that some of them are not appropriate for the kind of pod 

system which is needed for this facility. And so there will be 

new construction, some new construction going on, but that will 

be after — during and after the time when we have received the 

first students into this facility. 

 

So it’s been . .  And I recognize what you’re saying in terms of 

why so long, because the need is great, and we know that. But 

there’s also a greater danger in dealing with new ground and in 

dealing with the lives of young people, that we be sure, to the 

extent that it’s humanly possible, that we do it right and 

properly. And that’s the track we’re on. 

 

Mr. Currie’s recommendations, and I value them highly, are 

that we go in this area. And we believe that we’ll have the first 

people coming into the system, oh, I don’t know — very early 

in the new year. But certainly we’ll have people there and 

training and staffers on sight, and so on, before this year is out. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your remarks in 

this regard. You’ve left me with a few unanswered  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3112 

 

questions. I think I’ve heard you say, then, we’ve had a 

commitment that Whitespruce should be opening and 

functioning before the end of this year, and certainly early in 

the year 1988. Is that the commitment you’re making? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Our track has been that we would have 

students there by the end of this year because of this decision to 

go to the six-month training — total training in the full modules 

for all the people, prior. The students may not be there before 

the end of this calendar year, but certainly there will be students 

in that place before the end of this fiscal year, and they’ll be 

under way as soon as we can have it happen. But we really . .  

At this point, we will have people there; we will have the 

buildings, I believe, very close to being ready by the end of this 

calendar year. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I take it when you’re referring to 

students being at Whitespruce you’re referring to young people 

who will be there for treatment when you use the word, student. 

When the young people are finally into the process at 

Whitespruce, will all of the costs of their treatment — and by 

that I mean their lodging, their meals, their accommodation, 

their counselling — will all of the cost of the treatment be borne 

by your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — There are no plans to charge 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I’d like to be very clear. So all of the costs that 

a young person from anywhere in Saskatchewan who will be 

treated at Whitespruce will be covered by your department. 

How will young people be referred to Whitespruce? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — You’re right in your interpretation of 

what I said. Saskatchewan people, treatment will be paid for, 

and so on, and that’s the case. 

 

I should say, while I say that, I make the differentiation between 

Saskatchewan people and others. And obviously this is . .  you 

know, it will be for Saskatchewan people. There’s a good deal 

of interest from other jurisdictions on both sides of us and 

others that would say as this thing builds — and they’re 

watching it with care and have sent officials over here and so 

on, in the possibility of buying space and so on — but that’s a 

thing that we will get into as time goes on. And as we can walk 

before we run and prove to be successful, which we very much 

think we will, you know, we’re hesitant to get too big too fast. 

 

But Saskatchewan people, yes, it will be paid and the referral 

system will be through SADAC counsellors, for example, 

through the education system and the medical system. Just the 

systems that are out there in the community to deal with, and 

that will deal with these people, young people, on the ground, 

on a day-to-day basis. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, how many spaces will be 

available for young people when the centre opens? How many 

spaces will be available? 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The configuration that is seen and that 

is believed by our people to be the best would be modules of 

15, or pods, as they call them, and it would start with 15 and 

move upwards by groups of 15 to a total of 60 spaces. You 

know, a total of 60 spaces, and then from there it’s a matter of, I 

guess, success and just how many we could have. But that’s 

what the discussion is now — in terms of 60, and modules of 15 

in a group. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’m not clear. Are you funding 

an initial module of 15 this year, or can we expect to see the 

total of 60 spaces being funded this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — We’ll be beginning with the first 

module of 15. The time track that’s been approved by the 

government, by cabinet, is to get to the total of 16 over a period 

of two years, this year and next. Of 60 — did I say 16? I’m 

sorry. Modules of 15, four modules of 15, if everything goes 

well. If the system proves to be successful with the first 15, we 

add another 15, and so on. The approval of the time track that 

we have is for a period of approximately two years. 

 

I want to reiterate here that I don’t think it would be reasonable 

to . .  I don’t want to say these in a very definitive way to say, 

this is the date at which this next 15 will come in and so on, 

because it’s extremely important that we recognize what we’re 

dealing with here, and I know you do. We’re dealing with 

young people who are in severe need of help, and I don’t know 

what the success rate will be. All the people in this business can 

do is work toward the best possible success rate. So 15, 15, 15, 

and then another 15 for a maximum of 60 and hopefully within 

a two-year time track. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I don’t think there’s any 

question that 60 spaces can be utilized easily in our province. 

 

Mr. Minister, you spoke earlier about some renovations that are 

occurring up at Whitespruce or may have to occur. Are those 

renovations being funded from the property management or are 

they being funded from funds which are set aside for SADAC’s 

use? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The renovations are being funded by 

property management but there’s money in SADAC’s budget, 

money in SADAC’s budget for the ongoing lease of rental 

space as is the case in office space for other agencies of 

government and so on. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Minister, then the $1.7 million that 

wasn’t spent last yea r- you indicated to me that you’d spent 

2.3; that leaves about 1.7 that was not spent — is that money 

still then part of the budget for Whitespruce? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, that money is not lost to the 

Whitespruce project. It will be carried forward for this project 

and is specific to this project. 

 

I just want to reiterate the shortfall that was there from what 

was to be in place, and the shortfall is almost totally a 

Whitespruce shortfall because of some of the reasons that I’ve 

outlined in the last few minutes. 

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3113 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Is that money then included in the estimate 

figure we have for this year for SADAC? Is it part of the 13 

that’s budgeted for this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — My folks are telling me that a similar 

amount will be there this year for expenditure in Whitespruce. 

It’s 1.5 million is what we expect to spend at Whitespruce this 

year. Okay? And a good deal of that will depend on how fast 

we get into the second pod as they call it — the second module 

of 15, or the third, and so on. But the expenditure line is there. 

What we have in the estimated budget for ’87-88 for 

Whitespruce, specific to Whitespruce, is $1.5 million for this 

year. Okay? 

 

And I said to you earlier, I think I used the term, carry forward. 

I don’t want to give you the impression that carry forward 

means that there will be the 1.5 which is budgeted now plus the 

1.7 which is somehow in the bank. That 1.7 will be there in 

terms of the total of Whitespruce over a period of time. All of 

that will be whatever Whitepsruce is going to cost us. But in 

terms of when it’s spent, will be as time goes on. But this year, 

$1.5 million. Last year we budgeted a similar amount — 1.5 

million, and didn’t spend it for the reasons that I outlined 

earlier. This year we believe we’ll have no trouble spending the 

1.5 which is allocated. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So in fact you’re saying, Mr. Minister, then, 

that last year you budgeted about $4 million for this initiative 

— not for Whitespruce — for the total initiative. You spend 

$2.3 million, and of the money that wasn’t spent, $1.5 million is 

because of what didn’t happen at Whitespruce. So that money 

then that was committed is simply lost, it’s simply gone, and 

that any money that’s in this year’s budget is actually new 

money for this year. And so because the project wasn’t 

functioning, your actual commitment to this initiative last year 

is more like $2.5 million and not $4 million at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Let’s be clear here. What we’re talking 

about, the 4 million that you speak of, of which Whitespruce is 

one component, is the total initiative as it relates to the various 

initiatives related to drug and alcohol abuse and the sort of 

attack on those; some of which is a treatment program and some 

of which is the community prevention programs and the various 

things that are out there across the province. 

 

So I want you to be clear that we had an estimated amount of 

money — 4 million. The estimated amount of money in ’87-88 

is 4.6 million, in that area, 1.5 of which is Whitespruce. While 

Whitespruce is a major initiative, there are many other 

initiatives involved in this whole thing because you need your 

community systems out there and so on, in order to . .  It would 

have to be more than that. 

 

So we have staffing of after care. For example, once people 

have been through prevention, we have Pine Lodge operation, 

we have the community grants program, workshops, legal sort 

of workshops for people, community prevention, school 

initiatives, some of those kinds of things. The estimated amount 

to be spent on these initiatives, as it relates to drug and alcohol 

abuse and the approach to them, is 4.6 million. 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, then, the commitment of last fall 

of a $4 million program became a commitment of something 

like 2.5 million because it’s not now added in addition to what 

would have regularly been budgeted for the Whitespruce 

operation anyway in this year. So that commitment, in effect, 

has been short changed. 

 

Mr. Minister, just while we’re on the point of funding, while 

we’re on the point of funding. Your funding for SADAC last 

year, as my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana has pointed 

earlier this evening, was somewhere in the neighbourhood of 

$10 million. Your estimated funding for this year is just over 

$13 million, so we’ve seen about a $3 million increase. Mr. 

Minister, I want to compare the money that you’re spending on 

SADAC with the money that your government is receiving in 

revenues off the sale of liquor. 

 

Revenues from the Saskatchewan Liquor Board estimated for 

1987-87, your estimated revenues for last year — and where 

your minister got this figure I don’t know, but this was his 

estimated revenue from the Saskatchewan Liquor Board last 

year — $240 million in revenue. 

 

You estimated spending 7.8 million for SADAC. Now this 

year’s estimate for revenue from the Saskatchewan Liquor 

Board is 122,500,000 — 122 million this year. You put those 

two years together and you estimated that your government 

would receive, from the Saskatchewan Liquor Board alone, 

some $362 million — $362,500,000. If we put together what 

you spent in SADAC last year and what you estimate in 

spending this year, we come up with a figure of around $23 

million. Hardly a pittance, hardly a pittance when compared 

with the revenues that you’re taking from the sale of liquor in 

this province. 

 

So I ask you, Mr. Minister, how do you judge those two 

figures? Is there not more money, is there not more money that 

you could take from the proceeds, the sale of liquor, to put into 

the work of SADAC? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I hear the argument of the hon. member. 

It’s one that, if you take it to its logical conclusion, he’s 

suggesting, well, you’re spending this money on alcohol and 

drug abuse, you’ve taken these initiatives as a government. And 

we have, and we’re proud of having taken them. We, as I said 

to you earlier, we don’t believe that it’s enough. It’s a 68 per 

cent increase in terms of amount of money that’s being spent. It 

is, in terms of what’s being spend and was before. 

 

The government . .  or the group of folks who are opposite will 

say, well, the sale of liquor — to take their argument — the sale 

of liquor in liquor stores in our province must have started in 

1982, I mean, the way you’ve approached this. It didn’t start in 

1982. The sale of liquor has been a long-standing thing; it’s the 

society that we live in. And frankly I don’t think that anybody 

in this society or any other should say, well the sale of liquor, in 

and of itself, is a bad thing. The abuse of liquor, in and of itself, 

is a bad thing, but not the use. Not a bad thing, in and of itself. 

You and I may disagree on that, but I would suggest that that’s 

the case. 

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3114 

 

So, you know, to say, well take all of the revenues and target 

those revenues at the treatment of those who abuse it, is not a 

valid argument. And all I’ll say is that we are committed. There 

is a national program on the attack of alcohol abuse and 

substance abuse led by the Hon. Mr. Epp. He’s done an 

excellent job in this area and has credibility across this country 

in this area. 

 

(2030) 

 

That initiative is supported whole-heartedly by this government, 

and we, in our own right, have our own initiatives which are 

significant and which are recognized. And I hear this from my 

colleagues, the ministers of Health in other provinces, those 

initiatives which we’ve taken here and which we call the 

Premier’s initiatives of last September, are recognized across 

this country as being very straightforward, very forward 

looking, and very excellent initiatives — initiatives which are 

directed right at the prevention, right at the treatment, which are 

two sides of the equation obviously. 

 

So sure, we can get into a debate about how much of the liquor 

budget should be dedicated in this area, or should revenues 

which come from any source be dedicated revenues to 

particular programs. I suggest, and I know Finance departments 

in your day and Finance departments in our day do not like to 

get into the dedicated revenues for certain things. I know there’s 

some areas where it happens, and I think of the wildlife fund 

and some of those kinds of things, but for the most part, 

dedicated revenues from one revenue source to a particular 

program gets you on to a rather slippery slope often. And I 

think that would be agreed by others, you know, members of 

your party who have been ministers and treasury board 

members before. 

 

So sure it’s a debate that we can get into, but I would say to you 

that the use of alcohol, the sale of alcohol and alcoholic 

beverages, in and of themselves, is not anything that’s really 

wrong, and in this society, it’s been commonplace for a good 

long time. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, just two points to 

re-emphasize two points: last year for SADAC you spent, 

taking into account the supplementary estimates, somewhere 

near $10 million. This year you have budgeted $13.24 million. 

Now in anybody’s calculation, that is not a 68 per cent increase 

but a 33 per cent increase. And it’s an increase that we on this 

side of the House support and, I think, Saskatchewan people 

support, but let’s not pretend that it’s a 68 per cent increase 

unless you believe your estimate is way low on what you intend 

to spend this year, unless there’s something wrong with your 

estimates. 

 

The second point is that by your estimates, by your Minister of 

Finance’s estimates, you are taking in revenue in profits, from 

the sale of alcohol, $362,500,000 — $362 million in the last 

two years, over the course of the last two years, and I . .  These 

are the figures of your Minister of Finance; these are not mine 

— your Minister of Finance. 

 

So I just don’t think to compare a $21 million expenditure in 

prevention and treatment and education and all those  

very necessary and good things is a great deal of money when 

compared to the kind of money that you’re taking as profit off 

the sale of alcohol. 

 

Mr. Minister, while we await the opening of the Whitespruce 

centre near Yorkton, Saskatchewan young people, in the 

meantime, have been travelling outside of the province for 

treatment, and many of them have been travelling to the 

Heartview treatment centre in Mandan, North Dakota. My 

question, Mr. Minister, now is for the Saskatchewan young 

people who are leaving the province to attend treatment centre 

like Heartview. Are their costs being covered by your 

department? Are their total costs being covered by your 

department now? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay the . .  Just before I get to the 

specifics of the question, I just want to point out because we can 

get into these number arguments and so on. I think the point is, 

and I’ll just leave it at that, but the point is very, very clear that 

there’s a significant contribution, there’s a significant initiative 

by us and by this government and so on, and I don’t want to get 

in to the partisanship, but there’s a significant contribution by 

the representatives of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan on drug 

and alcohol abuse — no question. 

 

Let me just give you a couple of numbers. This is actual 

expenditure from ’85-86. Two years . .  Let’s go back two 

years. Actual expenditures in this area were $7.3 million — 7.3 

million. And I daresay that there wasn’t a year, you know, if 

you go back to ’84 and ’83, you know, to the time of your 

government and so on, there wasn’t a year when there was a 

reduction in those expenditures, okay. So that was about . .  

There wasn’t a year when there was a reduction in those 

expenditures, just for the hon. member’s clarification of what I 

just said. 

 

So 7.3 million was actually spent in ’85-86, and in ’87-88, 

we’re talking about an expenditure of — what is it? — 13.2 

million in the alcohol and drug abuse area in the widest sense. 

That’s a major increase, an increase of 5.9, almost $6 million 

over a period of two years. Now that’s from actual expenditures 

to what’s now estimated. I mean, it’s major stuff. I don’t . .  We 

can get into this number games and comparing columns and so 

on, but I think, and I know that you will and, in fact, have 

reiterated that the initiatives are welcomed by the people of the 

province, welcomed by people like yourself regardless of how 

many dollars or thousands or hundreds or whatever it is. There 

is no question this is a major initiative. There is no question that 

we need this, and as I’ve said earlier, we probably need more. 

We probably need more, but, you know, where do you draw the 

line? I don’t know. 

 

And all I’ll say now as it relates to your specific question as it 

relates to people being treated at Heartview, presently at 

Mandan in North Dakota, if a Saskatchewan resident is referred 

there by SADAC, by the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission, 

their costs are paid. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, are their total costs paid in 

American funds? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, that’s true if they’re referred by the 

Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission to the Mandan  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3115 

 

facility. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Are there other referral agents? Are there other 

ways that Saskatchewan young people can be treated in 

Mandan? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — If a person goes on their own to 

Mandan and goes into Heartview for the program that’s offered 

there, and are not referred by the Alcohol and Drug Abuse 

Commission, the payment which goes from the hospital 

services plan to the person is on the basis of Canadian funds 

and not in total American funds. So there’s a differentiation 

there between those that are referred by SADAC who have 

treatment facilities here in the province and those that are not 

referred by SADAC but who choose to go down on their own 

volition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, could you explain to me the 

rationale of that, why those who may go on their own initiative 

would not have their costs fully covered whereas those who 

may go referred by SADAC would have their costs fully 

covered? What’s the rationale for that differentiation? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, the rationale is the following. If 

we are to pay for treatment which takes place outside of our 

country, outside of our jurisdiction, then we should be sure that 

the individual in question has gone through the processes here, 

whatever is available. If they have or if the process here can, in 

fact, help them or whatever, that’s a determination of the 

professionals in the area, and I certainly don’t pretend to be one 

of those, but that’s the rationale. It has some control in terms of 

the costs on individuals deciding just on their own that they’re 

going to go to Mandan on their own. 

 

The same kind of thinking is involved in the process for . .  If 

someone decides, well look, I’m going to head down to the 

Mayo Clinic and have some medical procedure or whatever 

without having been referred by the medical profession here in 

Saskatchewan, they need to have the normal referral process 

here so that it can be determined whether or not that procedure 

that they’ve received at Mayo — I use that as an example — 

could indeed have been done here in our own jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. A few 

questions to the minister. I don’t want the minister to take this 

in a negative light of the comments, but I’ve listened closely to 

the discussion on SADAC and its role, particularly with the 

development of Whitespruce and also in its relationship to the 

Heartview foundation in Mandan. 

 

I want to relate this example to you, Mr. Minister, of some of 

the problems that can arise and some of the concerns that I 

know all members of the House — it doesn’t matter which side 

they’re sitting on — may have with this. I had the opportunity 

this summer . .  well I was in the position to have to take the 

daughter and mother, a mother and her daughter . .  Her 

daughter had problems with drug and alcohol abuse. She was a 

constituent and I had to take them down to the Mandan centre. 

And they were taken . .  This girl was taken to Heartview and 

admitted to Heartview on the recommendation not of a SADAC 

counsellor. In fact, one of the SADAC  

counsellors, it was the opinion of the particular SADAC person 

that a referral wasn't necessary. But the mother had another 

referral from a private practitioner in the city of Regina, and I 

won’t mention any names here, but those in the drug and 

alcohol abuse field will know who I’m talking about, that they 

had that referral from a well established practitioner in Regina, 

who in fact it was that person’s opinion that indeed this 

teen-age girl did need help and required help. 

 

Now the mother was fortunate in the sense that she had a 

private insurance scheme which covered the cost between what 

was covered under medicare and the exchange rate. The 

exchange rate in this particular instance was $3,800. It was 

either 3,200 or $3,800 was the difference that she had to pay. I 

think the total treatment costs were somewhere around $12,000. 

 

Now the reason I am bringing this one particular example up, 

Mr. Minister, was that if in fact someone who needs to be 

referred does not get a correct intake, or the counsellor — and 

we're all human; and I’m not trying to blame any particular 

counsellor — makes a mistake in that intake program and 

rejects the young person and says that they’re not in need of 

that program, then what happens is that there’s hardship 

inflicted upon that patient. 

 

I was wondering, Mr. Minister, if you would perhaps review the 

situation to see if one of two things could be — either that the 

provincial government makes it a practice that any qualified, or 

anyone seen to be a qualified practitioner in the field, whether 

it’s a doctor or whether it’s somebody in private practice 

because we have private counsellors in private practice in the 

city of Regina, people who are well qualified, who’ve got that 

kind of background — or whether they’re referred by those 

types of people or by SADAC or maybe a guidance counsellor 

in school who has gone through some kind of training program, 

if in fact people who are referred by the system, in total, if the 

government would make an undertaking to pick up the cost so 

that there is that accessibility to all — or if in fact the minister 

would look on the other hand to a system in SADAC where a 

referral from somebody outside the SADAC program will get 

an automatic approval by SADAC or in consultation between 

the two counsellors. Would you undertake to in fact attempt to 

define the system so that people who’ve got those kind of 

troubles will, in fact, be able to gain the kind of access to the 

treatment until the Whitespruce program is opened? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — You know, the case you outline and I’m 

sure, you know, there can be cases like this where something 

would — I don’t know how to put it — fall through the cracks 

in terms of the system that we have. A couple of things that are 

important to recognize here. I think we should not make the 

assumption, and nobody in the professional field makes the 

assumption that, for example, all medical practitioners are 

knowledgeable in the field of addictions, and many of them 

would say — most of them would say — that that’s the case, 

they aren’t. You know, guidance counsellors, people who really 

have their, literally, their arms around some of these people 

who are really in some serious troubles and are feeling 

frustrated at the time, and so on, the way you’ve outlined  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3116 

 

the story in terms of yourself becoming involved and in fact 

driving them down, as I understand, and so on, I mean, those 

are the kind of things that happen. 

 

But from the point of view of, and you know I hesitate to say 

“the system” or anything, but from the point of view of having a 

structure in place which can deal with whatever eventuality will 

come up, it’s really difficult to open it up in the broadest sense, 

the kind of broad sense which you outline, you know, I think, 

for some obvious reasons. 

 

I think, however, that there is potential there for, you know, if 

one counsellor, counsellor A over here in the SADAC system 

who says no, I don’t believe that that should be, a referral 

should be done and so on. I think that there is on very short 

notice in the case you’ve outlined, if you had made a call to the 

chairman of the board of SADAC, or even Dr. Cohen or to the 

office of SADAC or whatever, there is always that process of 

appeal of the circumstance. And I don’t mean a long and drawn 

out one because I also understand that these circumstances are 

. .  you deal with them in the here and now, not in the 

maybe-sometime field. 

 

So all I’ll say is that it’s really difficult to develop a system that 

would allow for that kind of very widespread referral because 

there would be . .  people would be just going down there. I 

mean they would just go on their own — families picking up or 

some of the counsellors who are bona fide in their own sense, 

who will say, well SADAC system . .  And I found this out. 

They will say the SADAC system is, you know, like the 

counsellor or the ones in this location, or whatever, it becomes 

really a dicey situation. 

 

No system is perfect, obviously. But on the other hand no 

system should be too rigid and that’s the point I’ll make to you, 

that there is an avenue of appeal which I think can be rather 

quick. And I’ll always look to improvement, you know, if you 

have suggestions about how that could be improved. And you 

obviously have some personal experience with, you know, with 

helping someone. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I don’t think it’s a question of 

trying to have every Tom, Dick, and Harry act as a referral 

person to the thing. I think that would be just a ludicrous kind 

of suggestion to make and I’m not even trying to even talk 

about that. 

 

We’re talking about, in fact, having qualified practitioners who 

may operate outside the organizational structure of SADAC. 

But surely there’s got to be some mechanism where the private 

counsellors, or people who are approved by SADAC, but not 

necessarily employees of SADAC, that on the recommendation 

of those kind of people, that SADAC in fact will give them 

some kind of authorization to do the kind of referral. 

 

And I know that there’s guidance counsellors in the city of 

Regina, as there are in Saskatoon and other places, that work 

very closely with SADAC and with people involved in 

SADAC. And there’s people involved in private practice who 

work very closely with SADAC and develop that kind of 

relationship. And it seems to me that if, given the very, very 

intense personal nature of each individual situation, that there 

should be, there can be some kind of mechanism developed 

whereby somebody that doesn’t  

necessarily work for SADAC but works with SADAC, that they 

in fact . .  that SADAC can work out a kind of a situation where 

their referrals are just as good as somebody who is in fact an 

employee of SADAC. I think it’s more or less a question of 

developing a rapport with those outside practitioners. 

 

Certainly every system can’t deal with a situation like this, 

particularly personal situations like that. Certainly every system 

can be improved. And I think that I’m putting forth a suggestion 

that maybe you want to look at in terms of having outside 

practitioners work very closely with SADAC so that they have 

referral powers as well. I’m wondering, in fact, if you would 

sort of make it a commitment to undertake that kind of review 

with the SADAC personnel so that those little glitches can be 

worked out. 

 

I also want to say that I think that the initiative at Whitespruce, 

I personally applaud it. I’ve had an opportunity to talk with 

some of the counsellors at Mandan and some of the 

professionals who operate there. I like that kind of module. I 

think that the success rate of the Mandan experience, 

particularly the second time around where there has to be 

referrals again for people who have gone through it once, and 

particularly the second time around their success rate seems to 

be fairly good, and I hope that the Whitespruce experience turns 

out to be just as effective. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, just a couple of comments. I 

appreciate what you’re saying about the Whitespruce initiative. 

As I said before, we will make every attempt and we have made 

every attempt to hire good people to go through the Mandan 

experience and use that experience to the best possible . .  I can 

say to you, and you’ve said it here as well, the Mandan people 

involved there are very excited about this initiative and their 

opportunity to be involved, and they think it’s good. 

 

I will just give you this undertaking as it relates to that little 

glitch that you’ve mentioned here. We’ll look at it and take it as 

a serious suggestion. I would say to the hon. member, our 

people in SADAC are quite willing to sit down and go through 

it in more of a detailed way in another form than back and forth 

here. Make your suggestion and we’re quite willing to listen to 

those suggestions. Thank you, Mr. Member. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, with the number of very positive 

things that have been said about the Mandan program and 

Whitespruce, it seems to me there may still be those individuals 

who will need perhaps some other form of treatment, perhaps a 

longer-term form of treatment than will be offered at 

Whitespruce or that’s currently offered at Heartview. Is it still 

your commitment, then, to be willing to fund Saskatchewan 

people who may leave the province for other treatment centres 

other than the Heartview? Are you still prepared to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t contemplate 

any change in that policy. We do believe there'’ be some change 

in terms of the incidence where the number of people, the 

young people especially, will go to Heartview at Mandan. 

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3117 

 

But sure, there will be other treatment centres. And I think you 

will know there are treatment centres and there are treatment 

centres in the United States and in other jurisdictions, and some 

of them have been recognized by professional people, some not 

recognized to the same extent. And so we must reserve the right 

to lean upon our professional advice here, and to recognize 

those who have the best records and so on. 

 

And sure, we don’t contemplate any change in policy in terms 

of funding our citizens who may go elsewhere for treatment if, I 

reiterate, they go through the normal channels of referral 

through SADAC and some of those other kinds of channels. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, just to move away from the 

SADAC treatment centres for a moment, will you tell me and 

the House how many other are there in Saskatchewan — other 

treatment centres that would be privately owned and operated, 

operated for a profit? Are there, in existence, in Saskatchewan 

those kinds of treatment centres? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I just make the point that I understand 

that the centres that you’re talking about are in the in-patient 

treatment centres. In-patient, because we have a series of 

out-patient treatment centres and I can reiterate those to you in a 

minute. 

 

The in-patient ones in the province are Calder centre in 

Saskatoon; Regina rehab here in Regina; Pine Lodge at Indian 

Head, which is a funded agency, it’s not a . .  The first two that 

I mention are directly administered by SADAC. There’s 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, which is a funded agency located in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse; and St. Louis, which is operated by a board and 

almost like a foundation type of a structure which is for the 

DWI or driving while impaired programs. So those five which 

are in-patient treatment centres. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, are there, or is there any 

operation in Saskatchewan that is owned by an individual — an 

in-treatment centre that would be owned by an individual? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The funded agencies — Pine Lodge, 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, St. Louis — they’re all sort of what we would 

call non-profit organizations. They’re funded by SADAC. 

 

If you’re thinking of one that’s in — just a moment, I think 

there’s one other comes to mind that I didn’t talk to my folks 

about, I think I will. 

 

No, the two that I was thinking of that I wanted to clarify if we 

had any funding involved in it through our provincial agency, 

are one that’s run by the status Indians at Fort Qu’Appelle, and 

there are two more recent ones now opened which are also run 

by the status Indians through federal funding. That’s one at Red 

Pheasant Reserve near North Battleford, and one at the James 

Smith Reserve, you will know, is between P.A. and Melfort. So 

those are the ones, those that I’ve outlined earlier, and then 

these which are no relationship to these estimates. 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’ve had at least some 

communication of concern from the Saskatoon area that a 

privately owned treatment centre is being proposed for the 

Blackstrap area or for somewhere south of Saskatoon. And the 

concern that has been raised with me is that in fact if this 

operation is funded, it may in fact effect some of the Saskatoon 

treatment centres. And I’d like some assurance that that isn’t 

going to happen. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I have heard of that only at one 

occasion, and it was . .  in fact I heard it from the chairman of 

SADAC who said that he had heard these rumours around the, 

you know, around the network that is the alcohol and drug 

abuse area. I have not heard anything more than that. We have 

no proposal come forward, nobody has suggested anything to us 

one way or the other. So that’s all it is at this point is in the 

rumour stage, and I know nothing more about it than that, and I 

don’t know that I could add much more to the discussion. I’m 

not even sure that I could give you the details of what is 

rumoured, so I don’t know that we will gather much 

information from that kind of discussion. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, may I ask, have your officials 

met with anyone in this regard? Have officials of your 

department or SADAC met with anyone in this regard at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. The answer to that is no, and that’s 

as I’ve outlined it to you. I heard it only through the chairman 

who had said he had heard a rumour around on the street, so to 

speak, and that’s all. Our SADAC officials have not met with 

anybody in this regard. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, just on a kind of philosophical 

basis, would you personally, as minister, see that as a direction 

we might want to move in this province at any point — sort of 

the privatization of drug and alcohol treatment? Is that 

something that you could support, or would support? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I think first of all if you look at the 

way in which Whitespruce, which is one of our major initiatives 

and we’ve talked about it for some time here, is structured, I 

think you’ll see that, you know, where our philosophy lies as it 

relates to this sort of area. It goes with the publicly, you know, 

funded or I say funded agency sort of thing, where it’s a — it’s 

in that — or that sort of thing. I might just say, because I think 

it’s important to our . .  I believe that, you know, some of the 

people at Calder centre, there’s some discussion among the staff 

there at Calder centre about this, and they hear a rumour like the 

thing that you’ve mentioned here from, where is it, Blackstrap? 

You said near Blackstrap? So they would hear something like 

that and be filled with some concern and I can understand that. 

 

The discussion that’s gone on at it relates to Calder centre, and 

as you will . . is a potential move, and we can only say potential 

at this stage because we have to have architects’ reports back 

and so on, but there’s been some discussion, and I think it'’ 

fairly widely known, and I don’t mind how widely known it is. 

The discussion has been that that Calder centre move its 

treatment facility  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3118 

 

over to what was the Frank Eliason Centre. There’s been some 

discussion about that. But certainly in terms of its . .  the way in 

which it’s funded and developed and so on, I wouldn’t change 

it. 

 

But in any case, in any case there’s been some discussion about 

that as it relates to Frank Eliason, but I can’t say that that will 

take place, or not. But I am quite willing to put it on the record 

here that that has been discussed, because it has and continues 

to be. But that will depend to a large degree on whether or not 

the architect’s report or whatever professional sort of reports are 

needed in this kind of area, come forward with a favourable 

type of recommendation. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, a little while back I wrote you a 

letter in regards to a Pelican Narrows program. And of course 

your response was that through one of your staff we’d be 

looking at approximately a $2,000 grant to be done in 

conjunction with the Pelican Narrows band and also some of 

the non-band members that are involved in it, as well. 

 

I’m sort of looking at it in a long-range goal situation. When I 

look at the developments taking place in the South and the 

tremendous focus, for example, on Whitespruce, a lot of people 

from many areas are trying to look at something of a similar 

sort in northern Saskatchewan. I’m wondering whether in your 

own plans you are looking at something like that in the northern 

area, especially when you recognize not only the distances but 

also the special social and cultural situation in northern 

Saskatchewan. Is there a plan in the near future that will move 

in that direction? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of things, and I’ll address the 

broader issue last, but as related to the specific issue at Pelican, 

just a point of clarification. The people that are proponents of a 

treatment centre, a treatment centre or whatever form it takes at 

Pelican, are those status Indians? Is that people from the reserve 

or whatever? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Both. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. The member has said that it’s 

both status Indians and others. So I will just say that the 

difficulty — and this is the story we’ve all heard for so often 

and always, and that’s why I made the distinction as I related to 

the Red Pheasant one, and to the one at Fort Qu’Appelle here 

and so on. There are some federally funded, run exclusively by 

status Indians, and I know that’s a difficult problem in the 

North because some of the communities will have larger 

percentages of status and lesser. 

 

I just want to turn now to the sort of longer-range circumstance 

or the longer-range treatment that will be needed. First of all, I 

recognize what the member says. I do recognize what the 

member says as it relates to northern people, and I make the 

distinction here. I don’t mean necessarily just native people, I 

mean northern people who live in a more remote sort of 

circumstance and so on. I recognize the difference and the 

cultural shock and various of those other things which happen 

when someone is outside of their own environment. 

But I think having said that, that what we must recognize in this 

initiative that’s taking pace at Whitespruce is that the youth 

treatment centre going in there, as I have said earlier to your 

colleague, is the first one in Canada, in all of this large country 

of ours. Many areas of this country have far larger populations 

and far more serious problems than we have, if you can call the 

problems more serious because there are a larger number. And 

we are the jurisdiction which has taken the bull by the horns, so 

to speak, and said we will break new ground, we will have a 

centre. 

 

I know that that is not, you know, that’s not sort of comforting 

to those in the farthest reaches of the province who say, well, it 

may as well be on the moon as in Whitespruce, outside of 

Yorkton, because that’s still out of my environment and so on. I 

understand the feeling there. 

 

I will say, as one who’s trying to be a responsible minister, is 

that I really want us to walk and walk well before we try to run 

into another facility and so on. That’s not to say, for ever and 

ever, amen, or there won’t be in the North, because we do 

recognize the need for special type of treatment facilities and 

certainly prevention programs in the north. I think we’ll always 

recognize that; we have to. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I guess the reason why I asked that, Mr. 

Minister, is as I travel around and I look at the special situation 

in the North. During the period of the ’70s, you had an 

employment rate that was a little bit higher then. As the housing 

prices hit at the community level, a lot of the short-term jobs 

that were available during the summer months — especially 

that were used to employ the youths and the young families — 

those jobs are no longer there at the community level, apart 

from let’s say places like Pelican Narrows this year where 

they’re building a school. The majority of the communities just 

don’t have anything to go for. 

 

What you’re seeing here is a high level of unemployment and 

we’ve said that so often. But not only that, it’s creating a lot of 

problems with the families. For the first time in the history of 

the North, we’re seeing at the same time the traditional 

economy being pushed to the background, and many of the 

younger people do not have the skills either in the traditional 

economy. So a lot of the young people are in a “catch-22” 

situation — they do not have the skills from the traditional 

economic base as their parents would have had in the past 

because most people had thought that they should get an 

education and get jobs in the mines and in the forestry. But that 

hasn’t happened to a great extent, it has only happened on a 

partial basis. 

 

So here you have a situation where the younger married people 

don’t have the jobs. There’s a tremendous amount of friction 

taking place between those that were able to combine traditional 

livelihood with part-time jobs in the summer, and those are the 

older people, but the younger people have neither. And for the 

first time, you’re seeing some of the younger people raising 

children without having gone through the experience of a 

proper job other than maybe a short summer-time job, and they 

do not have that skill basis. And you’re seeing a tremendous 

amount of pressure at the community level. 

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3119 

 

If you look at — and I’ve mentioned this before — a 

tremendous amount of alcoholism and drugs has taken place 

and has risen drastically in the past few years. A tremendous 

amount of family pressures related to that; tremendous amount 

of, let’s say, abuse even on children that has never been there 

before in the past. And everything in the community level is 

being pressured to a great extent, and there is a tremendous 

outcry for people in saying, look, we have to look at, at least a 

positive base in the North where we can control something and 

say that we have achieved something. And people are saying, 

we don’t want to go in a situation . .  

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

. . So that when you walk into a place you can shift back and 

forth and whether it’s Cree or Dene and also in English and be 

able to feel right at home in a setting. And most . .  You already 

know as a Minister of Health that not only do you require the 

basic physical needs and the aspect of medicine but also you 

need the social, psychological, and cultural aspect in relation to 

that. 

 

And I’m wondering, in relation to the first question that I asked 

about moving something in to the North, what are you doing as 

the Minister of Health in regards to looking at the programs and 

looking at the cultural background of the people involved in it 

and coming out with a program approach that looks at 

knowledge in the cultural spheres, the skill levels that are 

required to that, and the attitudinal changes that are very 

important in looking at that whole aspect? What are you doing 

in terms of your new programming to deal effectively with the 

social and cultural aspect of the overall health field? Could you 

tell me? 

 

Maybe you could get it from your officials as to where it’s at, 

and especially as it relates to . .  I suppose I’m not only talking 

about people in the North but various ethnonational groups in 

this province. That’s an important base that we have to 

consider. What type of things are you doing in that regard, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, I know the question is a bit 

broader than just SADAC, I believe, but I’ll just go into that for 

a minute. 

 

Specific issues as it relates to the North, and a good deal of it as 

a result of these initiatives which we talked about, new 

initiatives — Buffalo Narrows, Creighton, La Ronge, and 

Meadow Lake have out-patient centres. We have a series of 

community-based programs which have been either expanded 

or started in some new communities, community-based 

programs which address just the kind of thing that you talk 

about, or at least attempt to. And I think we should reiterate that 

— attempt to address the specifics or the socio-economic as 

well as the concerns of the ethnic group or the status of people 

or whatever. 

 

It’s important that we . .  And I go back to the conversation I 

had with your colleague from Moose Jaw a while ago because I 

think it’s very, very easy — in fact it’s the easiest possible thing 

to do — is to say, well, the  

correlation between, you know, there is unemployment or there 

are these problems, you know, related to unemployment, and so 

as a direct result of that alcoholism is there. And to some extent 

that may well be and probably is true to some extent that there 

can be a correlation drawn. 

 

But I think often we can fall into the trap, as responsible people, 

of saying there is a bogy man that I can point at and it’s 

unemployment, and so that’s why these people are, you know, 

have contracted this disease which is alcoholism or which is 

substance abuse or which is, you know, glue sniffing or 

whatever it is. 

 

You made a couple of good points. I mean the points are serious 

ones in terms of physical needs of people, and their 

socio-economic, their spiritual needs. All that sort of stuff 

comes into the making of the whole person. And one other 

thing that comes into there is the person him or herself looking 

in the mirror once in a while and saying, I'’ going to pull myself 

up to the extent that I can. 

 

As it relates to pointing to that bogy man which is 

unemployment, and I recognize that, and it’s serious across 

northern Canada, not just northern Saskatchewan, across this 

country. There is no question. And it’s serious in the inner cities 

of our urban areas in some of the larger cities. 

 

We can say, well, as it relates to northern Canada, for example, 

when we talk about development, and we talk about 

development of jobs which will be in a newer economy than the 

hunting and fishing and traditional economy, it’s important that 

we all pull the same way in terms of trying to develop that kind 

of diversification because it’s important. I mean whether we 

like it or not, there will be a change. There’s the change in this 

world here, and there is a change in the world of the North, 

maybe even a more drastic one there. 

 

Those kinds of changes have to be recognized, have to be, well, 

recognized by all of our people, people in leadership positions. 

And those people — those of us in leadership positions — have 

to say, let’s lead into the new world, rather than say, that was 

grandpa’s trap line, so there shall be no development of a lodge 

which means jobs or whatever. Because frankly, that, you 

know, that trap line which was grandpa’s has not been trapped 

by anybody for a good long time because of that changing 

economy. That’s as an example. I don’t want to get into that 

long a discussion, although it’s all part of this, and I think, 

somewhat related to what you’ve said. 

 

So it goes back to the other discussion we had in terms of to 

what extent is this disease, alcoholism, related to big, bad 

society doing it to us, or to me, or whoever, and to what extent 

is it a decision of someone whose role models, you know, aren’t 

there or who, you know, ash lost respect for their elders, and 

some of that kind of stuff, which you know, it’s a chicken and 

egg thing. Some will argue, well that’s the reason, because of 

this unemployment and this alcoholism that we’ve lost respect 

for elders and so on. So sure, that’s a long and philosophical 

discussion and we can carry that on for a long time. 

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3120 

 

As you know, I look in my own constituency. I have seven 

reserves in my constituency, some of them very remote, as well. 

And there’s a difference in terms of, depending on the 

leadership on a reserve and depending on the way in which 

they’ve approached, some of the economic development things 

that they would try to do or aspire to, there’s a difference in 

how they conduct themselves, how they conduct the alcohol 

and drug abuse on their particular reserve, or whatever, and that 

difference is obvious for anyone who would want to go and 

look. 

 

So I say that there’s a combination of government initiatives, of 

leadership from people that are seen by them to be leaders, and 

there’s a responsibility for the individuals, as is the case in 

every society, I would submit. In every society, regardless of 

where they live, there’s a responsibility to look in the mirror 

and say, as for me and my house, this is how I will live. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, I’ll just comment on a couple of 

things that you’ve mentioned, then I’ll go back to, you know, 

one more final question. 

 

In my statements, when I talk about socio-cultural involvement 

and moving services right into the North, I’m meaning that by 

socio-cultural emphasis, I’m not saying that it is the old versus 

the new developments. I’m including both. I’m making an 

assumption that socio-cultural development is both the old and 

the new in the native situation. I mean that’s what I’m talking 

about. 

 

Also, when you’re talking about contradictions between the 

social and the perceived contradictions by some theorists, 

between the social and the individual, I’m not talking about that 

contradiction. Every individual is in a social context, and you 

also have to look at both the social context and the individual 

context. I agree to that; I’m not talking about that specific thing. 

 

And when I examine the aspects of . .  What I was trying to get 

at in terms of the socio-cultural emphasis is this: I know that 

people will plan programming whether it'’ at the reserve level 

or in Ile-a-la-Crosse and so on. But, you yourself, Mr. Minister, 

have been a teacher, that even with a lot of skills in the area of 

mathematics, which you have learned through time, or in 

English, or in science, that you still need programs, developed 

programs to help you out in a work situation. As a teacher, you 

know that, and as educators that side beside you also recognize 

that. So you need to have developed programming. 

 

Most of the programming in Saskatchewan education has goals 

which point to that, whether it’s in Directions report or the 

Indian and Metis curriculum advisory committee. I guess the 

point I’m trying to get at: are you working at the same time in 

developing these programs in alcohol and drug use to take into 

consideration the social and cultural variables and come out 

with a support basis for the people who work in these 

preventative centres or in these situations? What are you doing 

specifically in these areas to be able to provide the positive 

support basis for the workers who work in these situations? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, to give you an example, to the 

hon. member, much of what you said I agree with, frankly, in 

terms of how you deal with the circumstances  

there. 

 

We have a separate course within SADAC for the counsellors 

who will work in the various areas now. That’s been done 

because there’s been a hue and cry, frankly — people have said 

at the community level — and we need this sort of thing and 

that’s the case now. Some of it’s been developed under these 

new initiatives, which is obviously an umbrella which covers a 

good deal of the need in both prevention and treatment of 

alcohol and drug abuse. So we have a separate course for 

counsellors who work specifically with northern and native 

people. And while that’s one example, it may not go as far as it 

might, as some would say, but we think we can only do that as 

develop this stuff in an ongoing way. 

 

I don’t know, we are, but SADAC and people like Dr. Cohen, 

who is a medical doctor and who is the first to say that the 

profession — his profession, who have a lot of training in terms 

of disease-related matters and dealing with disease and so on — 

have limited training as it relates to alcoholism, this disease 

which we know as alcoholism. 

 

So it’s very difficult to develop courses. It’s very difficult to 

continue on with developing new courses and breaking new 

ground out into new areas, although we want to do that, through 

a recognition of the points you’ve raised. But we also know that 

there is a good, long way to go — there’s a very long way to go 

in the professional world, and in that, recognition of the 

socio-economic differences of people in how we all will, or 

how the body reacts to these substances and so on. 

 

There’s a lot of medical work that needs to be done and that is 

being done, some of which is being done in this province, and 

some of that research is out in front of what is going on 

anywhere else in North America. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, to move again into a slightly 

different area. It’s my understanding that somewhere during the 

course of this past year a board policy was set; a decision was 

made changing some board policy in terms of the 

confidentiality of clients in treatment in Saskatchewan. It’s my 

understand that prior to this change in decision, that those who 

were involved in treatment were obliged to provide their 

hospitalization number and their name at the program delivery 

centre, but that their name did not leave that centre. The only 

thing that left that centre for statistical purposes was their 

hospitalization number. It’s my understanding that that now has 

changed and that the client’s name is now forwarded on further 

into the system. There has been some real concern raised, and I 

think that concern is very real, about confidentiality for those 

who are receiving treatment through the SADAC centres. 

 

Mr. Minister, you will agree, I hope, that confidentiality is 

extremely important when we are dealing with drug and alcohol 

treatment. And so I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if in fact my 

understanding is correct. And secondly, who among the front 

line counsellors did you consult with before this change was 

made, if it was made; and do you share a concern about 

confidentiality in this regard? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll get you a more detailed answer  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3121 

 

to this, you know, and if I could bring it back tomorrow or the 

next time we come to this, or prior to your next series of 

questions. 

 

If I could I just would say this: we don’t have the policy right 

here with us, but I’m told this sort of policy is related to some 

cost sharing which goes on for various programs between this 

government or the provincial jurisdiction and the federal 

jurisdiction. But I will say this, and it’s very important; I mean 

the issue you raise is an important one as it relates to the 

safeguarding of confidentiality. We’re sensitive to that and we 

have safeguards built into our computer system to make sure 

that that confidentiality is safeguarded. That’s what I’ll say at 

this stage and . .  because that’s the best understanding I have 

right now; but we’ll get you a more detailed answer as it relates 

to the way in which that policy has changed. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I will anticipate 

that further elaboration on this issue, and I think we could have 

a longer discussion about it at some future point. 

 

One or two other issues I would like to raise tonight. First of all, 

I think a very short, quick question concerning PRIDE (Parent 

Resources Institute for Drug Education Inc.) in Saskatchewan. 

You will be aware of PRIDE, the Parent Resource Institute for 

Drug Education, primarily an organization that involves the 

parents of young people with drug and alcohol problems. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding that through your 

department or through SADAC, through your government, 

PRIDE Canada has received some funding, but PRIDE 

Saskatchewan has not. And will you explain for me why PRIDE 

Canada can be funded by the Government of Saskatchewan and 

yet PRIDE Saskatchewan is not? 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The explanation is that first of all there 

was no request ever from PRIDE Saskatchewan for . .  

(inaudible interjection) . .  or the member says PRIDE 

Saskatoon? I hear the member from Nutana saying that rather 

than PRIDE Saskatchewan, it’s PRIDE Saskatoon. I don’t think 

that there was a request there I can go into. But just so I can 

clarify what . .  PRIDE Canada, as I understand it, the president 

of PRIDE Canada or the chief person in the country is from 

Saskatchewan. The national convention of parents, resources, 

information for drug education is . .  That national conference 

was held in Saskatoon, and the money that went to PRIDE 

Canada was related directly to that conference which was held 

in our province. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, again to move to a little different 

area. We talked initially this evening about some of the causes 

of the use and abuse of drugs and alcohol, particularly among 

our young people. I would like to suggest to you tonight that it’s 

widely recognized in our province that a part of the problem 

exists because of your government’s decision to allow the 

advertisement of alcohol on the media. You may shake your 

head — you may shake your head and say, that’s not the case. 

But I’ll tell you, a good number of people in this province  

disagree with you on that. 

 

In 1983, Dr. Saul Cohen — whose name you raised earlier and 

who is a person widely respected, I think, on both sides of this 

House and across the province — in 1983, Dr. Cohen, in his 

brief submitted to the liquor laws and regulations review 

committee, warned your government, warned your government 

of the consequences of changing the liquor act to allow this 

alcohol advertisement on television. He said, and I quote from 

his brief: 

 

The ban on media advertising stems . .  (he was referring 

to the ban in existence) The ban on media advertising 

stems from the negative consequences such advertising is 

likely to promote, especially among young people. 

Furthermore, media advertising of alcoholic beverages 

fosters the integration of alcohol as part of everyday 

life-styles, and this results in an increased use and abuse of 

the substance. The alcoholism commission of 

Saskatchewan, therefore, recognizes the merits of not 

permitting the media advertising of alcoholic beverages. 

 

Further on, he says: 

 

There is evidence that youth are the most influenced by 

alcohol advertising. 

 

I mean, I wish there were opportunity tonight to read this entire 

brief presented to your government prior that change in policy 

in 1983. 

 

I could spend some time tonight quoting from letters and briefs 

and other communications. I wish to quote from one, Mr. 

Minister, at least one. I could read a letter from Circle Drive 

Alliance Church in Saskatoon; I could read a letter from 

Discovery Baptist Church; I could read a letter from St. Paul’s 

United Church in Estevan, Saskatchewan; I could read a letter 

from the Esterhazy Baptist Church in Esterhazy, Saskatchewan. 

Because I know this institution the best of the church 

community in the province, I’d like to quote to you a bit from 

the brief presented to your government from the United Church 

of Canada, this in 1983 following the change. I know that this 

issue has been raised several times by the churches in this 

province and, I might say, by the school trustees who last year 

passed a motion at their convention, you’ll be aware of. 

 

In the ’83 brief from the United Church of Canada, the church 

says: 

 

The only identifiable people in favour of the legislation 

(and by that they mean the legislation permitting the 

alcohol advertising) are those who make a profit from 

alcohol sales: the government; breweries; media; and 

sporting groups. 

 

An editorial in the Leader-Post (and again I’m quoting) on 

September 15th and 22nd (I would  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3122 

 

assume of 1983) raised the issue of the amount of 

contributions made to the Progressive Conservative Party 

by liquor and beer companies. When the government in 

power finds itself in this conflict of interest situation, it 

becomes even more important that they listen to the 

commission and the constituency members for direction. 

 

Mr. Minister, not to belabour the point, I would like to move to 

the fall of 1986, the fall of 1986. We have heard members of 

your government say, non, no, alcohol advertisement has no 

influence on people, no influence on the amount that we drink, 

that it all has to do with brand preference or something. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I have here the Alcohol, Drugs and Youth: 

A Saskatchewan Survey, Fall 1986 — this is research from 

SADAC. On page 18 of this document, which you may be 

aware of: 

 

Teenagers across this province were asked if, indeed, the 

commercials on television had any effect, or some effect, 

no effect. 

 

Mr. Minister, your own research tells you that teenagers 

between the age of 12 and 18, 76 per cent of them — 76 per 

cent of teenagers between 12 and 18 say that alcohol 

advertisement has a great, or some, effect on their drinking; 30 

per cent of them said it had a great effect; 46 per cent had some 

effect. Young adults, ages 19 to 24, again, 76 per cent of that 

age group say that alcohol advertisement has some or a great 

effect on their drinking habits; 21 per cent of them said it was a 

great effect; 54 per cent said it had some effect. When parents 

were interviewed, 66 per cent of parents said the advertisement 

of alcohol had some, or a great, effect on their children. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think the evidence is clear. Your decision to 

advertise alcoholic products on prime time television and media 

has had an influence — and I would say an adverse influence 

— on drinking patterns among Saskatchewan young people. 

And so, given the length of time of this research will you 

commit to: (1) preferably, remove those advertisements from 

the media, or (2) at least further restrict them. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I mean, this issue 

will — can be, and will be, I’m sure, discussed for a long time. 

I will say, as I have said before, the advertising of beer and 

wine — and that advertising of beer will be one thing and that 

will be to change the view of the person, if it has any influence 

at all, will be . .  And if the companies want to put it on, I guess 

that’s the — must have some — the influence will be to buy 

Blue instead of Molson’s, or buy Golden instead of whatever it 

is. And that’s what it is, it’s advertising of brands. And that’s 

exactly what it is. 

 

I mean, the member can . .  Because this goes back to the view 

of these folks who have this view that these societal things . .  I 

mean, when you see . .  watch the Blue Jays game — maybe 

you didn’t, but I did. I don’t know if I’ll ever watch another 

one, but I watched one yesterday. And it does not, it does not 

have the effect — it does not have the effect to say, I’ve got to 

run and have a beer. I mean, that’s a . .  I’m not going to run 

and have a beer  

because you see that. Give individuals — which is something 

that people of your political stripe and of your bent do not know 

what to do or how to do — give individuals credit for making 

up their own minds about what they will do, how they will live, 

all of those kinds of things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — You say, you say to me that young 

people have . .  When questioned, young people will say — oh, 

a large percentage of us will say — oh yes, I am affected by 

those; I’m affected by those ads; I really liked the music on the 

Labatt’s Blue ad. Well, they might like the music, but I’d tell 

you right now that those ads have not made young people run to 

their fridge and have a beer. They don’t make them run and 

have a beer, and I just tell you that there are numbers — there’s 

no conclusive evidence to suggest that those have happened. 

 

And you can look at the numbers. There are two provinces in 

this country that don’t have liquor advertising — two provinces, 

Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick. You can look at the 

numbers at the consumption of alcohol in our province that has 

been dropping during the time that alcohol advertising spirits 

and wine and beer is on. And you can look at it, and the 

numbers are dropping. Wine is increasing, beer is dropping, and 

most of the ads have been on the basis of this brand, and all of 

them have been promoting this brand over the other brand. 

 

Liquor advertising does not send the public to the liquor store. 

But when the public gets to the liquor store and when they’ve 

made that decision to walk through that door and I will buy a 

case of beer, they go into that store, and if they’re influenced by 

the ad in any way to say, I’ll pick up a box that’s that colour 

instead of a box that’s that colour, so be it; let them have a 

choice. 

 

As I said earlier in these estimates, the consumption and the use 

of alcohol in and of itself is not, is not the largest problem 

facing us. The abuse of some of these is. You will say, big bad 

society made Johnny have a beer; I’ll say, Johnny decided to 

have a beer. And that’s just the difference between you and me, 

and you should think a little bit of going back to a little bit of 

what the individual will do for him or herself and forget about 

what big bad society did to Johnny. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I find this appalling. A minister 

. .  

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — A Minister of Health who first of all does not 

believe the very information that’s provided to him. Mr. 

Minister, you said a minute ago that consumption is dropping in 

this province, and I agree that’s true. It’s borne out statistically; 

consumption is dropping in this province. But your Premier 

tells us we’ve got a rising tide of alcohol abuse. So it’s not 

dropping among the young people of Saskatchewan apparently, 

it’s a rising tide, and again I agree with him. 

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3123 

 

Why is it a rising tide among the young people of 

Saskatchewan? I submit to you, the young people of 

Saskatchewan are those most influenced by these ads, and the 

brewers and the distillers know that, they know that, Mr. 

Minister. Mr. Minister, you say to me, you say to this House, 

and you say to the people of Saskatchewan, these ads have no 

affect on consumption. That's what you've just been saying. 

They're not there to sell more product, they’re just there for 

brand preference. 

 

Then I ask you this, Mr. Minister: do you support your federal 

minister? Do you support your federal minister in his initiatives 

to remove tobacco advertising, to remove tobacco advertising? 

First it was removed from the media, from television, radio, 

now it’s being removed from print media. Were those ads there 

just for brand preference? 

 

Mr. Minister, use the same logic. If we want to deal with this 

problem, here is a very constructive direction to follow. Pull the 

ads that are being put on television by your friends in the 

brewers and distillers and broadcasters; pull them, and if you 

won’t all together pull them, then I say at least restrict them. 

Here’s a positive direction that you can undertake if you’re 

serious in dealing with the situation. 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of things on this, Mr. 

Chairman. The member makes a . .  the bridges to smoking and 

the advertising of tobacco. I’ll say to you and to anybody, 

smoking, in and of itself, and the use of tobacco has been 

proven time and again without question to be a health hazard, 

whether you smoke five cigarettes or whether you smoke three 

packages a day, it’s a health hazard regardless. Tobacco is a 

health hazard . .  (inaudible interjection) . .  the members over 

here say alcohol is not a health hazard. I’m telling you, and I 

believe this to be the case, and I believe it can be backed up by 

much statistical evidence, alcohol use — the use not the abuse 

— but responsible use has not been shown to be a major health 

hazard. That’s not the case. 

 

The member said advertising has done this. I’ll tell the member 

that the kind of crisis that we have in terms of youth treatment 

is related t things like Lysol. I haven’t seen it advertised on the 

television during the Blue Jays game — Lysol abuse which is in 

my constituency and some others. Glue sniffing. That’s not on 

the TV either in terms of advertising with nice music, that the 

member says. Crack, something new — the kinds of things that 

these new innovations, that the lower life folks in society that 

traffic in the stuff. That’s not available at the liquor store; that’s 

not available through the government agencies — aerosol cans 

and gas tank sniffing and vanilla and lemon extract. Those 

things aren’t in the advertising on television. Those things are 

the kinds of abuse that we’re talking about when we deal with 

some of the very serious problems that we have, whether you 

want to admit it or not. So you can say all you would like about 

that. 

 

So what I’m telling you is what I believe to be the case. Alcohol 

abuse, as substance abuse in any of these other examples, is a 

serious problem. It’s a serious problem, but responsible use is 

not a serious problem. Alcohol abuse is  

a disease for which there is some possibility of recovery — 

there’s some possibility of recovery. And to make the bridge 

between smoking and alcohol is not a reasonable bridge. 

 

Per cent of respondents. I’ve got a whole series of other 

statistical information here, but I’ll get to it. So I just say to the 

. .  (inaudible interjection) . .  The member from Quill Lakes is 

there and I will say to the member from Quill Lakes who is now 

having a smoke, that is a health hazard, sir. Please put it out 

because you’ll cost the health system some significant money at 

some future time. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, you suggest that the alcohol ads 

that we’re seeing on television — and I may say this to you, Mr. 

Minister — we have a five-year-old at home and we very 

rarely, if ever, have beer in the house. But I tell you this, I’ve 

got a five-year-old at home who can name every brand of beer 

on the shelf, and he’s five years old. Where do you think he 

learned that? Where do you think he learned it? He didn’t learn 

it out of a fairy-tale book. He learned it off television, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

If you suggest to me, Mr. Minister, that these alcohol ads that 

are now on prime time television have no effect, have no effect 

on the viewing public other than somehow brand preference, 

then how can you suggest that your own program — which I 

laud and support — your own program of media ads will have 

the reverse effect of discouraging the abuse of alcohol and 

drugs? I mean, if one has no effect, then how do you suggest the 

other has some effect? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the record in terms of 

the consumption of alcohol in the province, if there is a 

correlation, why is the correlation not shown as it relates to that 

period of time when alcohol advertising was permitted and from 

the time that it was not permitted? I’ll just tell you that there is 

no concise and clear evidence that that’s the case. You’ll have 

to prove that, which you cannot do. 

 

All I say to the member is, we’ll go through this many times 

and many of the more sanctimonious will say, oh, you know, I 

don’t have a beer in my house, and my kid knows the name of a 

“Blue” and “Golden,” or whatever, and that’s serious. 

 

It goes back to the individual circumstances and it goes back to 

the individual and what you'll choose to do with your life and 

what your child will. There’s be many more influences on him 

than that, I would hope, and you should be one of them — 

positive influences. 

 

The member from Regina Lakeview and myself grew up in a 

town — and the member from Battleford — grew up in the 

town of Meadow Lake. You want to talk about people using 

and abusing alcohol. With no television, right? No television. 

Neither of us ever saw a television until we went to university. 

So there we are . .  (inaudible interjection) . .  Yes, she’s the 

same age. It wasn’t because of the . .  I should apologize to the 

member for that. I maybe let something slip out in terms of the 

member’s age. 

 

But in any case, some of the influences, if you want to use  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3124 

 

those influences of “big, bad society,” of the things that we saw 

in Meadow Lake would make your hair curl, sir. It would make 

your hair curl. But neither of us has turned out to be a raving 

drunk. Okay? And many people in our community haven’t, so 

go ahead. All I’ll say to you is those influences which you say, 

bad influences, and my boy knows the names of the brands of 

beer — well, welcome to the real world, I say to you. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I came into these estimates 

hoping that we could have a rational and reasonable discussion 

about a very serious problem in this province. You stand up and 

suggest that it’s somehow being sanctimonious to care about 

young people in this province. Well I’ll tell you what would 

make your hair curl, Mr. Minister. If you could sit in the office 

that I’ve sat in for the last number of years and see what 

happens to families in this province who have young people 

trapped in drug and alcohol abuse, now that will make your hair 

curl, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, we come into this House with a number of 

positive suggestions. We applaud some of the things you’ve 

done. We come into this House tonight with a number of 

positive suggestions. One of those positive suggestions involves 

either the removal or the restriction of this alcohol 

advertisement through the media, and particularly on television, 

and you somehow stand in this House and make light of the 

entire issue as if it has no importance. 

 

Mr. Minister, I suggest that the editorial that was written in the 

Leader-Post in 1983, referred to by the United Church of 

Canada in its brief to your government linking the contributions 

of the brewers and distillers to the Progressive Conservative 

Party, has a great deal to do, a great deal to do with the position 

of your government, and that what is lacking here; what is 

lacking here is a commitment to the young people of 

Saskatchewan. Instead, we have a commitment to your political 

friends. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the points I have made I 

believe them to be the case and we’ll just leave it at that. This 

can go on for ever. The member says, you know, in terms of 

caring . .  And we have had a good discussion earlier about the 

young people. My former profession, I have seen many of them, 

I have talked to many people. I have not had one — I can 

honestly tell you this — I have not had one person who has 

come to me with their specific problem of this drug abuse 

problem that we have in this family or whatever, and I’ve had 

some talk to me about that. I’ve not had one said, it was that ad 

on TV that made me do that; it’s from that ad on TV that has 

made Johnny into an abuser of sniffing glue, or whatever he’s 

been into, or whether he had . .  was drinking beer or whatever 

it was. So the problem is larger — you can say there’s a bogy 

man out there, and it’s big society, and all the rest of it. I’ll tell 

you that the bogy man out there is some kind of . .  some of 

these sort of self-satisfied attitudes that you project here tonight. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’m going to run through a short 

list of some of the positive suggestions that we have made here 

tonight. 

 

We have suggested here tonight that if you’re sincere as a  

government in wanting to address this problem in our society 

and in our province, that you will begin to look at some realistic 

employment programs; that you as a government will develop 

some job strategies that are effective and can deal with this 

crisis in unemployment that affects Saskatchewan young 

people. 

 

I suggested that you might want to look at taking more of that 

profit that you as a government are taking from liquor, and use 

more of that money for SADAC, for education and prevention. 

You suggested that wasn’t worth much. You have seemed to 

have suggested tonight that the employment thing really doesn’t 

have much effect. 

 

We’re suggesting here tonight, and we’ve done it in a positive 

way, that you look at some full funding for referrals out of 

province. We’ve suggested here tonight, in a very positive way, 

some more socio-economic emphasis in the kind of treatment. 

We’ve raised a concern, and we’ll discuss it again later, about 

the confidentiality of those involved in treatment. 

 

And we’ve come finally to a closing, with some debate around 

the advertisement of alcohol on television. You flatly have 

denied in this House, and no one has suggested that these ads on 

television somehow are the entire cause of the problem, or that 

they are the entire cause of the problem in one individual case, 

but I’m telling you, Mr. Minister, they play a role. They play a 

role, and people across this province agree with me, and I 

suspect there are members in your own caucus who agree with 

me. I certainly know there are some of your constituents and 

constituents represented by your colleagues who agree with me. 

 

The school trustees in this province agree with me; churches 

across this province agree with me; educators across this 

province, and members on this side of the House — now will 

you listen, will you listen to Saskatchewan people? Will you 

listen to the advice of your own statistics? This is not the whole 

problem; it’s not the cause, the entire cause of the problem, but 

it’s a factor. And it’s a factor that you can address, because it’s 

a factor that you created. 

 

So I ask you again, I plead with you, will you either remove the 

alcohol ads from the media, or will you at least look at further 

restrictions upon them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The member goes back and is 

reiterating some of the things that he — and he said at the 

earliest stages of the estimates tonight that he had planned to 

make some suggestions. I’ve heard those, and you have made 

some suggestions. Some of those suggestions have been, as I 

have said in the answers to them, have been based on a 

particular philosophical bent, which I say is the case, and I 

mean, what one would expect, in this forum, that to be the case. 

 

Some suggestions that you’ve made, we’ve heard what you’ve 

said as it relates to SADAC and the treatment facilities. We 

appreciate those and we will need — we, I say that we being the 

wider society in Saskatchewan, and  

  



 

October 5, 1987 

3125 

 

those of us responsible for delivery of those programs will need 

all of the co-operation necessary from whatever quarter, 

including the opposition, as it relates to breaking this new 

ground in that areas of treatment of young people. 

 

And all I can say is, further, Mr. Chairman, is that it’s been a 

stimulating and a good discussion tonight, frankly. And I think 

it’s getting to near that time, so would just ask, Mr. Chairman, 

that the committee rise, report progress and ask for leave to sit 

again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 

 


