













































November 4, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 November 4, 1987 

 

3937 

 

 

AFTERNOON SITTING 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to 

you, and through you, students from Miller high school, grade 12 

history class, with their teacher, Vaughn McIntyre, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’d like to point out that Miller high school and LeBoldus 

high school are two schools in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, that 

will be competing in the city high school championship football 

this weekend, and I’ll be cheering for both teams, of course. 

However, I’d like to point out that football is just one of many 

activities in the school year, and it will be of some importance to 

some students, I’m sure, because pride, school pride, is very 

important. 

 

However, I’d like to welcome the history students to our 

Assembly today. I hope you enjoy the activities for the next half 

hour or so. I’m sure you will, seeing democracy in action in its 

purest form, and I’ll be talking to you later at 2:30. Ladies and 

gentlemen, please welcome our guests. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a guest I would like to 

introduce and welcome to this House, in the person of Mr. George 

Lawson. George is in the province and in the city of Regina 

attending a national convention, the National Association of 

Learning Disabilities. George has a deep and abiding interest in 

that association and also in the realm of politics. And so I would 

ask all members to welcome George Lawson from Vancouver, 

B.C. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Ceiling on Payments to Doctors 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier in 

the absence of the Minister of Health, and it deals with a 

potentially serious problem facing the people of Saskatchewan, 

and that problem is the arbitration board ruling which puts, for the 

first time ever in this province, a cap on payments to doctors. 

 

Mr. Premier, the question here is not savings to the province nor is 

it the income of the doctors; the question is accessibility to health 

care for Saskatchewan people. 

 

What action, Mr. Premier, is your government planning to ensure 

that services will remain for Saskatchewan people? What actions 

are you planning to take to ensure that services to Saskatchewan 

people remain? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I can say that I’m quite well 

versed in Saskatoon Agreement II, having negotiated it with the 

medical profession in 1985. And one of the  

requests brought forward at that time in Saskatoon Agreement II 

was for a clause in binding arbitration. This year in the settlement 

of physicians’ fees, that clause has been brought into play and the 

decision and the amount of money has come down, and it 

indicates that the cap on the payment by MCIC (Medical Care 

Insurance Commission) to physicians is almost expended at this 

time. Therefore, the implementation of this will be worked out 

between officials in the Health department and members of the 

MSA (Saskatchewan Medical Association). 

 

To my best knowledge at this time, there is a meeting set up for 

November 11, where the discussion that will take place on the 

implementation will be undertaken. I can assure the member and 

members of this Assembly, from my past dealings with the 

medical profession and the Department of Health, that I feel that 

we can work out a system that will fix, or have the continuation of 

service to the people of Saskatchewan continued at the same time 

as working out a system that will be acceptable to both the 

Department of Health and the medical profession. I think the past 

track record of this government in dealing with the difficult topic 

of extra billing indicates that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary to the minister. The 

Saskatchewan Medical Association says that the 1987 limit has 

practically been reached. If nothing is done doctors will have one 

of two choices: they will work for nothing, or they will withdraw 

their services to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, we don’t expect people to work for nothing. 

And so my question is this: what is your government going to do 

to prevent the nightmare of sick people with no doctors to attend 

to them or waiting lists at doctors’ offices? What are you going to 

do to prevent that situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well let me indicate to the member again, in 

case she missed my first reply, was the clause for binding 

arbitration was asked for by the medical profession. And when we 

negotiated that, and negotiated in good faith, it would seem to me 

that one would live with that as it was something that was asked 

for. Now it has come into play. 

 

I’ve indicated to the member that there is a meeting set up, as I 

understand, on November 11. Let me say once again, Mr. Speaker, 

from the past deliberations, which were not easy, which were to 

work out an agreement in Saskatchewan that is a historic 

agreement, Saskatoon Agreement II, when we reached that, it was 

in good faith. 

 

And I believe strongly that the medical profession and the Health 

department of this province will reach, again, an agreement in 

good faith that will continue with services to the people of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3938 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question, Mr. Minister, you display an 

amazing siege mentality. The health situation in this province is 

out of control. We have hospital waiting lists that you have not 

been able to deal with; it’s been too little too late. We have a drug 

plan where people are making decisions between groceries and 

prescription drugs. Too little too late. 

 

And so my question is this: do we have to now arrive at a situation 

in this province where we are going to have waiting lists at 

doctors’ offices, or doctor’s office closures similar to what we 

have in our hospital system? Is that your response to the health 

care crisis in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well once again, Mr. Speaker, we see the 

member from the other side of the House try to exaggerate and 

inflame and mislead. I want to tell you the health care system in 

Saskatchewan is not out of control. There’s more hospitals being 

built, more nursing homes being brought in, a new chiropody 

program — there’s been more things done under health care under 

the Devine government than happened for many years before. 

 

And I take exception . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I take exception to misleading statements 

that have come forth from the other side of the House. 

 

Let me indicate to you once again — your government never ever 

had the fortitude to deal with the extra billing. You wouldn’t take 

it on. You went and talked out of one side of your mouth and said 

you didn’t like extra billing. But would you sit down with the 

doctors and work out an agreement? No. 

 

This government did, and I can tell you that that same 

continuation of service, that same type of co-operative dialogue 

and discussion will take place. And I feel that the types of things 

that you’re trying to scare the people with will not take place in 

this province, that this will be decided between the Health minister 

and the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association), and the 

meetings are already set up to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Employment of former MLA by Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation. Yesterday, Mr. Minister, your colleague, the Deputy 

Premier, took notice of a question concerning, shall we say, a 

career opportunity for a former colleague of yours, one Louis 

Domotor, a defeated Conservative cabinet minister, at the property 

management corporation. 

 

Could you now advise this Assembly of Mr. Domotor’s job 

description, his qualifications for the position, along with the 

salary level? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: Yes, Mr. Chairman. I understand that the 

Deputy Premier took notice yesterday, and I do have some 

information that the member had asked for. 

 

Mr. Domotor has been employed with the corporation since 

August 17 of ’87, and it is as a classification compensation labour 

relations officer. He is at a professional level 4, and that is in a 

range of levels 1 to 12, so he’s at the fourth level, and that salary is 

3,500 per month. The qualifications required for the position 

include . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Grossly overpaid, grossly overpaid. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I would like to give the qualifications. 

Experience in the personnel field; a university degree preferred, or 

equivalent training and experience . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. The minister is 

attempting to answer the question, and I’m sure you want to hear 

it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Good communication skills; experience in 

dealing with legislation, regulations, and agreements; and the 

individual should be perceptive, possess a high degree of 

ingenuity, and have common sense and good judgement. 

 

Now they asked about Mr. Domotor’s qualifications. Mr. Domotor 

does meet the requirements for the job. He has two university 

degrees — a degree as a Bachelor of Education and a Bachelor of 

Arts and, as well, has some non-credit courses in labour relations. 

He was a cabinet minister in the government, so therefore 

certainly knows about operational policy of a government 

department; and he was assistant Deputy Speaker of this 

legislature. 

 

So I feel that with his education and his experience, that Mr. 

Domotor is well qualified for the position he’s holding in the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, a further question to the 

minister. Finally, after months and months and months, I’ve got a 

little bit of information about one of the employees in the property 

management corporation out of this minister. And the minister has 

managed to keep the lid on it for over a month now. And I would 

wish the minister would, at the earliest opportunity, would bring 

forward more information about the property management 

corporation. 

 

I want the minister to confirm that the main qualification of this 

gentleman who’s been hired into the property management 

corporation is that he brings to this position his political 

connections, which suits your government’s desire to sanitize the 

civil service of all non-Tories. Will the minister confirm that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. That certainly isn’t true, and . . . 

 

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3939 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

Order, please. Order, please. I’d like to once more ask for the 

co-operation of the members to allow the minister to answer the 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly the person in the job, as I think I 

indicated in the last response, is well qualified. He holds two 

university degrees, plus experience. And you seem to want to 

indicate there’s some politicizing here. 

 

I want to tell you, if you want to see the degree of acceptance that 

this government has, I remember sitting in the desk you’re sitting 

in, I believe . . . no, on this side —over on that side was one Jack 

Chapman. Jack Chapman ran against the Premier of this province 

— employed by Sask Power; he’s still there. 

 

I think you would find many members of the member from Quill 

Lakes’ family — the Koskie connection as it was called — are 

still employed. In fact I have some of the relatives employed in 

some of the things that I’m responsible for today, so I think your 

allegation is completely unfounded. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 

minister. Now, Mr. Minister, during your estimates I had asked 

you for a list of officials of this Crown corporation. You said there 

was no permanent job designations at that point. 

 

The Crown corporation was created by order in council in March 

of ’86. It was activated in December of ’86; it is now being 

reconstituted in 1987 by legislation. 

 

Can the minister tell me when the designations of permanent 

positions will be made; when will I receive the list that I have 

requested; and is the gentleman’s name who is under 

consideration here a permanent employee; is he on contract; what 

are the terms and conditions of his employment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I notice that the member 

opposite talked about sanitization of the civil service or something. 

I want to just indicate something for the public. I think they should 

know this. It comes from the NDP resolutions for June ’87 

convention. And I read resolution P-44: 

 

Whereas it is necessary to have civil servants and board 

members of provincial bodies who are dedicated to 

promoting the New Democratic program of democratic 

socialism, be it resolved that when the New Democratic 

Party is elected, a careful screening take place to ensure that 

such people are in place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s what your party stands for. There it is 

in black and white. And you have the gall, the audacity to stand 

here and criticize a person with two degrees that’s eminently 

qualified for the job he’s in.  

I think you should apologize. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. Order, 

please. The member for Saskatoon Westmount, I believe, has a 

further question. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to ask a further question of the 

minister, Mr. Speaker, it’s an old saying that when you pound on 

an empty drum, it’ll make more noise than anything. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — And that’s exactly what I’m getting out of 

this minister, Mr. Speaker. I’ve asked this minister, starting in 

December 1986 — 11 months ago — for information about the 

people in this corporation. I have receive virtually nothing to date. 

Only upon sweating out some political information out of the 

minister was I able to get a bit of information. I want to know, the 

people of Saskatchewan want to know, where is the information 

about the people that staff the property management corporation, 

this multi-million dollar corporation which has hundreds and 

hundreds of employees? The minister hasn’t got permanent 

assignments for staff yet. We deserve that. The public deserve 

that. When is the minister going to supply it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the same thing 

that’s been going on here for the last four or five weeks. I don’t 

know why you don’t just shut her down rather than asking the 

same questions over and over again. 

 

I stood in this House and discussed with him in estimates, told him 

exactly what we’ll do. When the permanent positions are in place 

in the property management Crown, I will be the first man to send 

him the list, and he can ponder over them and look over them and 

look for Koskies and see whatever he wants. And he can put it to 

the screen of resolution -44, and I don’t know if he heard it, and 

for the enjoyment of the House I might read it again. 

 

However, those decisions have not been made. The only 

permanent position in the property management Crown at this 

time is the president, and that is Mr. Otto Cutts. 

 

Sale of Sask Forest Products Assets — Perceived Conflict of 

Interest 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Premier in the absence of the minister for Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation. Mr. Premier, it is now apparent to everyone 

in this province that you’re on the verge of announcing the sale of 

the three SFPC (Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation) 

assets remaining. 

 

And I’d like to deal with one of those assets today, the Hudson 

Bay mill, and the perceived conflict of interest  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3940 

 

here. Mr. Minister, we’ve discussed previously in this House the 

fact that one of the groups trying to buy the Hudson Bay mill 

involves the current sales manager of that in Vancouver, an Eric 

Hedlund, and that the principals in AFA Forest Products are part 

of that group. 

 

Mr. Premier, the chairman of the SFPC board of directors, one Pat 

Hill, is an employee of AFA, and AFA is the major customer of 

the Hudson Bay plywood mill. Will you give this House your 

assurance that this perceived conflict of interest does not become a 

real conflict of interest and that the assets will not be sold to this 

particular group? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of this 

question, or one similar to it yesterday, on behalf of the minister 

responsible for Sask Forest Products. I’ve since, as acting 

chairman of Crown Management Board, taken it upon myself to 

find out exactly what the situation was with the lay-offs and the 

possibility for a privatization or a public participation with Sask 

Forest Products. 

 

The question specifically was dealing with the six months notice 

for lay-offs of the headquarters’ employees, and under section 

15.01 of their agreement. And there was six months notice given 

for the lay-offs, Mr. Speaker, in anticipation of a deal coming 

together some time during the next six months. 

 

There are more than one proposal on the table that are being 

evaluated at this time. No decision has been taken at this time as to 

which proposal, if any, will be the successful proposal. And 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, no sale has been made, and when a sale 

has been made it will be, Mr. Speaker, to the benefit of 

Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan and Sask Forest 

Products, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — A supplementary to the same minister. Mr. 

Minister, perhaps you didn’t hear my question. I asked you if you 

were going to allow a sale to go ahead to the group that is giving 

the view to the people of this province that there is a conflict of 

interest, and I ask you to categorically deny that you will sell to 

those people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — What I will commit to, Mr. Speaker, as 

we did with Weyerhaeuser, we will get the best possible deal for 

the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — A new question to the same minister. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re hoping on this side of the House that they can cut a 

deal, a better deal than they did with the Weyerhaeuser operation. 

 

But my question is this: you have given notice to employees, six 

months notice to employees; you can’t stand up in this House and 

say whether you’re going to sell it or whether you’re not going to 

— or at least you refuse to. You’re playing games with the lives of 

those  

families of those employees. My question is this: are you going to, 

four months or five months down the road after they’ve been out 

looking for alternate employment, are you going to stand up and 

say, oh, whoops, you can have your jobs back; we really didn’t 

mean it. This is just an indication of how you treat working people 

in this province and, Mr. Minister, I say you’re unfair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, he should talk to the 

employees at the Weyerhaeuser plant in Prince Albert. The 

Weyerhaeuser people, the Weyerhaeuser employees in Prince 

Albert don’t think that we were unfair in that deal. The 

Weyerhaeuser employees in that plant are very, very happy that 

they are there and that they are working in the Weyerhaeuser plant 

with a paper mill being built on the end of it that will create 

another several hundred jobs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people in Sask Forest Products will be 

equally as happy if and when, if and when we put a deal together 

based on one of the proposals that is up for consideration at this 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — We noted how deliriously happy the people 

in Prince Albert were; they defeated both your MLA’s from that 

area in the last election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — And one of the reasons was because of the 

way you treat working people. Mr. Minister, will you admit that 

the reason why you gave them the notice was to circumvent 

section 37 of a trade union legislation so that when the new owner, 

when Weyerhaeuser takes over that as well, or whoever the private 

owner is, they will not be bound by any previous contracts that 

might have been entered into? Will you admit that that’s why you 

gave the notice — to circumvent section 37? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, for all I know . . . like, Sask 

Forest Products has operations in Prince Albert and Hudson Bay 

and other parts of the province. For all I know the new operators 

— and we’re talking about head office employees here, Mr. 

Speaker — for all I know the new operators may have the head 

office in Hudson Bay or in Meadow Lake or in Carrot River. I 

don’t know. 

 

The fact is that under the existing agreement, in the event of 

substantial changes in working methods or facilities, six months 

notice is required, Mr. speaker. We have provided that six months 

notice in the event that one of the proposals currently being 

analysed and worked on is successful, and there is some 

substantial change in working methods or facilities. 

 

Public Policy with regard to the Future of Agriculture 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Agriculture. Mr. Minister, at a conference of the Canadian 

Bankers’ Association earlier this week in Toronto, a few startling 

things came out about the future  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3941 

 

of agriculture in this country. 

 

Dr. Ralph Ashmead of the Farm Credit Corporation said that 8 per 

cent of the farmers are broke, 23 per cent are in very bad shape. 

Harold Baker of the University of Saskatchewan said we expect to 

lose 25 per cent of our farmers in the next few years, and he also 

stated, Mr. Minister, that there is a clear lack of public policy 

dealing with the situation. 

 

Do you agree that there’s a lack of public policy, and have you 

expressed any of those concerns to the federal government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to involve farmers in 

looking at new solutions, we just finished holding a symposium, 

and the hon. member attended the symposium. And we had farm 

people, and we had the Credit Union Central, and we had the Farm 

Credit Corporation, and we had major presentations by individuals 

from various parts of Canada, talking about deficiency payments, 

talking about equity corporations, discussing the various kinds of 

rescheduling of debt. 

 

Obviously it’s been a Conservative government that provided the 

deficiency payments to farmers and has provided drought 

payments. And we have over a billion dollars out at 6 per cent 

money. So in fact, Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite has just 

realized that the financial problems in agriculture are significant, 

and he has to read the newspaper to find out that a banker says it’s 

difficult, well, I mean, welcome to the real world. Farmers have 

been saying that they needed some assistance for some time, and 

we’ve helped them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the minister agrees that 

here is a certain lack, a very definite lack, of public policy coming 

out of Ottawa. Famous programs like the rural transition program, 

paying farmers to get off the land — very little at that; allowing 

variable freight rates; increasing Farm Credit Corporation interest 

rates and dropping the moratorium; losing the two-price . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The member will have to repeat 

his question. Your mike was turned off. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — We have a legacy of great and wonderful 

programs coming out of Ottawa, as I mentioned. The Farm Credit 

Corporation moratorium, foreclosures, interest rates, and all the 

others that I previously mentioned, Mr. Minister. Is that the record; 

is that the policy that you’re so proud of? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said before that what 

farmers want are low interest rates, and higher grain prices, and 

the rescheduling of debt, and some cash. And I’ve said it many 

times that if only the NDP had of helped them when interest rates 

were 21 per cent, they wouldn’t be in the trouble today. And they 

know that. And you did absolutely nothing. 

 

And you didn’t even encourage the federal government of 

Trudeau. You and Mr. Trudeau were just like this — and when 

Trudeau said I won’t sell your wheat, and you said, I won’t protect 

you against high interest rates. You all just hung in there like this. 

And today we see farmers in trouble. 

 

Now we did protect farmers against high interest rates. We 

brought in 6 per cent money. And it’s difficult, particularly when 

we don’t have the revenue. We said, yes, we’ll provide a 

deficiency payment. It’s at over $1 billion. And that’s something 

that you never did. We said that we would provide cash advances 

to farmers, provide drought assistance, and we provided 

counselling assistance, and passed legislation to protect them. 

 

And you stand in your place as if you don’t like the $1 billion at 6 

per cent. Well you wouldn’t support it. You never support any 

interest rate protection for farmers because the NDP, when they 

had their chance, they just stood there and said, home owners and 

farmers can pay 21 per cent interest rates. And you know what, the 

people have never forgotten. They’ve never forgotten, nor should 

they forget, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon University, before 

we go to second readings, begged leave to introduce some guests. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure to introduce two guests who’ve just entered your gallery a 

short time ago. One is Mr. Larry Ross of Christchurch, New 

Zealand, who’s been one of the leading spokespeople there, Mr. 

Speaker, on behalf of the peace movement, a driving force in the 

successful nuclear-weapons-free zone campaign in New Zealand 

that has resulted in a formal declaration of a nuclear-weapons-free 

zone by that government, one which we on this side of the House 

hope we will one day see in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s my pleasure to introduce Mr. Ross and also to introduce a 

gentleman accompanying him, Reverend Herald Peters-Fransen. 

We’re very happy to have them both with us this afternoon, and 

I’d ask all members of the Assembly to warmly welcome them to 

Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 95 — An Act to provide for the Registration and 

Regulation of Persons Engaged in the Real Estate Trade 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

bring to the Assembly a new Real Estate Brokers Act. The Bill 

which hon. members now have before them is innovative, 

progressive, and reflects extensive consultations between my 

department and  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3942 

 

representatives of the Saskatchewan real estate industry. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is innovative because it follows the self-

administration models which this government has previously 

introduced. A notable example is the system of insurance councils 

which involve the industry in the day-to-day administration of 

Saskatchewan insurance regulation. At the same time, the 

superintendent of insurance remains the final authority and has 

discretionary powers under the insurance statute. 

 

In brief, Mr. Speaker, this self-administration model in the 

insurance industry brings together the industry people who are 

undeniably best qualified to administer their own affairs, yet with 

no compromise in consumer protection. This system of insurance 

councils has proven to be very successful, is working very well, 

and completely supports this government’s trust in the ability and 

the integrity of the industry. 

 

This same positive, progressive approach is now being used in the 

funeral services industry as well. Again, the industry appears to be 

off to a very successful start, administering its own affairs, while 

the public sees no reduction in its level of protection. Mr. Speaker, 

there is every indication that public protection will be enhanced 

because of the direct industry contact, involvement and initiative. 

At the same time hon. members will appreciate that significant 

public savings in administrative costs are being achieved by using 

this self-administration approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed Real Estate Brokers Act follows the 

self-administration model, builds on the successful experiences of 

other industries, and reflects the unique nature of the 

Saskatchewan real estate situation at the same time. This Bill is the 

result of three years of intensive and extensive discussions and 

consultation with the industry. 

 

One of its unique features is the creation of a new, self-sufficient 

legal entity to be known as the Saskatchewan real estate 

commission. The general function of the commission will be the 

day-to-day administration of their statutes. This includes the most 

important mechanism of consumer protection, the statutory 

assurance fund, which collects fees from licensees. Moneys are 

made available from this fund to compensate consumers. Such 

things as licensing, fee collection, and drafting by-laws to establish 

education standards in the real estate industry would be within the 

powers of the proposed commission. It would also investigate 

complaints and ensure proper standards of consumer protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as in the other industries where a form of self-

administration has been introduced, the final authority still resides 

with the Superintendent of Insurance and real estate. For example, 

the superintendent can, at his own discretion, review, revoke or 

amend commission by-laws, and he also retains supervisory 

control over policy and investigations. 

 

The Act would permit brokers to hold trust money in interest-

bearing accounts. Currently brokers may not do so unless 

specifically requested by a client. As a result,  

much of the interest from trust moneys accrues to the banks or 

financial institutions. The proposed Act would permit interest 

earned on trust accounts to go to the commission, unless, of 

course, a broker’s client requests otherwise. The commission 

could then use the funds for the benefit of the real estate sector as a 

whole for education programs, for licensees and consumers, 

research, or a variety of other purposes related to the 

administration of the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the implementation of self-administration by a 

new real estate commission is the central feature of this Bill, there 

are some other new provisions. These changes are largely of an 

administration nature and I would suggest might be best discussed 

in detail during Committee of the Whole, should members desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill represents a fair balance. These proposed 

changes to the Saskatchewan real estate law reflect both the need 

for greater industry control over its affairs and the need for 

continued consumer protection and confidence. 

 

It is appropriate, I feel, that I publicly express my deep 

appreciation to the executive and members of the Saskatchewan 

Real Estate Association for their hard work during the consultation 

process, which, I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, began some 

three years ago. I might add that no additional public 

administrative costs will result from the introduction of this Bill 

and that civil rights of Saskatchewan residents will not be 

adversely affected by the proposed legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The Real 

Estate Brokers Act, 1987. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

new piece of legislation replacing former legislation, The Real 

Estate Brokers Act. Formerly real estate brokers and sales-persons 

were licensed by the Superintendent of Insurance directly under 

the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. This new 

piece of legislation was as a result of a proposal brought forth by 

the Saskatchewan Real Estate Association a couple of years ago. 

The reason for this legislation coming forward, or the suggesting 

for change, was because of the frustration experienced by the real 

estate brokers and sales-persons by the failure of the Department 

of Consumer and Commercial Affairs to provide quick service in 

licensing real estate sales persons and in investigating complaints. 

 

The Minister of Consumer Affairs has bragged about her 

commitment to letting the licensing and investigation branch of 

her department wither away. And in spite of the obvious need for 

better regulation and investigations as demonstrated by her failure 

to prevent the collapse of investment contract firms, and to take 

action to regulate the bingo industries, out of frustration with that, 

the PC government opposite . . . the real estate agents now want to 

gain control of the trade and to operate as much as possible outside 

of government regulations. 

 

Now the agents of the real estate association who have been 

promoting this Bill are a group that represent only 65 per cent of 

people who deal in real estate, although  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3943 

 

they do 90 per cent of the business of real estate selling. But they 

are mainly the big players in the real estate market. They are 

groups like Royal lipase and Century 21, Royal Trust, Realty 

World. They’re large; they’re often the multinational businesses. 

They’re already taking over the market from many of the smaller 

independent businesses, and their headquarters are often outside 

Saskatchewan and outside of Canada. 

 

The other 35 per cent of the people who do trade in real estate in 

Saskatchewan are not represented by the association that was very 

active in putting this Bill together. 

 

Many parts of this Bill are taken from the old Bill. The assurance 

fund that the minister mentioned is much the same in this Bill as it 

was in the old Bill, so there’s not much to be concerned about 

there. But what they’re proposing in this new legislation that is 

certainly a cause of concern is the establishment of what’s called a 

real estate commission. 

 

This commission is being established as a corporation, and it is not 

for any of its purposes an agent of the Crown, and its powers 

granted by this Act shall be exercised in its own right and not as an 

agent of the Crown. This is a new concept in Canada. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity to check — although this legislation has 

come down only very recently, in the last day and a half — I’ve 

had the opportunity to check as to what’s happening in other 

provinces. And legislation like this does not exist anywhere else. 

 

In Manitoba, a province which the government opposite often 

likes to brag about copying, real estate sales are governed by the 

securities commission. And in Ontario the sale of real estate is 

regulated directly by the Department of Consumer Affairs. 

 

Now while this is a new concept, this concept of the real estate 

commission, I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members 

opposite, that “new” does not automatically mean better, and 

“change” is not automatically for the public good. And I say that 

we have sadly learned this from the implementation of the so-

called changes to the destroyed drug plan and the so-called new 

dental plan which is really a return to dental practice as I knew it 

as a kid 40 years ago. 

 

So while this government comes in with things that are new, they 

are not necessarily any better, and sometimes often a lot worse 

than what we’ve had before. 

 

When we look at the make-up of this real estate commission, we 

have even greater concern because initially the real estate 

commission is to be made up of five persons nominated by the real 

estate association . And I remind you, Mr. Speaker, that that 

association is made up of the big players in the real estate game — 

the large corporations. Five persons from that association are to be 

nominated to the real estate commission. The other four members 

of the commission are to be so-called “other persons” appointed 

by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

In this legislation there is no suggestion whatsoever as to what 

groups those other persons are to represent. The consumer’s 

association is not represented; consumers’ groups are not 

represented. No one is suggested to be on this commission 

representing the 35 per cent of the sales-people and the brokers 

who are in real estate trade not represented as members of the 

association. 

 

There are no members from the construction of home builder’s 

association; no particular rural representation and, as many people 

are aware, most of the large real estate companies operate out of 

the big cities. So there’s no concern to represent the rural people in 

this. 

 

Now it’s interesting to me, also, in looking at this legislation, to 

look at how this commission is to be governed, because whether 

we like it or not, Mr. Speaker, we always have to come back to the 

issue of governance, since governance is a crucial, essential 

element of any civilized society. 

 

So we have to look at how this commission is governed. I’ve 

already explained that it’s to be an independent agent, that it is not 

for any of its purposes an agent of the Crown, so it has no 

connection with government there, and its powers granted by the 

Act are exercised in its own right and not as an agent of the 

Crown. 

 

It’s to be governed, as explained in this Bill — this elite group, the 

commission made up of five persons from the real estate 

association, the large players in the real estate trade, and the four 

other persons, whoever they may be. And with the record of the 

government opposite in terms of appointing its friends and former 

defeated cabinet ministers and whatever to their commissions, I 

wouldn’t be surprised to see someone like that show up in this 

commission. 

 

(1445) 

 

But this elite group to be appointed will be prescribing its own by-

laws. They are to draw up their own by-laws, including 

prescribing how long the five originally nominated big real estate 

firms’ representatives are to hold office in this commission. So it 

becomes a very tight in-group with that kind of power. 

 

The by-laws that this group of people, this small group, this elite 

group getting together and drawing up for their own governance 

without any input from the rest of the trade, these by-laws don’t 

have to be ratified by any annual meeting of people who are 

registered real estate sales-people and brokers in the province. 

They don’t have to be registered . . . or ratified by any group of 

public interest people. This small real estate commission sets its 

own rules. 

 

The only way in which those rules can be changed is by the 

Superintendent of Insurance, if he has the time to read them, and 

that the Minister of the Department of Consumer Affairs does not 

have to receive these by-laws and approve them, or know what’s 

going on. The commission is going to operate on its own. 

 

And this is a great concern when we look at what’s been 

happening in terms of the work of the Superintendent of  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3944 

 

Insurance in the Department of Consumer Affairs in other areas. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Consumer Affairs prides 

herself, I say, on being asleep at the wheel; that she relies on the 

market-place to do its work, which it sure did, as I say, when it 

shafted 4,400 investors, Saskatchewan people, in the province this 

last year. And that is a serious condemnation of the Department of 

Consumer Affairs and stands on the record as being condemnation 

of this department. And legislation that this department brings 

forward, failing to give the minister control over the agents and the 

organizations that it sets up, is an organization to be under strict 

surveillance by the opposition. 

 

The real estate registrants, the people, the brokers and the sales-

persons that are registered in this province to sell real estate, and 

the interested public who are concerned about what’s happening 

with the sale of real estate in this province, have no mechanism in 

this legislation through which to question or to ratify the by-laws 

that this commission operates under. 

 

Now I want to recognize that the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

may disapprove of a by-law, but only within 90 days of its being 

filed. And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, what kind of time line is that for 

guaranteeing a thorough consideration of the issue? That the order 

in council, the cabinet, has a lot of things to go through. Within 90 

days, this commission — set up by the large real estate players in 

this province, plus these four other people, whoever they may be 

—has 90 days to look at the by-laws that they come up with. And 

if they don’t get to those by-laws within 90 days, as I read this 

Act, the by-laws are in force, and the real estate commission rolls 

on, on its own. 

 

So the issue in this legislation, for us on this side of the House . . . 

one of the major issues is control . . . is control and governance 

and what’s going on with this secret commission that will operate 

as an elite group. 

 

And another example of the kind of control that the commission 

will have is on the training of the real estate sales-persons. This 

commission will be able to control the number of people in this 

province who are licensed to practise real estate trade in 

Saskatchewan, because they will control the kind of training 

courses that are put forward. They will decide how stringent those 

course are or how lax they are, how expensive they are to enrol or 

how inexpensive. 

 

And history shows and experience show that courses that are 

organized by the private sector are very expensive, so I worry 

about the cost of these programs. I worry about who is going to 

get into them. When the control is in the hands of the organization 

itself, they may well decide that people can’t get access to that 

training because they want to control the number of sales people 

who are available in the province. 

 

If this legislation said that courses in selling real estate and in the 

whole development of the real estate market were being offered 

through a technical school or a regional college which would have 

public, independent input into the program, similar to a group like 

the engineers who are  

trained at the university, then perhaps there would not be such a 

need to worry about the kind of control that the commission has, 

about who’s going to get the training, and who’s going to get into 

the profession. 

 

So the clause in here that gives the commission the power to 

register courses, prescribe the classes, decide who’s going to get 

the training, and also that no one can sell real estate in this 

province unless they’ve taken this course, is an issue of the kind of 

control that this government is putting in the hands of a few. This 

government that says that it’s indulging in self-administration is 

actually putting the control of a huge industry into the hands of a 

few people, and also making . . . probably allowing it to have 

control over a lot of other aspects of the real estate trade. 

 

And the other aspect of this legislation that I have some serious 

concerns about are the secrecy of the work of the commission, 

because the annual report that’s presented by this commission 

doesn’t come to the legislature. The annual report doesn’t come to 

the legislature. The annual report doesn’t go to the minister of the 

department. The annual report from the commission goes to the 

annual meeting of the registrants. And by “registrants” is meant 

the people who are registered in this province to sell or to be 

brokers in real estate trade. 

 

They are mandated to have an annual meeting at which they will 

elect at some point in the future their representation to this 

commission, but they are not provided with an opportunity to see 

the annual report. And at the very end of this Act there is also 

some clauses regarding the secrecy of the information that’s 

available to the commission. When they control the industry, and 

they are themselves the industry, the decisions made by the 

commission are private and secret decision. They go to the 

superintendent of Insurance, but they don’t go any further than 

that. 

 

And what is of great concern is the fact that this government, 

instead of strengthening the Department of Consumer and 

Commercial Affairs, instead of making the licensing broader and 

stronger, the licensing in the investigation department so that it 

could do the work that’s needed to be done in governing, they are 

turning governance over to a small, select group of people from 

within their own area of interest. And they are eliminating the 

opportunity for public scrutiny of that industry, for public 

information, and for the opportunity for the elected representatives 

to have some control over what happens in that industry. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation — and I have a number of 

other concerns about it which we may talk about in Committee of 

the Whole — but that this Act, this legislation, gives the 

commission the power to be self-administering, very much so. But 

it is not being given in a democratic, open, independent way. It’s 

giving more power to those who are already powerful, it’s 

reinforcing secrecy of the industry, and it allows government to 

abdicate its responsibility for governing. And that is a very serious 

condemnation. 

 

And it’s because of those points, Mr. Speaker, that we will be 

opposing this legislation. 

 

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3945 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and, by 

leave of the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later 

this day. 

 

Bill No. 58 — An Act respecting the repeal of the Agricultural 

Research Funding Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, The (Saskatchewan) 

Agricultural Research Funding Act was brought into law in June 

of 1979. Through that Act a person, by definition, individual, 

corporation, co-operative, partnership, association, or any other 

organization may apply for financial assistance for the purpose of 

research and investigation in any field of the agriculture sciences, 

pure or applied, as it effects the economy of the province. 

 

Since the advent of the agriculture development fund in March of 

1985, research projects could be applied for under either program, 

Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan agricultural research fund has had 

the limitation of only it being able to finance projects for a one-

year period whereas the agriculture development fund can 

authorize longer term research projects. 

 

In the budget we announced that we would provide, our 

government would provide almost 30 millions of dollars to the 

agriculture development fund this year, which is an increase of 28 

per cent. And I raise that point, Mr. Speaker, because I think some 

might view the repeal of the Saskatchewan agriculture research 

fund as somehow a lesser commitment by our government to 

agriculture research. And such is clearly not the case, Mr. Speaker, 

because in this very budget that is before this legislature, we have 

an increase of 28 per cent to the agriculture development fund this 

year. 

 

This injection of capital alone far outweighs any loss of research 

dollars with the elimination of the Saskatchewan agricultural 

research fund program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With both programs operating, two boards operate, two funds are 

administered, two programs exist at duplication of service and 

expense, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan agriculture research 

fund normally deals with applications once annually in November 

of each year. With the elimination of this fund, any existing 

projects will be administered to their conclusion by officers of the 

Saskatchewan agriculture development fund, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In summary then I would suggest to you and the hon. members of 

this legislature, there are several benefits to the repeal of this Act. 

First, all agricultural research will now be consolidated under the 

agriculture development fund, which is by far a larger fund and, I 

would argue, Mr. Speaker, a far better one in terms of its terms of 

reference allowing for long-term research, that kind of thing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Administration will be reduced — the elimination of unnecessary 

duplication and a savings of dollars there. And projects under way 

— because we are mindful that there are projects under way under 

the Saskatchewan agriculture research fund — will be completed 

under the  

administration of the agriculture development fund, so there will 

be no loss of projects under way. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I move second reading of Bill No. 58, 

An Act respecting the repeal of The (Saskatchewan) Agricultural 

Research Funding Act. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, rather. 

I’d just like to make a few brief comments on the repeal of The 

(Saskatchewan) Agricultural Research Funding Act. 

 

This type of manoeuvring is common in this government. And 

we’ve seen it many, many times throughout the budget — where 

we take money from one department and put it in another 

department; take one department and consolidate with another 

department. The dollars always come up short. And I . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well how do you end up with a 28 per cent 

increase then? 

 

Mr. Upshall: — That’s right — 28 per cent increase. And we can 

talk about it, we’ll be talking about it a little later on, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I can use the example of irrigation. Taking money out of 

the irrigation budget, putting it into Sask Water Corporation 

budget, but the budget’s still down. so we’re losing in two ends. 

And this is the type of direction this government seems to be 

going. 

 

And the other thing I’d like to mention, Mr. Speaker, is 1979, 

when this government came in in ’80, in ’82 they had that three 

and a quarter million dollars sitting in that fund — used for short, 

quick money for fast rising problems. We could tackle the 

problem quickly; the money was there. 

 

And now instead of just rolling it over into the other areas of 

research and development, they’re putting it back into the 

Consolidated Fund. I think there’s a good reason for that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and that’s because the coffers are pretty low, and 

they don’t need to spend that . . . they can use that money until 

whatever time they decide to spend it down the road sometime on 

research. 

 

So that money really isn’t there right now for quick rising 

problems in the farm economy . . . or in the farm . . . in farming, 

like wheat midge or rust or whatever the case may be. 

 

(1500) 

 

So that’s the direction that we’re going, shuffling it into the 

Consolidated Fund just so this government can pay its bills, 

because they’re terrible, terrible, terrible managers. And in the end 

run, when we shuffle all these departments around and use our 

percentages to the government’s best advantage, we will see, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we will see how much money actually is being 

spent. 

 

And there are no signs of looking into the future with this, because 

we will bring up some of the questions in the committee stage, 

where we will show you the direction this government is going. 

Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3946 

 

leave of the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later 

this day. 

 

Bill No. 81 — An Act respecting the Consequential 

Amendments resulting from the enactment of The 

Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in regard to the structure 

and the philosophy and the operation of the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation, I believe I explained all of 

those things during second reading of the major Bill. This is 

second reading of the consequential amendments pertaining to the 

Saskatchewan property management Act. I would, without any 

further discussion, move second reading of this Act. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I can 

understand the rationale for having a Bill dealing with the 

consequential amendments, for the changes you’re making with 

regard to The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Act. However, in your remarks you didn’t deal with any of the 

aspects of the consequential changes and I want to give you notice 

now — and you can respond at the conclusion of this particular 

debate or in committee, whichever is more convenient to you. 

 

But I raise a question about The Public Works Act, which is one 

of the consequential amendments. The Public Works Act is an Act 

which has been in effect since about 1916 in the province of 

Saskatchewan, to the best of my knowledge. And it would appear 

that the consequential amendments place under the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation the question of public work, 

and also have the expropriation powers under the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation. 

 

And the question that arises in my mind is: why is The Public 

Works Act being retained when in fact virtually all the powers are 

in the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation? I have 

some thoughts in my mind about why that may be so, however, 

I’d be prepared to listen to the minister’s comments, either on 

conclusion of second reading debate or in committee. 

 

The second point I raise, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the doing 

away with the Department of Supply and Services, which 

formerly, prior to this time, had all of the powers which are now 

being exercised by the property management Corporation. At a 

previous time in this legislature I had asked the minister about the 

transfer of the powers from the Supply and Services to the 

property management corporation, and the minister will recall —

it’s on page 3597 of the debates — I had requested information as 

to whether all of the Supply and Services had been transferred to 

the property management corporation. At that time the minister 

said in part: 

 

. . . a small portion of the systems centre is still in Supply and 

Services . . . 

 

And later on, on the same page he related that there are: 

 

. . . about eight or 10 people left within Supply and Services 

regarding this aspect of the systems  

centre. 

 

And if the minister is, in fact, doing away, repealing The 

(Department of) Supply and Services Act, what will be the 

consequential effect on those employees, and that function that 

was left, according to him, in Supply and Services? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation is a necessity; consequently, I do not 

believe these amendments are necessary. 

 

So therefore I will oppose them: my opposition primarily being 

with the other Act, namely The Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation Act. And that’s all I have to say at this 

time, Mr. Speaker. Questions may arise in committee with regard 

to the matters I’ve raised. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of the 

Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 10 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. You will 

recall, Mr. Minister, when you had your other estimates before the 

House a day or so ago I requested information about property 

from the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, listing 

community, building address, and square metreage, and I would 

also like the similar information for your department that you’re 

dealing with now. 

 

And also provide a list of all departmental consultants paid in 

1986-87, showing the name of the consultant and the purpose of 

the consultant and the cost, where the consultant’s results were 

shared with another department, agency, commission, or other 

government, etc., please indicate who, and the total cost of the 

study as well as your department’s portion of the cost. 

 

Please provide the additional global costs for your department for 

consultants in ’85-86 and the global costs estimated for ’87-88. 

And I don’t need the information right now, Mr. Minister, I’d be 

quite prepared to receive it in written form as soon as possible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well we would be glad to provide it in 

written form as soon as we can bring it together. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I can send over the item here 

and then you’d have it at hand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I want 

to ask some questions of you concerning one aspect of the trade 

agreement reached between Canada and the United States, and in 

particular, I want to focus on the binding dispute settlement 

mechanism which is referred  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3947 

 

to in the agreement as a binational panel dispute settlement. 

 

Now I ask these questions in the context of Canada’s objective, or 

as the Prime Minister used to call it, the bottom line, which was 

that Canada would secure access to the United States market 

through the establishment of a new set of trading rule which would 

define the practices or the government programs or subsidies 

which would be deemed acceptable, so that we’d have some idea 

of when we were crossing the line and in danger of running up 

against the countervailing duties or anti-dumping measures by the 

American government. 

 

The problem that I have with the agreement that was reached, as I 

understand that agreement, is that I don’t know what we got. I 

don’t know what we achieved in that agreement that we can feel 

very good about. I’ll just outline to you my understanding of what 

we got and then give you an opportunity to give me your 

understanding of it. 

 

Let’s take a complaint arising in the United States by industrialists 

in the United States such as happened in the potash case. They 

allege that Canada is unfairly dumping potash into the American 

market. And there is, as you know, a complex system set out in the 

American laws to determine whether or not that complaint is well-

founded. And it has various stages, and at the end of those stage 

comes a final decision on the complaint. 

 

Now in the past, people in the position of the potash companies in 

Saskatchewan would, in the normal course, be allowed to or have 

access to the courts in the United States to test the validity of that 

decision on certain limited grounds. And those grounds are 

defined in the administrative law of the United States, as they’re 

defined in the administrative law of Canada. And the grounds are 

quite, quite narrow. 

 

The question really becomes . . . or the question that the courts 

answer is: did the tribunal correctly interpret the law that they 

were applying, and in the odd case, did they have any evidence on 

which they could act? And on the question of evidence, as you 

know, it’s not a question of preponderance of evidence or weight 

of evidence, but merely was there any evidence at all on which a 

tribunal might have reached that decision. Now that’s how it used 

to be. 

 

Now as I read this agreement, what we’ve agreed to is the 

establishment of a panel which will take the place of the courts. 

And our redress from the decisions of the anti-dumping and 

countervailing tribunals in the United States, instead of being to 

the courts, is now to the panel. 

 

It’s my understanding that the grounds on which you can go to the 

panel, the grounds of review of those decisions, are precisely the 

same as they were with the old system — with the U.S. courts. 

 

(1515) 

 

And it is further my understanding that the law that the panel will 

be applying will be the law that’s already established in the United 

States, including the precedents  

that have been laid down by the courts in years gone by. 

 

Now I ask myself if I’m correct on all those facts, I ask: what’s 

new? What have we achieved that wasn’t there before? And I’d 

like you to answer that question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the hon. 

member’s question and appreciate the tone of his question. Let me 

begin by saying, if we didn’t change the anti-dumping or the 

countervail laws at all, but we moved tariffs to zero in the next 10 

years for both countries, you could ask yourself, would that be 

worth it to get two major trading partners, the largest trading 

partners in the world, to finally succeed in reducing their tariffs to 

zero. 

 

And as the hon. member knows, we’ve had three major tariff 

rounds internationally that have reduce dour tariffs. The first one 

in 1947, then the Kennedy round in ’63, and the Tokyo round in 

the ’70s, and always consistently reducing tariffs. So that now 

between the United States and Canada about 80 to 85 per cent of 

all the goods and services we trade are without tariff. 

 

Now this agreement says, we’ll take them so that 100 per cent of 

the goods and services we trade, with a few exceptions — beer, 

maybe, and some of the marketing board commodities — will be 

traded without tariff. And that seems to be an honourable thing to 

do. And generally most countries agree that you should move 

towards less tariff and less restrictions, and we’ve been all trying 

to do it since the Second World War. So that, it seems to me, is a 

win, if we did nothing with respect to their anti-dumping or ours, 

or their countervail or ours. 

 

So the second point is, now, if you can reduce them to zero and 

they don’t play fair, what do you do with them? I guess I could put 

it this way. If we designed a perfect deal and their laws were 

identical to ours, the point is, you still can’t cheat. You’ve got to 

play fair. So if they subsidize and then export into Canada, we 

have to have some remedy that we both agreed on. And the same 

applies for us subsidizing and trying to export into their market. So 

it’s good to have tariffs go to zero. And if we had a perfect system, 

we have to agree that when you shake hands on something, you 

can’t cheat on the agreement or else there’s a penalty. 

 

And that gets to — what about the laws? I’m inclined to answer 

that in three points, as briefly as I can. We don’t want to leave 

them as they are because it is unfair, and particularly in the mood 

of Americans and in some others in terms of retaliation it’s not a 

particularly harmonious mood. And they have an omnibus trade 

Bill before the House and 200 other Bills before Congress that are 

quite destructive and damaging because they lead to higher tariffs 

and more restriction, and so forth. 

 

So that’s the first. You don’t want to leave it the way it is. but you 

want to move tariffs to zero, so don’t leave it the way it is. 

 

Secondly, could we change their laws just as quickly as possible? 

And then that raises the question of, you know, is it politically 

possible to get Americans — Congress, Senate, and the House of 

Representatives — to actually  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3948 

 

change their anti-dumping and their countervail laws quickly, and 

Canadian parliament and our Senate to change our laws quickly. 

 

And I think the political judgement would be, and the consensus 

is, it’s difficult enough to cut a deal that takes 10 years. I think you 

would admit that. I mean, you know, given all the perspectives we 

have, it’s difficult to cut a deal that would take 10 years, let alone 

have United States and Canadian politicians change their laws 

right now. 

 

So you can’t leave it the way it is. You can’t expect to fix it 

overnight or literally within hours, or even weeks, so you go the 

third alternative, and the third alternative is the agreement we 

have. And the third alternative says this: we’re going to take tariffs 

to zero, and we’re going to design a mechanism to make it better. 

 

And in doing that, a couple of things have to happen. We have to 

bind them right now and get hold of them so that they can’t 

interpret their laws by themselves. 

 

Now their anti-dumping laws are very similar to our anti-dumping 

laws, so we can’t let them go ahead and interpret them because 

there is a fair amount of political influence, to be fair to 

Americans, or at least some connotations of some political 

influence in this mood of protectionism, that some people are 

encouraged to bring Bills before the House in anti-dumping cases, 

and that the same kind of people who are going to be lobbying 

those, that are going to be judging them, and it goes on and on. It’s 

wrapped up in the American flag and they say, well, this is the 

way it should come out. And they get to interpret their own laws. 

Never have they agreed to let somebody else interpret their laws. 

 

So we said, all right, I can’t live with it the way it is; I can’t 

change their laws overnight; but I can bind them and get a panel of 

people that they agree and we agree and a fifth person, say, in the 

middle, to be the binding dispute settlement mechanism, the final 

say — and an agreement that says over the next seven years we 

will harmonize our laws and we’ll get our anti-dumping laws more 

fair. 

 

We’ll have to address the constructive cost problems with respect 

to anti-dumping when you’re marketing into another man’s area 

and you have the lion’s share of it. And we particularly see that, 

say, in items like potash or steel or something else — and in the 

countervail to look at subsidies, the whole question of subsidies. 

When it comes to agriculture, I mean, the subsidies are enormous, 

particularly in United States. So in theory what we want is to get a 

hold of it, contain it, move the tariff to zero, and harmonize the 

laws on both sides of the border. 

 

Now I would agree with you if you say that’s not perfect. We 

would rather have their laws the same as our laws and the kind of 

law we would both like to see. And I agree with you. 

 

Now I guess the question that I faced was: would I let this go in 

the face of a perfect deal? In other words would I say, no, I’m 

walking away from this because I don’t think that the tariffs going 

to zero is important, or holding United States, or an agreement to 

harmonize the law is enough.  

I’ll just let it go the way it is. 

 

Now that’s a big decision to make because I think most people 

would like to see less tariff, generally. I mean, it goes down sector 

by sector. It just keeps dropping off and generally, and we’re now 

to 85 per cent of them or whatever that are without tariff. We want 

to see it go that way. In the mood of the country, and not to extend 

it, but the interconnection we have world-wide and the mood of 

people in this market and everything else, we’d say, I don’t think 

we can afford to just leave it there, particularly if we could just 

take these tariffs to zero. That’s precisely what we’re after. 

 

And then that may even create a spirit in the United States of co-

operation that is better than is there now. Because they’d say, we 

got a chance to show the rest of the world how to do this. We’ve 

already got the President of the U.S. to say, and table in Geneva, 

his 10-point plan to reduce agriculture subsidies to zero in 10 

years. And the Prime Minister of Australia, Bob Hawke, has done 

the same just last week — tabled how we’ll get all these things to 

move to zero. 

 

So we have a few of them moving, we think, in the right direction. 

So over time we’ve got seven years to harmonize and make it 

more perfect in terms of the laws, and a panel to judge them. 

 

Now the panel has some advantages: probably a little less political 

influence; it’s faster, dedicated, and they’re professional — not 

just judges, but professionals, say, in softwood or in hogs or in 

uranium or something else, that know the industry and can say, by 

gosh, here’s group of two people on this side and two on this side 

that the people in the industry agree are reasonable folks, and a 

fifth person that we both agree on. So that’s basically as I see the 

opportunity that’s before us. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, for the answer. It raises 

a number of issues that I think we’ll get into later on this 

afternoon, but I just want to try and limit my questions at this point 

to this dispute-settlement mechanism, this panel idea. 

 

And I heard what you say, and there’s a beguiling kind of aspect 

to it. You say there are professionals on this panel, and they know 

what they’re doing, and they’re free of political influence, and 

that’s the beguiling part of it. 

 

But I’m afraid when I look at the agreement that there’s a harder 

reality there that strips the beguiling, attractive feature from the 

panel. And it’s simply this: all the panel is going to be doing is 

replacing the American courts. And the law that the panel is going 

to be applying is going to be the law that the courts have applied, 

and the basis for the panel’s review of the decision of the tribunals 

is exactly the same as the basis for the court review. And they’ll be 

working from the same precedents. 

 

And trade law is much litigated in the United States; at least that’s 

what I’m advised. Trade law is much litigated, and there’s a huge 

body of precedent which sets out very clearly what is the meaning 

of the American law and what certain words and phrases and 

concepts mean. And my fear, Mr. Premier, is that this panel, 

which has this  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3949 

 

attractive aspect to it, this sort of attractive appearance that you’ve 

mentioned and that I agree with, in practice is going to just operate 

like the Americans’ courts have. 

 

Now I’m not criticizing the American courts, but their basis of 

affecting trade decisions, countervailing and anti-dumping 

decisions in the United States is very, very limited indeed. It’s 

only when the tribunal makes an error in interpreting its own law 

that the courts have intervened. And that’s exactly what the panel 

is going to be doing. And when they’re doing it, they’ll be 

applying this long line of American court precedents so that they 

won’t get a chance to display their knowledge of softwood lumber 

and their knowledge of potash and steel and the rest. The only 

opportunity they’ll have to display their knowledge is with respect 

to the administrative law governing the review of these kinds of 

decisions. 

 

Now what’s the significance of what I’ve said? It means, if I’m 

correct, that in the short urn there’s really no change in the 

decision-making process on countervailing and anti-dumping 

cases in the U.S. — that’s the first thing it means, no change. 

 

The second thing is related to the first, and it is that there won’t be 

any change until something else is negotiated that makes the two 

trade laws more compatible and works out a more equitable 

system as far as Canada is concerned. And that’s going to take . . . 

that could take as much as five years, according to the agreement. 

 

And here, Premier, is my next problem. We’re going to try and 

negotiate changes to American trade law which will be more fair 

to Canada, and we have nothing left to offer, you know; it’s a 

negotiation with our chips already having been played with still 

such a sizeable amount of the game left to go. Do you understand? 

I mean, we’re limited in our bargaining here to really the content 

of the American trade law without . . . having given them 

everything that they reasonably wanted anyway. I mean, if you 

believe their literature on the subject, this deal is a great deal for 

the United States. Our pay-off for all of the things that we did in 

energy and foreign investment and the rest was to be this kind of 

new trading regime, new trade laws. 

 

Now with respect to the two points that I made: first of all, that 

there’s nothing different in the short run; and secondly, we just 

have no pressure, no bargaining pressure left to help us convince 

the Americans to change their laws. I think we’ve come up empty. 

 

Now you will answer, and I know you will because I’ve heard you 

so many times on the point, that a tariff reduction is sort of worth 

the whole thing. And I just observe that there are tariffs, at least 

the ones that affect goods coming into Canada. There are tariffs. 

We put them on there; we’ve reduced them, as you have observed, 

over a long period of time. And it’s the objective of successive 

Canadian governments to keep reducing them, and we could 

reduce them. And we don’t need a trade agreement in order to 

reduce them, except to the extent that we want the Americans to 

reduce their tariffs. 

 

My advice on that is that the level of American tariffs is about 

one-third on the average of our tariffs, and we  

didn’t need all the rest of this agreement just to accomplish a 

reduction of tariffs. 

 

(1530) 

 

Now I’m not . . . you know, I’m from Saskatchewan too, and I 

understand about tariffs. Now you understand about tariffs in a 

Canadian context also. In spite of your rhetoric you understand 

that tariffs have played a certain role in the development of this 

country. It’s an economic and, to some extent, a political decision 

as to whether they’ve all outlived their usefulness, but the 

reduction of tariffs to zero, I don’t think, with respect, is a strong 

argument for the rest of this agreement. 

 

And I come back then again to the fact that our bottom line is sort 

of hanging out there in the breeze, as it were, unresolved. 

Hopefully we can get it resolved in five years, but in that respect I 

observe that we’ve got no bargaining pressure left to put on that 

particular item. And I feel worried to say the least. I feel quite 

pessimistic about where that process would take us. 

 

Now in that presentation, Premier, I don’t isolate just one question, 

so I would invite your response to everything I’ve said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine; Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m always interested 

when people say that Canadians gave up anything. I mean, what 

did we give up? What did we give up? I mean, I spend a good part 

of my time, and many premiers have, encouraging others to invest 

in Canada. And some said, well we’ve given up the right to let 

Americans invest here. 

 

I mean, there may be philosophical differences about Americans 

investing here. But, you know, GM and Ford and Chrysler and 

John Deere and Case International and McDonalds and 

hamburgers and all kinds of things, you know — investments are 

here. And you’ve heard me talk about Ontario investment, and I 

won’t pursue it in any great detail. 

 

But what did we give up? We didn’t give up our sovereignty. We 

have the rights to do all the things we want here. The arguments 

about culture . . . I mean, what did we put on the table? I just say 

this before I get into the specifics of the dispute settlement 

mechanism. 

 

I’ve read a lot of the work, and used his research and his writings 

in my graduate economics classes, John Kenneth Galbraith, a 

Canadian who is now a naturalized American. And Professor 

Galbraith, not being for or against free trade one way or the other, 

says clearly Canadians have won on a free trade agreement 

between the United States and Canada because we have access to 

this huge market, and nobody else in the world has that. 

 

Now this is a liberal and, if you like, a very prominent socialist in 

America who has written profoundly and profusely all over the 

world and has been an Ambassador to India and written very 

much. And he says clearly, clearly, that Canadians have won in 

getting this access to the United States when no other country has 

it. 

 

Now if we have tariffs to zero and we have a binding  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3950 

 

mechanism . . . And let me get into that. Because I don’t know 

what we’ve offered to them at all — they can invest in Canada. 

Well I hope so. I mean, for the places where we’ve done the best, 

Americans have invested the most, and that’s very, very clear. 

 

I mean, you know, again, Oshawa — tens of thousands of jobs. I 

don’t know — 20 or 30 or 40,000 people work there in the 

automobile industry, and GM as an American company has 

invested a fortune. And I wouldn’t want any more than Oshawa —

I’ve said that; I say it in all respect —let’s just keep up to Ontario 

in terms of American investment. Why not? It seems to have been 

good for them. It’s even good for all the people that work there. 

They kind of like it. 

 

So what have we given them? And any event . . . I’m just reading 

from the agreement to give you some comfort that on the domestic 

anti-dumping and countervail duty laws: 

 

The free trade agreement shall provide that each party 

reserves fully its right to change its domestic anti-dumping 

and countervailing duty laws provided the following: 

 

Page 19. 

 

No future changes in such laws can be applied to the other 

party unless it is so specified in the legislation. 

 

So they’re not going to change their laws without the agreement of 

their partner who is now his bilateral, would be Canadians. 

 

It notified such proposed changes to the other party and 

entered into prior consultation with the party upon request. 

 

Secondly, so that you are going to be . . . we will negotiate with 

them, and they will negotiate with us. 

 

And it makes only changes (and this is very important) 

applicable to the other party which are consistent with the 

GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) anti-

dumping code and subsidies code. 

 

So anything we do we agree will be consistent with the general 

rules and regulations of GATT. Then it goes on to say: 

 

A new binational panel would replace the judicial review in 

both the United States and Canada. 

 

Now, they have agreed to harmonize their laws. They agree if they 

have new laws that they will be consistent with our laws or they 

will consult with us, and they will not do anything against 

Canadians that are not consistent with GATT and they’ve agreed 

to have a five- to seven-year process to bring their laws together 

with us. And they’ve agreed that a panel will judge their laws. 

 

Now imagine, has anybody ever done that to Americans before? 

No. This is the largest trading company in the world . . . trading 

country in the world, and they agreed to  

harmonize and to co-operate and to move in the same direction as 

Canadians as we take tariffs to zero. 

 

My final point will be: we are just as sovereign as they are. If they 

pass some really ridiculous trade laws, we can pass just as 

ridiculous trade laws. We can pass laws that are so protective and 

protectionist. We can nationalize the world here, and we have that 

right. We can be just as ornery. And we can all break, you know, 

an international treaty. And we can be as ornery as anybody else. 

 

The intent is to go the other way, to harmonize the law, make them 

more consistent, and have a mechanism to judge those laws that is 

fairer than it is today. I believe, and our research I believe that will 

point out, that cases like the softwood lumber wouldn’t even have 

come to the fore had we had this binational panel and we had the 

mechanism that we have today; because the political pressure and 

the temptation and the knowledge that it’s not going to be just 

judged by somebody else or judged by Americans, but somebody 

else, has an impact, and people in the industry will say, yes, that 

could have a significant impact. 

 

And the same applies to potash. If it wasn’t just interpreted by 

Americans but in fact it could be interpreted by a binational panel 

of professionals that know the industry, it reduces significantly the 

probability of the problem. Now . . . plus a commitment to 

harmonize those laws over time, seems to me at least to be going 

in the right direction, particularly when I look at the fact that . . . 

 

What would you do in the face of the world today and under 

existing laws, realizing you can’t change all their laws all at once 

because the political pressure down there is, I am sure, in favour of 

protectionism, as it may be here in Canada. I mean I think the 

survey said today there was only 40-some per cent of the people in 

the entire country knew that we had initialled a free trade 

agreement; 60 per cent of the folks don’t even know we’ve done 

it. 

 

You know, I mean, you see what we have at stake. We have some 

very historic, profound things like Meech Lake, like trade, and 

some other things, that when you’re involved in the middle of it it 

becomes quite clear, but it takes a fair amount of time for the 

general public to even know that you’re involved in the 

discussions evidently, according to the research. 

 

So I say, looking at the alternatives, as leaving it alone, could we 

change laws immediately or could we move towards tariff free 

plus a mechanism to change American law and make it closer to 

ours, not quickly but as fast . . . and an agreement to do so, 

harmonize the laws, be consistent with GATT and the rules of 

GATT, I ask myself, what’s the down side of us agreeing to have 

a panel and move in the same direction towards more liberal laws 

that are the same? What’s the down side? 

 

And you say, well we gave away our bottom line. What was our 

bottom line? A bottom line that they could not invest here, that we 

wouldn’t have sovereignty, or they would hurt our culture; or that 

we would have a binding dispute settlement mechanism? Well this 

is a binding dispute settlement mechanism. This is the last panel. 

This  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3951 

 

is it, between the two countries, that’s what it’s called, a binding 

binational dispute settlement mechanism on anti-dumping and 

countervail. 

 

And so, I agree, it’s not perfect and I just believe, sincerely, we’ve 

made progress in the light of international relations between two 

countries that trade a great deal and progress politically on an 

international front, as an example, consistent with what we’ve 

tried to do in GATT. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well there we are, there’s the argument that you 

and I are really having. This is not the kind of binding dispute 

settlement mechanism that the Prime Minister and his ministers 

were talking about over the months, and that Mr. Reisman was 

talking about. 

 

What we’ve got here is something different than what they were 

talking about and different than Canada expected. Now I think that 

it’s clear what happened. I think that Minister Carney told us what 

happened, and let me just recount the story as I recall it: they were 

bargaining in Washington on the Saturday. They were getting 

nowhere on this question of a binding dispute settlement 

mechanism. Negotiations had broken down. The Americans were 

not prepared to compromise their trade laws. Negotiations broke 

down and they went to Secretary Baker’s office and they were 

eating Kentucky fried chicken. 

 

You remember this story? And they were recounting sort of what 

had happened and what a pity it was and what an opportunity this 

was and reviewing why it just couldn’t go without a mechanism. 

And during that discussion Secretary Baker said words to the 

effect, like: well there just has to be a way out of this, there has to 

be something that we can do. I’m going to go down the hall to talk 

to my lawyers and I’m going to ask them to be creative — ask 

them to be especially creative and see if they can’t come up with 

something. 

 

So Secretary Baker washes the Kentucky fried chicken off his 

hands and down the hall he goes to his lawyers and he says, be 

creative guys. And the lawyers, in their creativity say: well we 

don’t want to change our regime at all. We don’t want to change 

our trade laws a bit. We want them to operate just as they have, at 

least in the short run. 

 

So what we’ll do is just take the courts out of that system — the 

courts which have a limited review role in the administrative law 

of the United States — we take away the courts and we’ll plug in 

this panel —no greater power than the courts, no greater role, 

deciding cases on the same ground. 

 

And my point to you, Premier, is that it’s just not the kind of 

dispute settlement mechanism that the Prime Minister wanted or 

that Mr. Reisman wanted or that you wanted. It is just . . . It’s not 

correct to describe it as some sort of over-arching court of last 

resort, a sort of an expert panel that can resolve things that have 

got mucked up in the American system. It is really just another 

court appointed by different people. 

 

So instead of being appointed by the President of the United States 

to serve on a bench as a judge, it is a panel  

of people who will serve exactly the same role. So it is not what it 

purports to be, and in that respect it’s a sham. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, it’s not. It’s not a sham. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well I’m sorry, Premier. It’s a sham in the sense 

that it’s not any kind of a broad appeal mechanism from the 

tribunal’s decisions. It is only an administrative tribunal . . . 

pardon me, not an administrative tribunal; it’s only another form 

of court for the review of decision of the tribunals’ unlimited 

grounds, and it will not have the kind of broad jurisdiction that we 

needed it to have. 

 

And you, sir, with respect, ought not to be satisfied with it. I mean 

it just doesn’t do the trick. And if your advisers are telling you that 

it does, then I suggest they should broaden their consultations 

because, with respect, I think that they’re wrong. 

 

Now you mentioned, Premier, that the softwood lumber case 

would not have been decided in the way that it was if this 

mechanism was in place. And again, with respect, sir, in my 

submission, that’s wrong. Softwood lumber would have gone 

exactly the way it did. 

 

It started out as a complaint by the lumber people in the United 

States about Canadian imports into the United States, and it went 

through their countervailing machinery . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Well it went through a number of times, didn’t it, and it was 

turned back by that tribunal again and again and again — at least I 

say again and again three times, I’m not sure it was three times — 

but it certainly was turned back on at least one previous occasion. 

The tribunal decided there was no subsidies, so therefore no 

countervail. 

 

(1545) 

 

Now then the last time it came up, for some reason Canada 

decided that it was going to lose so it went down there and it 

negotiated a deal. Now softwood lumber would not have had any 

different result than it had because it would have had to go through 

the same American decision-making mechanism as it went 

through — up through the countervail procedure to the point 

where somebody decides that yes, there is a situation where a 

countervailing duty should be imposed. 

 

Now if you don’t like that, Mr. Canadian softwood lumber 

producer, you can go to the American courts and ask for a judicial 

review on certain limited grounds, namely the interpretation of the 

statute, but that’s all you can do. Now that’s how it was back when 

these duties were imposed. And what’s different today? The only 

difference today is that instead of going to the courts in the last 

resort, you go to the panel who exercise the same jurisdiction as 

the courts. 

 

And so again I challenge your advisers, Mr. Premier, and suggest 

to you that they’re not correct when they advise you that the 

softwood lumber decision would have a different outcome. And of 

course the softwood lumber decision is unaffected by this 

agreement that we’re discussing this afternoon. 

 

And finally, the third point I want to make, Mr. Premier, is  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3952 

 

that with respect to our future laws, you quoted from the 

agreement, and you quoted the clause where it says that: 

 

The agreement shall provide that each party reserves fully its 

right to change its domestic anti-dumping and countervailing 

duty laws, provided that . . . 

 

Now I heard you say that — at least I think I heard you say — that 

Canada had to agree to those changes. And I want to make the 

point that that’s not what it says in my copy. What it says in my 

copy is that if the Americans wanted to apply to Canada, they have 

to say so. But before they do that, they will have notified Canada 

of the changes and entered into prior consultation with Canada if 

Canada wants that. But they are still free to do, in the final 

analysis, they’re still free to do what they want to do. Now . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Now turn the page. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Yes. Right. I mean I know that we can abrogate 

the agreement; we can pass mirror laws of our own and that sort of 

thing. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Got to be consistent with GATT. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — And they’ve got to be consistent with GATT, 

yes. But what they’ve got to be consistent with is the anti-dumping 

code and the subsidy code of GATT, which cuts a wide swath, Mr. 

Premier. I mean, I’m no expert at anti-dumping and countervailing 

rules, but it does cut a wide swath. 

 

So what I’ve said to you first of all is that, on this occasion, is that 

the Kentucky Fried Chicken story is, I think, true. And the 

Americans gave us something which looks like it’s something, but 

which in fact isn’t anything. It’s not what we need. It’s not what 

we wanted. I call it a sham. You take objection to that description; 

that’s fine. But it is not what we thought it was, and it is not going 

to serve the purpose that we needed served. 

 

And secondly, the softwood lumber case would not have been 

decided any differently. 

 

And third, I fear the Americans can go on passing the laws that are 

before it in congress that you and we are so concerned about, and 

without any meaningful restrictions on the right to pass those laws 

if they so wish. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I’m sure you understand how, in all 

respect, that your comments that this exercise and this agreement 

is a sham would irritate not only me, but people like, for example, 

Derek Burney, who is a career civil servant, probably one . . . the 

best external affairs people that Canadians have had; Simon 

Reisman, who’s been a negotiator for years under various 

administrations — deputy minister, negotiated the auto pact, not 

necessarily for any political persuasion. 

 

These are career civil servants, and have more experience than I 

have —or you, in all respect — about trade matters. The 

Ambassador to the United States, I mean, a career individual, a 

diplomat, says this is absolutely historic and it is a good thing to 

do. The ambassador makes the point,  

and I think fair enough, and as the Prime Minister has, we’ve 

never done this before. We’ve never done this before. 

 

The Prime Minister has never done this and we’ve had 10 

meetings of the first ministers, gone over the details and looked at 

it. He said, I just want you guys here so you don’t think I’m 

pulling the rug out from under you. I mean, Lester Pearson signed 

this deal with the United States in the auto pact and he never even 

met with the Premier of Ontario. I mean, we’ve had meetings and 

meetings and meetings. I say, we’ve got to have a binding dispute 

settlement mechanism. The Americans are tough. we’ve got 

similar laws, but we’ve got to try to cut a deal the best we can 

because I want to do it and the President does. 

 

Now it seems to me we have only one difference here. You would 

like to have the laws the same right away so that their anti-

dumping and their countervail are the same as ours. I think that’s 

what you would like to have — and a binding mechanism right 

now. 

 

Now what came to pass is that we couldn’t get them to change 

their laws to be exactly like we wanted them, quickly. Now you’re 

saying to me that it’s a sham because we got them to change them 

over time, an agreement to modify them over time, and you say 

that’s no good. You would have just said, go home, leave it the 

way it is. Or you can speculate, having hindsight, and say, I’m a 

better negotiator, I’m smarter, I’m all this stuff. 

 

We’ve never done this before. We certainly had a lot of people at 

the table. We’ve had the so-called SAGIT’s (Sectoral Advisory 

Groups on International Trade), the industry groups that have met 

across the country and the premiers and their staff. I mean, you’ve 

never seen so many meetings. 

 

I have the advice of people who have done some great 

negotiations in the past — and we all agree historically the auto 

pact has been terrific — and people questioned it at the beginning. 

Simon Reisman says, it has been good, and this is even better for 

Ontario. he says Ontario, in fact, benefits the most from this 

because they have the economies of scale because they are 

industrialized. 

 

So you’d rather have it perfect, have the laws all changed 

immediately to be just the way we want them, or I suppose you 

would say Americans agree, over time, to change their laws. Our 

anti-dumping laws are the same as theirs now, so it’s the 

countervail that you’re changing. Well we said: an agreement to 

do it over time, take the tariffs to zero, and a binding mechanism 

that is a panel so the U.S. can’t judge their own laws. 

 

Now any reasonable person 15 years from now, out of the heat of 

the political rhetoric, is going to look back and say, academically, 

that’s a step in the right direction. any two countries would agree 

with this. 

 

Let me just finally say this, and we’ll agree to disagree. If the 

Japanese, my hon. friend, had cut this deal with the United States, 

I very much believe that the opposition would be on my case and 

the Prime Minister’s case — while you guys were asleep at the 

switch, here the  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3953 

 

Japanese have cut this deal with the best trading partner in the 

world. They’ve got a binding dispute settlement mechanism, 

tariffs going to zero. We’re going to lose out and all that stuff. You 

know the game of politics. I mean, when people thought we were 

walking away from the deal, there was long faces. Well I thought 

the United States and Canada were kind of friendly. We do 150 

billion . . . It’s a matter of perception. 

 

As I pointed out earlier in this survey that was released today, 44 

per cent of the people are aware that we’ve even cut a deal; 66 per 

cent don’t even know we’ve done it. So I can only say, we’ve 

never done this before. Ambassador Simon Reisman has said, 

we’ve never done it before; this is a brand-new mechanism. 

 

You go to the table and see if you can cut a deal that’s as 

reasonable. Take tariffs to zero, increase trade, it’ll be increased 

jobs. As tariffs go down, the number of jobs go up. And since the 

Second World War the correlation is beautiful. The more you 

reduce tariffs and the more you increase trade, the more new jobs 

you have. And if you can move in that way and harmonize your 

laws to be similar and have a fair interpretation of those laws, 

that’s all any man could ask for. 

 

Now anything else I’ve heard with respect to the fear, you know, 

that you hear of down East and other places, is pretty much 

rhetoric. There’s no economic basis for the fear, because of . . . 

either in terms of investment or whether we’ve held our own in 

trading with the United States. Ontario trades more than any other 

country, or equivalent to Japan. I mean, Canadians have done 

well, extremely well, and to have this kind of process, to have a 

binding dispute settlement mechanism judge their laws as well as 

ours — and our laws on dumping are the same, and so you just 

have the countervail left. I mean, obviously I have to take 

exception to your terminology that you use. 

 

But it seems to me that in an historic sense, in a new sense, it’s a 

major step forward and a five-year process to make it even better 

as opposed to just walking away and say, well you just be as tough 

as you like, because we can pass laws just like you can. 

 

And we look at the Smoot-Hawley Act of 1930 and all the laws 

that were passed around the world with double tariffs. And you 

had world-wide unemployment. That’s what’s at stake. I mean, 

it’s tough. You know, these days the market’s going down, the 

worry, the feel for protectionism, the mood for protectionism is . . . 

In Saskatoon, I mean, you knock doors in your riding and you say 

to the folks, I’m here to protect you against Americans, and they’d 

go yes, sir, you do that. I mean, you know that. And their whole 

life and their jobs may depend on selling into the United States, as 

many of your constituents do. 

 

But it’s difficult to tell them about and advise them about 

international trade, because it’s so easy to talk about 

protectionism. And it’s protectionism that could actually take 

away their job because American politicians are just as smart as 

you and me. And they can go do that in their jurisdictions and their 

districts, and they’ll get, just like they did in potash: oh, this would 

be really go for us; and  

they go, yes, and then they realize how silly it is. 

 

It’s not perfect, I agree with you. But I believe, and with the 

External Affairs and the other professionals that we have talked it, 

it is a major and historic step in the right direction. It’s not perfect 

— we’ve never done it before — but it’s in the right direction with 

some right machinery to get us in a position where we can both 

benefit. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, I’d like 

to pick up on some of the points made by the Premier and by the 

member for Saskatoon Fairview. I’d like to step back and see in 

what context we are being urged to make this free trade deal. 

 

I’d like to just put a few question and attempt to answer them, and 

attempt to ask the Premier to answer them. First, has Canada done 

well economically under the multilateral approach of GATT? 

Have we done well over the last 15 or 20 years, trading all over 

the world; have we done well? 

 

The second question I ask is, do we anticipate that over the next 

several years the United States tariffs versus the rest of the world 

will go up or down? And when I say the rest of the world, I’m 

now referring, I’ll just say, to Germany and Japan as examples. 

 

Thirdly, can we discriminate in favour of U.S. goods, i.e., lower 

tariffs against U.S. goods, but not against goods from Japan or 

Germany? Can we discriminate in favour of U.S. goods without 

discriminating against goods from Japan and Germany? The 

answer is an obvious no, but I’ll come to that. 

 

And the next question I ask is, if we discriminate against the goods 

of other countries, will that hurt us in selling goods to those other 

countries? 

 

Now those questions are the real questions, because the issue 

we’re talking about is the extent to which we tie our economy to 

that of the United States and the direction of the U.S. economy. 

 

Now I turn my remarks to the first question. Has Canada done 

well economically under the GATT approach? That is, trading 

with all nations, the approach we are asked in effect to abandon. 

And the answer is yes, we have done very well. 

 

And I am quoting extensively here from the remarks . . . an article 

by Mr. Allan Gotlieb, the Canadian ambassador to the United 

States, who will not be thought of as a person who was opposed in 

principle to free trade or opposed in principle to the Mulroney 

agreement, since I think it’s important to understand that the 

Mulroney/Reagan agreement is not a free trade deal, it’s a partial 

free trade deal and perhaps partial both in terms of the extent of its 

coverage, and the time of its application, and the absence of 

dealing with so-called trade remedy laws. But we leave that. 

 

I’m talking now about the deal which was initialled: did we do 

well under the GATT arrangement? And the answer is 

unequivocally, yes. We are now, and we tend to think of Canada 

as a little country not able to stand up  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3954 

 

for itself in the world — a little country — the seventh largest 

economy in the non-communist world. And if you take the EEC 

(European Economic Community) as one, we’re the fourth largest 

economy in the non-communist world. Since 1970 the nominal 

gross domestic product has quintupled, multiplied by five since 

1970. Since 1983 the growth rate has been higher than any other 

of the Group of 7 industrialized countries, since ’83. 

 

(1600) 

 

Incidentally, the United States is sixth highest — we’re one, they 

are six, Britain is seven. And we are significantly an investor 

outside of Canada as well as investment coming into Canada. This 

is not the story of an economy which is in deep trouble. There may 

be storm clouds ahead. I am not here to deny that. I am saying that 

up to now the multinational, or multilateral approach, the approach 

of Canada trading with all the world, has done very well by us. We 

have done well. 

 

The next question: will U.S. tariffs with the rest of the world go up 

or down? Well nobody knows the answer to that. But we can 

guess, we can guess that the United States is simply going to have 

to raise its tariffs or make some very, very major adjustments in its 

domestic policy. 

 

The United States is an economy in trouble. Let’s consider some 

trends. Incidentally, I say that because that economy is in trouble, 

the present position of dominance of the United States in the world 

economy is not immutable. It will always be a very major player, 

or always in the next 50 years, I’m not denying that for a moment. 

But its virtual sole position as the director of the world economy 

and having the unit of currency which is the currency of 

international trading is, I think, at grave risk. I think it’s at grave 

risk. 

 

It would not surprise me at all if five years from now or 10 years 

from now if you were selling potash, you would not denominate 

that contract in either Canadian dollars or U.S. dollars, but you 

might, if you were selling it to Japan, you might denominate it in 

yen or in Swiss francs or German marks. So I think that that point 

has to be made. 

 

The very fact that the United States’ economy is in trouble is part 

of our trouble at the current time. In the 1980s the U.S. investment 

rate has become the second lowest in the western world, better 

only than Britain. In six short years the United States has changed 

from the largest creditor nation in the world to the largest debtor 

nation in the world, and it is having enormous domestic deficits 

and enormous foreign exchange deficits — meaning it’s exporting 

a lot less than it’s importing. 

 

And it is clear, Mr. Chairman, clear to me at least, that the United 

States is going to have to import less and export more. And it is 

therefore going to have to take the steps — and the United States 

government will be the same as any other government; if this was 

our shape we’d do the same thing — they are going to have to take 

steps which involve exporting more and importing less. And I say 

they’re going to have to; they are already doing that. 

 

I don’t need to outline to this committee or this House what 

they’re doing to encourage U.S. exports. We know  

that. In farm commodities they are using what we think are tough 

and unfair trading tactics in order to expand their exports. Can 

anyone deny that? 

 

With respect to limiting their imports, is there a device under the 

anti-dumping or countervail or in several others we hadn’t heard 

of before, the health ones but even national defence ones, which 

are not now being used to truck down imports into the United 

States. Sometimes, as the Premier says very foolishly, as the 

potash ones are, but some of them may not be as foolish in their 

eyes. 

 

They are acting in response to the situation they find themselves 

in, and they are producing a climate which is hostile to imports 

and supportive of exports. And there are going to be walls against 

imports. And there’s going to be devaluation of the U.S. dollar vis-

-vis some of the stronger currencies, and I’ll use Japan and 

Germany again. 

 

Under these circumstances a fortress U.S. attitude is all but 

inevitable. And if anyone can see their way around that, I would 

like to hear the series of events which is going to make the United 

States an open world trader in the next two or three or four years. 

 

Now, Canada too has problems and no one should deny that. Our 

largest trading partner is the United States, and that’s a hard, hard 

fact. And the tough decision which Canadians have to face is this: 

when the walls group around the United States, do we want to be 

inside the walls or out? And that’s not an easy decision. And the 

walls will cut both ways. 

 

If we are inside the wall it is going to be harder for us to sell goods 

to Third World — I don’t say Third World, I’ll say other 

countries. Again, to my Japan and Germany, but everything I say 

about that is equally true of China or Brazil, and these are the 

tough decision we’re having to make. Do we want to be part of 

fortress North America, or outside trying to make our way in a 

world of tough trading blocs — and no one denies that — where 

we are a relatively small player, but not a tiny one — seventh 

largest economy — but a world which is not experiencing the 

U.S.’s problems. Now that’s the decision. The right decision is by 

no means self-evident. 

 

But we have to underline a few facts which are denied by 

proponents of the Mulroney deal. We have to recognize that any 

deal that makes it easier for Canada to trade with the United States 

in these circumstances will make it harder for Canada to trade with 

other countries. That cannot be denied. I see people shaking their 

head, but it is simply going to work that way. Well I would like to 

hear the explanation, or the example. This is not the first country 

in the world who has entered into a free trade deal. Canada is not 

the first one. 

 

If Canada . . . if Canada discriminates against, let us say, Japanese 

television sets: we say to the Japanese, you have to pay a tariff to 

bring your television sets into Canada, the United States do not 

have to pay a tariff, please buy our canola. I think they will say, 

thank you, we enjoy dealing with you, but we’ll get our canola 

from someone who doesn’t discriminate against our goods. If you 

think that’s not going to happen, then I don’t agree with you. I just  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3955 

 

don’t agree with you. 

 

And it’s not a case of any tit for tat. Let’s take the case of Britain. 

We used to do a lot of trading with Britain. I hope no one denies 

that. Britain entered the European Common Market, and they 

bought a lot more of their stuff from the European Common 

Market than they did before. They sold more to the European 

Common Market; they bought more from the common market. 

And the result was that we trade much less with Britain, much less 

with Britain, than was the case before they joined the common 

market. And just in exactly the same way that Britain’s trade 

became much more with its internal partners, its trade with other 

people dropped off. 

 

And our trade equally with Japan will drop off, and our China will 

drop off, and Brazil will drop off. There is no use saying that we 

can have a discrimination deal with the United States and thereby 

discriminate against other countries without reducing our trading 

opportunities with those other countries. 

 

Now that, I think, really . . . I ask you: is what I’m saying about 

Britain not precisely so? That our trade with Britain — and we are 

now in the same position as Japan in our example —our third 

country, our trade dropped with Britain, both ways, when Britain 

went into the Common Market. Just as surely will Japan’s trade 

with us drop both ways when we go into the Common Market — 

the Common Market or the free trade deal or the Mulroney deal 

with the United States. It is axiomatic that if we lock ourselves 

into fortress North American, we lock ourselves out of some other 

markets. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, if we thought that the United States was 

going to be a world trade, I mean, if we thought that they were 

going to pick up on GATT and that tariffs among all nations 

would drop, then it wouldn’t matter if we were locked into the 

United States. It wouldn’t matter. But I don’t believe that’s the 

situation. I don’t believe it can be the situation of the United States 

because I believe the United States must follow policies, because 

of their previous financial policies, they must follow policies 

which will encourage exports and inhibit imports. They’re going 

to have to do that. They are doing it. And they’re not doing it just 

to be bloody minded. They’re doing it because it’s an economic 

imperative. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, what would be a . . . One could argue that we 

would be just as well inside fortress North America as outside 

fortress North America. But what would be an absolute disaster is 

to lock ourselves inside fortress North America, committed to 

giving to special preference to U.S. goods over goods of other 

countries, without getting secure access to U.S. markets and I 

believe the Mulroney deal just does that. 

 

I believe it commits us to opening up a good number of industries, 

notably the service and financial industries in Canada, to U.S. 

entrepreneurs so that it will increase the earnings of foreign 

exchange for the United States — and that is their imperative, 

that’s for them an export — without giving us any access to U.S. 

markets. I think it will, in effect, allow the U.S. to sell more to 

Canada in goods, and particularly services, and still allow the U.S. 

to use all the trade remedy laws, all the anti-dumping duties,  

all the countervailing duties that they now use. 

 

Sure, they may be interpreted by some impartial tribunal, but It’s 

not the interpretation that’s caused us the trouble in the past, it’s 

the substance of the laws. And they will be able to use those laws, 

every single one of them, past and in the future, to bar our goods. 

And I’m not accusing them of double-dealing. They have reserved 

that right very clearly in the agreement, and they have reserved it 

because the economic imperatives in the United States are not 

going to change when they initial this agreement. They will still 

have to encourage exports and cut down on imports, and that is 

what this agreement will allow them to do. 

 

(1615) 

 

And if we somehow believe that we have got secure access to the 

U.S. markets with this agreement, we are living in a fool’s 

paradise because virtually all of the problems we have had in the 

past have resulted from the substance of the U.S. trade remedy 

laws, and every one of those laws will still be in place and every 

one would be able to be enacted five years from now. The 

agreement does not in any way inhibit the U.S. from doing that. 

 

They know they’ve got to cut down their imports. They have 

signed an arrangement with us which allows them to do that. We 

will not be able to cry “foul” but we will have to suffer the 

circumstances whereby we will not have free access and whereby 

they will be able to increase their earnings in Canada through 

increased activities in many, many areas but principally the 

services and financial areas. I say to you that this is not accusing 

the U.S. of any double-dealing. This is simply the imperative 

which they face, and if we think otherwise we are naive. 

 

I believe, to answer the questions one after the other, Canada has 

done well economically under the GATT approach. I believe that 

U.S. tariffs, with respect to the rest of the world, will go up. I 

believe that it will be very, very difficult for Canada, with a free 

trade arrangement with the United States, to have substantially 

different tariff structures from those of the United States, vis--vis 

the other countries. I don’t believe we can discriminate in favour 

of U.S. good and against other goods without harming our markets 

in those other countries. 

 

Members say they’re living in the past. Well why would anyone 

want not to live in a past where we have quintupled our gross 

national product in 16 years? Members say the world is changing, 

and that’s what I’m trying to analyse, what are the changes? What 

are the changes? 

 

The only change, the only change is the decline in the economic 

fortunes of the United States — that is the major change. And 

what effect is that going to produce? And I’m saying to you, what 

it’s going to produce is an attitude on the part of the United States 

which will force them to encourage exports and inhibit imports, 

imports from Canada as well as imports from Japan or anywhere 

else. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, this being the case, I have to ask the  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3956 

 

Premier what assurance he has that we will not face every single 

one of the trading barriers, the anti-dumping and the 

countervailing duties that we have done in the past. 

 

I know there’s a provision which says that they have to meet the 

GATT rules. But I hope it won’t be denied that the softwood 

lumber violated the GATT rules. What the U.S. did with respect to 

softwood lumber violated the GATT rules. It didn’t do us any 

good. We were a signatory to that treaty with the United States. 

 

We supposedly had a remedy, but we couldn’t use the remedy. 

And we couldn’t use the remedy because the United States were 

insisting, and we aren’t big enough. The retaliatory measures 

which they can bring are so much greater than the retaliatory 

measures that we can bring, that any agreement which says each 

of us can retaliate against the other is, while nominally equal, does 

not allow us the same clout that they have. There’s no denying 

this, nor should we be surprised. We’re a small country versus the 

United States. 

 

So the Premier suggests that what we need to do over the next 

several years is to harmonize our laws, and that of course is just 

what is causing me some real concern. I think I’m not happy about 

the idea of harmonizing our labour legislation laws with those of 

Georgia or Arkansas. I’m not happy with harmonizing our 

environmental laws. And these are all costs, these are all costs 

which would make it more difficult for our industries to compete. 

 

These are some of the questions which haven’t been answered, 

and I simply haven’t heard the point-by-point answer to very real 

questions. You can say that they’re . . . that we’re living in the past 

or whatever — whatever vituperative epithet you want to pull to 

mind — but that doesn’t answer the question. 

 

And I just want to remind the Premier that we know that he has 

many studies. We know that he has many studies, presumably 

showing that this free trade deal is a good deal, this Mulroney deal 

is a good deal for whoever — for Canada or Saskatchewan, and 

we know he hasn’t published a single one of those studies. And 

we know that if the studies showed what they said they show, he’d 

be more than happy to publish them. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why wouldn’t he? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Why wouldn’t he? And we therefore ask: 

why wouldn’t he make public the studies which supported his case 

if, in fact, they supported his case? And I think the only credible 

answer is, they don’t support his case. They’ve got a whole lot of 

holes in them. 

 

Well the Premier has asked: what was the down side for Canada? 

What did we give up? He suggests that our sovereignty is, as he 

would say, totally intact. Sovereignty is the right to make laws, the 

right to make rules, the right to shape one’s own environment. 

 

And the fact that you don’t want to pass a law today doesn’t mean 

that you haven’t lost any sovereignty by saying we’ll never pass it. 

You have indeed. And I think that any law which says that . . . let 

us say that farm land in Saskatchewan should be owned by 

Canadians — maybe  

we don’t want to say that. But to give away the right to say that is 

to give away our sovereignty. 

 

Maybe we don’t want to say that we would like to keep natural 

gas in Saskatchewan and sell it to an industry in Saskatchewan at 

lower than market price as a basis for a fertilizer industry. Perhaps 

we never want to do that, but when we say we can’t do it, we’ve 

given away sovereignty. 

 

Perhaps we don’t want to limit U.S. investment in uranium, but to 

give away the right to do it in an agreement limits our sovereignty, 

because none of us can look into the future. None of us can know 

what rules we may need in order to shape the country we want. 

 

Therefore, I don’t accept the Premier’s definition of sovereignty. 

And his definition of sovereignty is the . . . He suggests we 

haven’t lost any sovereignty if we wouldn’t want to pass that law 

today —not my definition of sovereignty. Twenty years ago we 

didn’t have any limitations on who could buy Saskatchewan farm 

land. And if we had asked then we would have said, well who 

worries about it? We don’t want to limit it. But time has passed 

and we have limited it, and I think that we should have that right. 

Maybe a bad decision, but it ought to be our decision. And that is 

my definition of sovereignty. 

 

I believe that when one looks at the economic environment, when 

one looks at the economic situation of the United States, one looks 

at the imperative that they will have to cut down their imports and 

expand their exports — you don’t have to look, you can see it all 

around you — and you look at this agreement, which undoubtedly 

gives the U.S. some opportunities to expand its exports into 

Canada, but allows the U.S. to apply all of the trade remedy laws 

which have inhibited our exports to the United States in the past, 

we see we haven’t got the access which we are promised. 

 

Now it’s not regular tariffs, which admittedly under this 

agreement will be reduced, which ever have been much of our 

problem. After all, it’s the Canadians who have had higher tariffs 

against U.S. goods than the other way around. It’s not the level of 

U.S. tariffs that have bothered us, it was all of their anti-dumping 

and countervail and health rule and defence rule and all the others 

which they have brought to bear. 

 

And while I can’t say whether all of them are still intact, because 

we don’t have the fine print of the agreement, the Americans have 

been very clear, saying: no, we can’t give up our right to put on 

any countervail, any anti-dumping that we want. They’ve been up 

front on that —up front, because they know their economic 

situation. And when they do it, we can’t cry “foul.” All we can say 

is that we should have read the fine print a little more. 

 

And I don’t know how anybody — and I invite the Premier to 

response — can suggest that the lowering of the U.S. regular 

tariffs, which have never been much of a problem, represent free 

access to the U.S. market when they can put on all of their 

countervail. 

 

Sure, it’ll be interpreted by an impartial tribunal, but it’s not the 

interpretation, it’s the substance which has always  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3957 

 

been our problem — when they can put on all of those and deny 

us free access without in any way, without in any way violating 

the agreement, and which they, I suggest, are going to be under 

great pressure to do so because of the particular economic 

circumstances in which they find themselves. And everything 

that’s happening in the United States underlines every word that 

I’ve said. 

 

And I therefore have to put the basic question to the Premier: on 

what basis do you say this agreement gives us any assured access 

to U.S. markets? And if we don’t have assured access to U.S. 

markets, what is the plus for Canada in an agreement which does 

not give us access to U.S. markets? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I have always respected the logic of 

the Leader of the Opposition, but, in all respect, today it’s . . . the 

logic isn’t quite as good as it’s been in the past. And I will respond 

in a couple of ways and be as brief as I can. 

 

It seems to me the basic tenor of your argument is that the United 

States is in difficult economic times, so we wouldn’t want to be 

too close to the United States, therefore you’re a little reluctant to 

tie ourselves there. 

 

Now because they maybe got it going down, and we’re going to 

have to go down with them, that would make us weaker, because 

we’re tied to an economy that is kind of sliding. 

 

Now if you do the flip side of that, would you say under good 

times, strong growth for the United States, you’d want to join 

them? Because they’d be quite a powerful country then. It seems 

to me that you could probably make the argument that we’d better 

not join them this times because they’re pretty powerful and 

they’ll flex their muscles. I mean, that argument kind of slips both 

ways. I’m a little baffled by which way you would accept it, in 

other words — because it’s good times or because it’s bad times, 

or why you’d reject it. Anyway, you spent a fair amount of time 

on that, and it wasn’t clear to me which would be the best for you 

in terms of Canada-United States joining agreement. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now you went on to say, have we done — and you asked several 

questions, and I’ll just address them — have we done well under 

GATT? Yes, we have done well under GATT in terms of 

multilateral trade, and the best we’ve done under that arrangement 

has been with United States. And we’ve seen that we have grown 

to be the two largest trading partners, and even Ontario now trades 

more with United States, or as much, as the whole country of 

Japan in two-way trade — $90 billion a year. 

 

So we have done quite well under GATT, and particularly well 

with our biggest trade partner. I throw in the question there, is this 

agreement consistent with GATT? And our ambassador tells us, 

both the trade ambassador and our U.S. ambassador says, yes, it’s 

perfectly consistent with GATT. In fact, it’s one of the best 

examples  

he could use at the Uruguay round and other rounds — the next 

round — to say, why don’t we all do this? And I’ll get to that a 

little bit later, that it’s perfectly consistent with the multilateral 

position. When two countries bilaterally agree to have more 

liberalized trade, it doesn’t hurt the pool of them that are in the 

process of liberalized trade. 

 

So your argument that, have we done well? Yes. My two 

arguments, have we done better with the U.S.? Yes, we have. Is 

this consistent with GATT? Yes, it is. 

 

Then we go on and say, will U.S. tariffs go up or go down in the 

future? Well, we can both speculate of what they may do. And you 

say the united States is in some trouble, so there’s a temptation 

towards protectionism. I agree that’s the case. At the same time 

you have an administration in the United States that has put on the 

table the complete removal of subsidies and an effort to reduce 

protectionism in the next round, and particularly in the agricultural 

world, and they’re trying to get our support and have the Prime 

Minister’s support and Bob Hawke’s and some other people. 

 

Now you could say yes or no in terms of how that will all turnout. 

In the short run you may see some tariffs increase — and I’ll 

follow that logic first in terms of discriminating tariffs, and then 

we’ll going to the next question of what about if it gets better. 

 

In terms of discriminating tariffs, I can recall our ambassador, 

Ambassador Gotlieb, in the United States saying, if the United 

States passes this omnibus trade Bill that is very protectionist and 

ugly, the best possible thing that could happen to Canada would be 

to be exempt from that — to be exempt from that — not to be 

included in it. Now I have yet to meet an international trade expert 

that would say the best thing that could happen to Canada would 

be to be encompassed in this ugly trade Bill — and there, my 

friend, is where your logic falls completely apart. I cannot find a 

Canadian who thinks that Bill is a good idea. And you have based 

your argument with some support, I believe, from the Leader-Post 

that says this would be the worst thing that could happen, to be 

exempt from this omnibus trade Bill in the United States. 

 

Now if the new ambassador, and I think you respect him, and I 

mean, we all do — tremendous experience as our trade 

ambassador. He says, imagine what would happen throughout the 

world — and I’m paraphrasing — he said if United States does get 

— and it’s by your first assumption it’s going to get more 

protectionist, and it’s going to put tariffs on Europeans, as it is 

now because of ag policy, and on Japanese, but it exempts Canada 

from these ugly measures, and we don’t do it to Canadians 

because we have a bilateral free trade agreement with no tariffs. 

What if it does that? 

 

Just as you suggested, we cut a deal with them, low tariffs, 

bilateral trade mechanism, and they get more ugly with other 

countries. Two things happen. Two things happen. We get to trade 

freely between the U.S. and Canada, our biggest market and our 

biggest success under GATT, and whether they’re kind of going 

up or going down, it’s still 230 million people with a big degree of 

income that buy and sell more than with us than anybody else in 

the world. So that is good. It moves back and forth. Or put it  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3958 

 

another way. If we couldn’t trade with our biggest trading partner 

because of tariffs and the omnibus trade Bill, would we get hurt? 

Obviously we’d get hurt a great deal. In fact, no other country in 

the world would get hurt more than us. 

 

So we’re free from that ugly Bill. We can trade with our big 

market and the biggest market in the world. Now, the argument 

goes, but they would apply tariffs to the Japanese because they 

don’t like what they’re doing, and they’d apply them to 

Europeans, and therefore we would have to do the same. Not at 

all! 

 

And there’s the second place where your logic falls apart — falls 

apart. The ambassador will say the United States is going to apply 

a tariff to the Japanese goods, and we decide because we’re 

sovereign we will have our own tariff policy, and we won’t have 

that. In fact, we will be negotiating — and I’ve said this many 

times — lower tariffs with other countries world-wide, whether 

the United States likes it or not, to encourage Japanese to invest 

here because we are a little more friendly than Americans. 

 

Now we’ve cut the deal with the United States, right? We can 

trade with them. The United States has taken this ugly stuff world-

wide, and they’ve given us exemption. Where are the Japanese 

going to go? They’re not going to go into the U.S., but they might 

come here to invest. Europeans might come here to invest, and 

that’s the ambassador’s whole point. The best in this situation is to 

be exempt from U.S. trade . . . or the omnibus trade Bills and 

protectionism. And as they apply to other countries, they will 

come to us because of two reasons: we don’t; and secondly, 

because we do a big business with the United States. 

 

Now I’ll grant you, under the agreement you can’t have goods go 

from there to here and just into the United States, okay? You can’t 

do that — I mean, just as a wholesaler. But you can have 

investment here and manufacture and process and create jobs. And 

in a normal relationship with your big partner you can trade back 

and forth without tariff. 

 

Now I would like to think, when we’re rewriting history here, 

looking back at it five years and 10 years from now, we have been 

the smart player in this whole world event because we have 

exempted ourselves from this protectionism fervour in the U.S., if 

it goes that way. Now this is your first logic — if it goes that way. 

And the ambassador would say, for Heaven’s sake, don’t include 

yourself in it, or that would be how you become part of “fortress 

America.” This frees us. This frees us to do as we like because we 

have the opportunity, North and South, and our sovereign power 

to change tariffs internationally with other countries, whether 

they’re third parties or not. 

 

Now you mentioned Great Britain and the European Economic 

Community. And when Great Britain joined the European 

Economic Community, it did more business there than it did with 

us. Well I think that if you ask Great Britain why they might do 

that is because it made them money. They had the opportunity. 

They didn’t have to, but they had less tariff and they made money 

at it. And other countries have stacked up to join it because it’s  

made them money. They weren’t making as much money with us. 

 

Under freer and freer tariffs we go where it’s most natural. We go 

to our closest customer which happens to be the biggest. I mean, if 

we would look at what we supplied to the United States, I mean, 

the potash and the uranium and the oil and the beef and the pork, 

and you know all the products, and paper, and so forth, you go 

where it makes you the most money. So Great Britain joined the 

European Economic Community, and they’re making money, and 

they’re saying, well, that’s why we made this arrangement. You 

wouldn’t expect them to do more business outside unless it make 

them more money outside. 

 

Now when I look at lower tariffs multilaterally, and I’m sure you 

agree, lower tariffs multilaterally, you build on your comparative 

advantage, and in some case your absolute advantage, to do the 

best with your resources, to make the most money with them. And 

you trade it with somebody else who takes their resources and do 

the best with them. And you know the growth that can take place 

because you’re taking this country’s advantage and producing 

oranges and bananas. And this country’s producing wheat and 

steel, and they trade with each other, and they’re both better off. 

And theoretically and academically, that’s exactly what you do. 

 

The Economic Council of Canada and other research that you’ve 

talked to, points to the fact that by 1995, which is not that far 

away, if we do a deal with the United States, under reasonable 

circumstances the gross national expenditure in Canada will 

increase 3.3 per cent; the consumer price index will drop 5.7 per 

cent; productivity per person employed will increase 0.7 per cent; 

the real wage rate per hour will increase 3 per cent; real disposable 

income for Canadians will increase 3.1; investment, 6.9 per cent; 

unemployment rate will decline 1.3 per cent; and the deficit for all 

governments will reduce by 5.2 per cent; and employment up 2.6. 

 

Now you said over the last five years, the ambassador — and I 

think he agrees with you, and you saw his article in the Globe and 

Mail, and it was a fine speech —he says today: 

 

Canada is recognized almost everywhere as a major power. 

Uncomfortable as we may be with that notion, modest as we 

may be about the reasons for it, that’s the case. 

 

Now we are a major power. And in dealing with the United States 

and in dealing with others in Europe and dealing with people 

across the globe, Canadians are looked on to set an example. And 

it’s my humble opinion that nobody influences American policy 

more than Canadians. And when we talk about our trade policy 

and we talk about our fiscal policy as the group of 7 and the group 

of many others, that’s precisely where we should be — in there —

not in an arrogant way, but because we’ve earned it. 

 

Let me say this. The United States has a proposal before GATT 

and the Uruguay round for multilateral tariff reduction. We are 

encouraging that. I agree, if we buy  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3959 

 

your first trend, your first assumption, that they may get more 

miserable. We have one scenario. And with all respect, I believe 

your logic is not consistent there in terms of why would we do 

worse. And I would challenge you to write the ambassador and 

ask him how we would do worse if we get exempted from this . . . 

(inaudible) . . . laws in the United States. I mean, that’s exactly 

where we’d want to be, is to get out from under that and trade 

freely with not only the United States but have our sovereign tariff 

policy with others. 

 

Now assume they get better. Assume the United States kind of 

gets over this and they raise some taxes and cut some expenditures 

and get their budget together, and they’re somewhat successful, as 

we all are in a multilateral, and we’re having lower tariffs 

generally. 

 

We’ve take the lead. We have reduced our tariffs between the U.S. 

and Canada very, very quickly. And we have the world going in 

the right direction, which I am sure you would agree that we can 

all trade. And Canadians have taken, as the ambassador will point 

out, the appropriate role in showing the rest of the world how to 

deal with the largest trading partner we have. Now that’s not a 

down side. That’s not a problem for us. It’s something that we can 

look back historically as being significant. 

 

I suppose the bottom line is: would you buy it whether it was good 

times or bad, or regardless of our logic with respect to whether 

tariffs will go up or down, whether you have sovereignty or not. 

Because it isn’t exactly the kind of new laws we’d like to have, 

and bound exactly the way we’d like to have. 

 

I can only say, as I did to your hon. colleague, we have never done 

this before with respect to the United States. They are, as you 

know, to put it mildly, extremely reluctant to change their laws. 

And given their mood, you’ve described that well. What are the 

alternatives? Leave them alone? Say, okay, no deal because you 

won’t change your laws because you’re feeling ugly? Or can we 

work out an agreement that does give us access over time, reduce 

tariffs to zero in 10 years, and to harmonize the laws? 

 

You know very well, you know the politics well enough, not to 

harmonize our environmental laws or health laws with theirs. 

We’ve got the highest standards in the world. It’s not to do that. 

It’s trade laws. And everybody knows our reputation is based on 

that, whether it’s the quality of our bacon or our wheat or other 

things. I mean, we are just as sovereign today as we were . . . let 

me just finish with this. 

 

When you sign a multilateral trade agreement, your sovereignty 

arguments apply there too, right? So when you do it multilaterally, 

you say, well, I’ve agreed to do A, B, C, and D. And you could 

say, well, then I can’t do quite as much in terms of my sovereignty 

on A, B, C, D, and E because I’ve agreed with all these partners. I 

can always break the agreement; I’m a sovereign country. 

 

If this is consistent with GATT, you can’t use the sovereignty 

argument that it’s been lost because it’s a bilateral, just because it 

isn’t a multilateral. If it’s  

consistent with multilateral trade agreements, then the sovereignty 

is no more or no less than an international agreement that is 

consistent with those. 

 

So I say in all respect that I would much rather, I guess the bottom 

line is, be exempt from the protectionist legislation in the United 

States than I would be included in it if the United States does 

decide to get miserable in the next five years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, I 

just want to reply, point by point, to some of the points you raised. 

 

First — and I will not do them in order because I want to come 

back to the key point at the end — first the economic council. The 

economic council study was on some fictional arrangement or 

some notional . . . I don’t mean . . . notional trade agreement with 

the United States — not with the Mulroney deal — long, long 

before the Mulroney deal was ever inked. And they have, I think, 

pointedly not put anything out since then. Perhaps they couldn’t 

update it, but if it was all the same, they would have said all the 

rules still apply. And I haven’t seen it. 

 

(1645) 

 

The second point — and this is not a heavy point — you say that 

this free trade deal is consistent with GATT. This Mulroney deal 

is consistent with GATT. It’s consistent only in a legal sense. In 

any conceptual sense, an agreement between two or three 

countries which have a different level of tariffs between country A 

and country B than between country A and country X is not 

consistent with the general thrust of GATT. But that is a 

theoretical point. 

 

I come now to the substance of what you said. First, you believe 

that Canada could have, let us say, a Japanese car maker set up 

here and manufacture cars here, or let’s say, get rid of cars, 

because that’s perhaps affected by the auto pact. But let’s call it 

computers. Toshiba could set up in Canada and manufacture 

computers here and move them into the United States. Obviously 

the free trade arrangement would not work. 

 

It would work in part. There would be very complicated 

arrangements with respect to the Japanese portion of it, which 

would have to . . . there would be tariffs attributed to it as if it 

came from Japan to the United States. If you don’t think there 

would be enormous pressure for us to harmonize our tariff 

structure with that of the United States, then I think you’re being 

naive. 

 

There has been a look at . . . Those arrangements have tended to 

move from free trade agreements to common tariff walls to 

common markets. And I believe that there would be great 

pressure, particularly if Japan was using us as the back door. Now 

I know that it’s not . . . There are supposedly administrative ways 

you can stop that, but I’d like to hear you use those arguments in 

the U.S. Congress. 

 

We’ve got a tariff against Toshiba, and Toshiba has set up in 

Windsor, Ontario and they are making these and they are sending 

them across to Detroit. If that would not put a lot of pressure on 

Canada, then I would be mightily surprised — mightily  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3960 

 

surprised. And I don’t think, therefore, we can sustain a sharply 

different tariff level than that of the United States if we are in the 

type of arrangement that the Mulroney deal involves. 

 

Now to the last two points. First, would I prefer this in good times 

or in bad? The answer is, I would prefer it in good times because 

we then could make it into a multilateral, multinational one. That’s 

what we’ve had during the last number of . . . since 1970. The 

United States — relatively prosperous, not objecting to the 

expansion of trade through multilateral lowering of barriers. That 

is the objective. And that can be done in good times and it’s darn 

difficult to do it in bad times, as we are finding out. And so you 

ask me the question, and I say we would want to do it 

multilaterally, and we would therefore seek the good times. 

 

And as to the last question, and this is the key one, you say, why 

wouldn’t we want this deal? Because it will exclude us from the 

application of the protectionist measures now being talked about 

in the United States. Quite simply, I don’t see where it gives us 

that protection. I don’t see where we are protected. We’ll be 

protected against some of the tariff measures which were kicking 

around Congress. Obviously there are so many kicking around 

which we’re bound to be exempt form some. But we will still be 

open to all of the measures that have caused us trouble in potash, 

and caused us trouble in lumber and shakes and shingles and fish 

and all the others. 

 

Now these may not be regular tariffs, but if they’re available to the 

U.S., then we’re not excluded — we’re simply not excluded from 

the application of protectionist laws. And if members opposite 

believe that this Mulroney deal gives us access, or, to use the 

Premier’s language, exempts us from the application of 

protectionist measures in the U.S., then I say that is not true. 

 

These measures . . . We Canadians somehow feel that the United 

States is always benevolent to us, and if they put up a tariff they 

don’t mean us. Is it thought that when they put up a barrier to 

shakes and shingles it was Korean shakes and shingles they were 

aiming at? When they put up a barrier against softwood lumber, 

was somebody thinking it was Japanese softwood lumber? When 

they put up a barrier against fish, are we thinking it was German 

fish they were aiming at? They were aiming at Canadian exports 

to the U.S., and they will do it again. And this is not being bloody-

minded, as I say, their economic imperatives require it. 

 

And I want to say again, and I ask the Premier, what provision of 

this agreement gives us any assurance that the protectionist 

tendencies of the U.S. Congress will not be as strong in relation to 

Canadian goods next year as it was last year? Just where is the 

provision because it seems to me all the trade remedy laws they’ve 

used in the past are still open to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, just let me say very briefly 

that with respect to . . . and I think the hon. member has come 

around a little bit. The problem — that, yes, we  

could have a different tariff policy. The Japanese may invest here 

and, by gosh, it would be quite a problem because we’d have a lot 

of investment and they may try to export into the United States. 

Well I can only say to the Leader of the Opposition that that would 

be a nice problem to have — too much Japanese investment 

creating too many goods and services and building too many jobs, 

that America has got worried. I would kind of like to have that 

problem. 

 

Secondly, on that, if the United States is applying tariffs to other 

countries, and their major trading partner is here, they may tend to 

invest more in North America, including Canada, than in Japan or 

in Germany and some other places. And in fact that’s what we’ve 

seen with respect to GM and . . . and I won’t need to pursue that. 

 

So, my basic argument is, it would be a nice problem to have to 

have all this investment here and Americans worry that we were 

getting too strong and perhaps even exporting too much. And I 

just leave it at that. 

 

Secondly, let me say . . . Our ambassador in the U.S. says the 

omnibus trade Bill and many other pieces of legislation like it are 

new and more protectionist. Now he says, if we can cut a deal to 

keep us exempt form those new pieces of legislation it would be a 

major benefit to Canada. Now that’s my only point. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Have we done it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, of course, this bilateral agreement 

says any new laws will have to be consistent with GATT and in 

negotiation with the country called Canada, and that’s exactly 

what we’re after; and an agreement for five years to say —or 

seven years — to bring those laws more and more into align with 

a completely free trade agreement. 

 

Now the ambassadors’ view, both the trade ambassador and the 

Canadian ambassador to the United States, said that’s exactly what 

you want to do, is you want to bind the United States and say any 

of your new laws that are damaging to the United States or 

damaging to Canada and damaging to the rest of the world, will 

have an exemption for Canada. If it’s going to apply to a Canada, 

you got to put it in legislation, talk to Canadians about it, and 

they’d better be consistent with what you’re going to do in GATT. 

 

Now, if we have an agreement between us and the U.S. to do that, 

the ambassador’s argument, it’s better to have that agreement to be 

friendly and to be exempt from those ugly new laws, as opposed 

to, say, well go away and we all can pass just as ugly laws as you 

can. And we’ll just both get right into it. 

 

So, you say it’s not strong enough and it’s not perfect enough. 

Well, we would all like a little bit more perfect world, and we’d 

like United States to have none of those laws on the books, and 

we’d like them not to be protectionist. But we’ve said . . . We will 

have a new binding dispute settlement mechanism, control them, 

and then work overtime to bring their laws, their trade laws into 

line with ours, and hopefully, hopefully, be the exception to this 

rule of protectionism. So, in fact, we  

  



 

November 4, 1987 

 

3961 

 

could have the benefit of this free trade arrangement even though 

they might, as you point out, apply tariffs to others around the 

world, we could be exempt. And secondly, we could arrange our 

own tariff structure probably to encourage investment here as 

opposed to some other places. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, I think that’s 

the nub of it. I think we’ve got the nub of it, and I think the 

Premier’s words indicated it. The United States commits itself to 

talk to us. They commit themselves to mentioning Canada in 

legislation in the future. Does anybody for one moment think that 

if they wanted to put some provision against softwood lumber as 

they did in the past — and clearly aiming at Canada and nobody 

else — they wouldn’t (a) talk to us? And having talked to us, 

mention it in the legislation. And then it’s all over. They have 

filled, fulfilled their obligation. 

 

And it is as the Premier suggests, the “hope” of an exemption, no 

more. The hope of an exemption, which is what we got in 

exchange for a continental energy policy, substantial restrictions 

on what I would call our sovereignty with respect to investment, 

all of the indications which I have given as down side. And for 

that we got the hope of an exemption. 

 

And I say that’s a bad deal. And on that basis I think Canadians 

should reject the Mulroney-Reagan free trade deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 10 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the Premier 

might permit me to revert for a moment and ask him, broadly, 

what the payment to the property management corporation of 

$900,000 . . . For what facilities does Executive Council pay? 

What are covered? 

 

Mr. Chairman, I’m advised by my colleague from Saskatoon 

Westmount that that information has already been promised, and 

that being the case, I will obtain the information from him. Thank 

you. 

 

Item 10 agreed to. 

 

Item 11 — Statutory. 

 

Vote 10 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 10 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 

 

I’d like to thank the Premier and his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, just . . . thank you.  

Let me have the opportunity to thank the members of the 

opposition, the Leader of the Opposition, for their co-operation. 

And particularly let me thank my officials from Executive 

Council, on both sides of me and behind me, for their work in all 

the aspects of managing the overall office of the Premier and 

Executive Council which, as we all know, encompasses every 

aspect of government and I sincerely appreciate their hard work 

and their significant contribution. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, may I join with the 

Premier in thanking his officials in making these estimates move 

to the extent that they have, and I enjoyed the opportunity to 

consider some of these important issues. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, may I say to the Premier how 

much I appreciated the direct responses that he gave to my 

questions. I’ve been in this House for some time now and he’s not 

famous for answering questions directly and fully but he certainly 

acquitted himself well this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


