













































August 14, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

August 14, 1987 

 

 

1797 

 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, 

and through you to the members of the Legislative Assembly, 14 

social studies teachers here from across the province. They are 

seated in the Speaker's gallery, and are in Regina to attend an 

accreditation seminar. Mr. Martin Wechel from Regina in the 

co-ordinator for the seminar, and I would ask all members of the 

Assembly to join me in welcoming them here to the proceedings 

this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the Minister of Education in extending a welcome to the teachers 

who are here for the accreditation seminar with Mr. Wechel, and 

also point out that a former member of this Legislative Assembly 

is also in the gallery with the teachers, Mr. Bill Allen, the former 

member for the Rosemont constituency in Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Policy Regarding Prescription Drug Plan 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier, and it has to do with your government's 

long awaited announcement on how you plan to help people who 

face catastrophic drug bills because of your change to the 

prescription drug plan. Mr. Premier, will you confirm that under 

your plan only a very limited number of people are going to 

qualify, and even those who do qualify will still be faced with a 20 

per cent up front drug cost? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health 

will be making a statement after question period with respect to 

the program. And the intention of the statement — and he will 

cover it in some detail — is to provide assurances for unique 

circumstances for individuals or families so that they know that 

they can be protected. And we will have a unique mechanism to 

deal with that, a professional mechanism, to make sure that no 

individual or no family will face a unique situation, and unique is 

just that. I mean, in some cases it will be because of very high 

drug costs; for other cases it will be because of other unique 

circumstances, and they should be dealt with in a unique fashion. 

 

As the hon. member knows, the people on welfare are completely 

covered; people in nursing homes are completely covered; senior 

citizens, it's $50. So you look at their unique situations, and as they 

are presented to a professional body, we will be able to have the 

flexibility to deal with those individuals or families in the unique  

situation. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, in my 

judgement every citizen of this province is unique and has unique 

needs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan have 

waited long enough for this plan. I simply ask: — what kind of 

catastrophic plan have you come up with? Will it cover 100 per 

cent of the prescription drug costs minus the dispensing fee for 

those who qualify, or will they still be required to put up 20 per 

cent of the drug costs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if I could respond to the hon. 

member, we have the best and most comprehensive drug plan in 

Canada today. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, for very unique 

circumstances, and to give the hon. member an example, if you 

had people that were making, or a family that had a very high 

income, but they had a unique problem because they had to spend 

$1,000 or $2,000 on a particular drug in a short period of time, 

that's unique. They have a great deal of money, but it's unique. In 

another case you may find a new drug comes in and it's expensive 

and somebody may need that for a 10-month period and the family 

couldn't cover it for several reasons. 

 

We want to take the individual cases because we have provided a 

comprehensive plan now so low income people on welfare are 

completely covered, so it's not that category. It's not those in 

nursing homes because that's covered. It's not senior citizens 

because they are well enough protected. So it is these unique 

circumstances with unique drugs that have been brought forward 

that can be reviewed by a professional panel that could provide the 

assistance and the protection for those people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct a question 

to the Premier, and it is along the same lines as those of my 

colleague from Moose Jaw South. 

 

The Premier speaks of unique circumstances. That has a ring 

about it, Mr. Speaker, of saying that he will decide what the 

unique circumstances are. What I want to know, Mr. Premier, is 

this: — will you outline criteria that the citizens of Saskatchewan 

can meet or not meet, objectively decided, or are these unique 

circumstances to be decided by you, your ministers, and your 

MLAs, without making public the basis upon which you are 

deciding? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health 

will be making a statement after question period with respect to 

the package. Let me just say, with respect to the rigidity that you 

are talking about, it tends to be a philosophical difference where 

your party, for whatever reasons, wants very rigid guide-lines to 

deal with a wide range of families and individuals that have 

unique  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1798 

 

 

circumstances. 

 

We want to make sure that with our professional guidance — 

professional guidance form the medical profession, from the 

pharmaceutical profession, and others — that we can cover all 

circumstances, and made sure that they're covered, with 

professional guidance. We need that flexibility to cover unique 

individuals that don't fit into the rigid guide-lines that you're 

asking for. 

 

Now we know, for low income people on welfare we have said 

we'll cover it. For people in nursing homes we've said we'll cover 

it. For senior citizens it's very well covered. For people in hospitals 

it's very well covered. 

 

Now you're looking at unique circumstances where we want to 

have professional capacity to deal with those, to be fair. If you 

want to have a rigid, rigid program, then obviously you can come 

back and say, from time to time, well you've missed somebody. 

You've created a barrier for this person and a barrier for this 

person. 

 

We don't want barriers for people; we want to be able to look after 

each and every individual family and each and every individual 

case, that will allow us to protect them because, in fact, they are 

unique. And I believe that's the intent of the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe the Premier has made his point very 

well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Premier, I think we all know that secret guide-lines, secretly 

applied, and that's what you're suggesting, are open to abuse. 

 

My question to you is very simple: — whatever the guide-lines 

you may come up with, however flexible, will you set them out in 

writing so that people may know whether they are being dealt with 

in the same way as their neighbour is being dealt with, or whether 

they're being dealt with on the basis of knowing you or your 

ministers or your MLAs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I . . . I believe, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that the hon. member, I say in all respect, knows better 

than to allege that you will only be protected if you happen to 

know the Premier of the province or you happen to know an MLA 

or something else. Now that's a pretty difficult allegation, Mr. 

Speaker. It's a pretty difficult allegation. I won't take it . . . I won't 

take it any farther except to say I believe, at a minimum, it's unfair. 

 

I said at the outset we are going to be flexible to include every 

single solitary case where we believe that it's unique. And 

professionals provide us with the categories that it is unique, Mr. 

Speaker. And to be fair . . . to be fair, we know that we have to 

look after low income, and we've dealt with that. And to be fair, 

we have to look after people in nursing homes and hospitals, and 

we have. But if there are unique drug problems or unique 

circumstances for families, we want the help of professionals for 

us to do that. 

So I would just say to the hon. member to . . . Well I ask for his 

sense of fairness in putting together a package and a program that 

will indeed deal with individual families and individual citizens as 

they require. 

 

Waiting Lists in Saskatoon Hospitals 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to address a question to the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, my question deals with your lack of 

leadership in the health care field, and more specifically it deals 

with the long waiting list in the Saskatoon . . . three Saskatoon 

hospitals. 

 

Mr. Premier, in this House on July 9 you told the House that the 

waiting list in Saskatoon was being addressed, and is being 

addressed by the Minister of Health. And I wish to quote you, Mr. 

Premier, where you said: 

 

. . . the unique situation in the city of Saskatoon is addressed, 

and is being addressed by the Minister of Health. 

 

You promised us, Mr. Premier, that the waiting list would be 

reduced. But since that time, Mr. Premier, the waiting list in 

Saskatoon has gone up by an additional 255 people. We now are 

very close to 11,000 people in the city of Saskatoon waiting to get 

a hospital bed. Mr. Premier, I ask you: — when are you going to 

start dealing with this problem in Saskatoon on the long waiting 

list and have that waiting list reduced? When are you going to deal 

with that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, in 

the summer-time it is the most difficult when it comes to the 

administration of hospital beds in the province of Saskatchewan, 

and probably other jurisdictions as well. 

 

We are, Mr. Speaker, addressing the line-up question and the 

waiting lines for patients in hospitals in a unique situation in 

Saskatoon. It is much larger than it is in any other urban market, 

and much larger than we think that it could be, and in fact we 

believe there's some things we can do in co-operation with 

hospitals and the medical profession to make sure that we can. 

 

I mean, I know the hon. member has been the minister of Health. 

And I know that the hon. member in his own frustration, in his 

own frustration in the middle of summer and the middle of spring 

and various times would say, line-ups are a sign of efficiency. 

Because in his own frustration he knows that this is a long-run 

problem. It's been going on for years and years and years. Well, 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Premier, never in the history in the province of 

Saskatchewan have we seen waiting lists of 11,000 in any city in 

this province. Mr. Premier, since you addressed this problem and 

assured us on July 9, we have had an increase of 255 people. 

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1799 

 

 

My question to you is: — why did you not act last month to 

reopen those beds, those 300 beds that are closed for the entire 

summer? Why did you not act then to reduce that waiting list and 

show the people of Saskatoon that you have some sympathy and 

some sensitivity to their cares? Why did you not open those beds? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can advise the hon. 

member that the volume of surgery has been increasing each year, 

and increasing, Mr. Speaker, and I make the point. The hon. 

member talks about history, Mr. Speaker. Two observations that 

we could make — never in the history of Saskatchewan has a 

Minister of Health, as you my hon. friend has said, is it an efficient 

sign of health care to have long waiting lines. Never in history has 

anybody ever said that, but you're on the record of saying it, and 

you knew the frustration of that. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I would say, never in the history of the 

province has there been the removal of extra billing to help people 

accommodate their health care needs, and we have done just that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when he wants to talk about history, never in the history of the 

province have we ever spent so much money on health. The 

budget is up 63 per cent since 1982, and the hon. member knows 

that. The combination of things that we must do to address the 

Saskatoon question is complicated and it is deep-rooted and it is 

historic — the hon. member is accurate there. We are addressing it 

in a long-run fashion to make sure we can make moves now and 

well into the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, could I ask a new question? Mr. 

Speaker, I want to ask a new question to the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The hon. member 

rose on a supplementary. I thought I heard that. And I would ask 

him to either ask a supplementary, or I'm afraid I'll have to move 

on the next question. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary question. Mr. 

Premier, my supplementary question deals again with health care, 

and now it deals with the hurt and suffering that your lack of care 

is inflicting on cancer patients in Saskatoon — cancer patients in 

Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that the Premier 

has not dealt with the closure of the beds, we have a . . . You 

recently received a letter from a man in Saskatoon who has cancer 

of the jaw. His doctor told him that there would be a 50-50 chance 

of complete removal if there were immediate surgery. His doctor 

applied for a bed and was told that he could not get a bed for 

urgent surgery until August 27. Mr. Premier, I ask you, are cancer 

patients expected to now accept a six-week wait for urgent surgery 

on cancer because of the lack of leadership that you show in the 

health care system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I'm advised that cancer 

patients are a priority — are a priority — among the medical 

profession . . . 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order. Order, 

please. Order. Order, please. From both sides of the House. The 

Premier is attempting to answer the question. Let us co-operate 

and allow him to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I'll just reiterate, Mr. Speaker. I am advised 

that the medical profession is treating cancer patients as a priority, 

and as far as I know, that's the case. Now notwithstanding that, we 

would like to see no line-ups at all, and I'm sure the hon. member 

knows that, and he has been through the frustrating experience of 

trying to reduce the line-ups himself at the same time when they 

held a health care budget about half of what ours is today, Mr. 

Speaker. The health care budget was half of what it was today 

with the line-ups, and the hon. member knows that it is difficult. 

So we are addressing that, and as far as I know, the medical 

profession is saying that the cancer patients are a priority in 

Saskatoon hospitals. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Premier, from your own words, you were 

telling the cancer patients of Saskatoon that six-week waiting list 

is urgent. That's what you're saying. They must wait for six weeks 

to get surgery. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Premier, again. You have ample money for your 

friends, the George Hills, the Pocklingtons, and to waste money in 

mismanagement. I ask you, Mr. Premier, will you today come to 

grips with those unique situations as you call them? 

 

You are aware of the situation. A man had to wait six . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please! Order, please. Order. The 

hon. member's preamble is wandering. I'm sure he is aware of that. 

I'm not sure that the Premier caught the actual question, so I will 

give him the opportunity to just put the question, please. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Premier, will you please now find ample 

money to open up some of those beds in Saskatoon so cancer 

patients can receive immediate urgent surgery when it is required? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The hon. member raises, I take as an 

assumption, his concern about cancer patients, and then, Mr. 

Speaker, he drifts on into personalities which shows that he really 

doesn't care at all; he's more interested in the politics of the 

situation. 

 

You know yourself — you know yourself, sir, that George Hill 

has got nothing at all to do with cancer patients in Saskatoon. All 

you do is grandstand for the public. I'll tell you, people like 

George Hill will raise more money in the province of 

Saskatchewan to create more health care funds to build more 

hospitals, to have a larger health care budget, and that's precisely 

why, Mr. Speaker, the budget is up 63 per cent since 1982. You 

get off track because you don't understand, one, how to make 

money, and you don't understand how to spend money. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1800 

 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Housing Program 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

Premier, and it has to do with his so-called housing program — 

the pre-election gimmick for the $1,500 freebie grants. 

 

Mr. Premier, I have recently received a letter from a prominent 

Saskatoon business man, one Mr. Joe Butzelaar, who writes to me 

about this subject, and I will quote just one short sentence: 

 

I find it obscene that people like me will obtain over $100 

million in a cynical vote-buying exercise when the truly 

disadvantaged in our community are suffering as never 

before. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you not take that message from Mr. Butzelaar to 

heart — cancel this profligate program, eliminate the unfairness 

and the cost, and as Mr. Butzelaar suggests in his letter, devote the 

government's resources instead to the handicapped, the mentally 

retarded, education for young people, and our health care system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will respond a couple of 

ways. Firstly, the hon. member knows that it is a voluntary 

program. People do not have to participate in it. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it's a matching program, which means that 

individuals are asked to dig into their pockets for $1,500 at a 

minimum, and then the government will match, and it's the 

combination of those two that have created a great deal of 

economic activity. 

 

And 19,000 jobs in the province of Saskatchewan are attributed to 

this program. Often the members opposite ask about jobs and 

opportunities for people across the piece in the province, in towns 

and villages and farms and other places. This program applies 

universally, across the community in Saskatchewan — all 

communities. 

 

So we have the second or third lowest unemployment. It's a 

voluntary program. And what's most responsible, which is the 

opposite to what the members opposite . . . the opposition 

provided in the election, is that you have to dig out of your pocket 

to see a matching program, which means that we can have 

economic activity coming from the people of Saskatchewan, and 

not just — not just from the taxpayer. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. Mr. Butzelaar is 

one of those who puts his money where his mouth is. He did apply 

for the program; he did get the $1,500; he sent it to me and asked 

that I pass it along to food banks in Saskatoon and Regina because 

he thinks that more appropriate. 

 

Mr. Premier, my question for you is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — All right, can you prove that, Ralph? 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Pardon me? 

An Hon. Member: — Can you prove that? 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Pardon me. There's the cheque. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, please. Order. 

Order. Order, please. We seem to be entering into debate. Would 

the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg detour that or divert it 

by please putting his question. 

 

An. Hon. Member: — Is he going to put it down as a charitable 

donation too, Ralph? 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I don't imagine he did, no. But, Mr. Speaker, my 

question despite the minister's . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I'm 

having difficulty hearing the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and I'm certain other members must also 

be. So I ask your co-operation once more to allow him to put his 

question. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite will not be 

able to demean Mr. Butzelaar. 

 

My question for the Premier is this: — how he can defend the 

program the way he has done when professors at the University of 

Saskatchewan say that it’s a failure, economically, when even the 

Fraser Institute has said that it’s blatantly bad policy. It’s a policy, 

Mr. Premier, that is. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member’s 

going on and on and please wrap up your question if you have a 

question, otherwise we’ll . . . Okay. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, my supplementary is simply this: 

in the face of criticism from the University of Saskatchewan, 

criticism from the Fraser Institute and many others about this 

policy, how can the Premier continue to defend a program that is 

so unfair and expensive? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just say to the hon. 

member that I, as I did to the Leader of the Opposition, I think to 

be fair we have to recognize that the individual did take the 

government grant. He took it. Then, Mr. Speaker, to be fair, he 

didn't just give it to a charity, he obviously had to have it raised 

here in the legislature, which if you're sincere about the charity 

and you're sincere about the program, I would question the 

procedure with which it's gone through. 

 

And third, Mr. Speaker . . . I would say, Mr. Speaker . . . Third, 

Mr. Speaker, if you want the judge of the program, the judgement, 

the general judgement, you just look at whether the people believe 

that it's a good idea. And the people are participating. They say 

they are prepared to improve their homes, and they are prepared to 

come out with the money, and they're doing it. 

 

And fourth, Mr. Speaker, the economic results are what the whole 

thing is about, is the creation of jobs. And it's been one of the best 

job creators that we've seen in some time in the history of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Rising Inflation Rate in Saskatchewan 

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1801 

 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I too have a 

question for the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, Statistics Canada has confirmed this morning that 

your government's policies are driving up the rate of inflation and 

the cost of living in an unprecedented way because of your 

policies. And we've been saying that o you for several months 

now. 

 

The consumer price index which was released showed that in 

Regina the annual inflation rate is 6.1 per cent and in Saskatoon 

it's 6.2 per cent, while in Canada it's only 4.7 per cent. Are you 

aware that the inflation rate in Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier, is the 

highest in Canada due to your government's policies, and how do 

you justify that to Saskatchewan families, hard-pressed 

Saskatchewan families, on whom you have imposed the highest 

tax increases in the history of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a couple of observations 

with respect to the statistical analysis. The first is, to make 

accurate comparisons, we can note that the city of Toronto was 6.1 

per cent, and it's in a boom. And people were looking at 

comparisons between other jurisdictions — Toronto, 6.1 and 

Regina is 6.1. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, if I could point out that the calculations do 

not include, Mr. Speaker, the rebate on the drug program. They do 

not include that, which is very, very significant. So if you look at 

the rebate on the gas tax, or if you look at the rebate on the drug 

program, which is obviously part and parcel of the index and 

particularly on the drug program, Mr. Speaker, what the index has 

done is saying there is no drug program at all, they've got to pay 

for it all. 

 

Now if you include . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it is. If 

you include the rebate — I'm advised, Mr. Speaker, that if you 

include the rebate, as you should, then you will see a significant 

difference in the results. 

 

So let me finally say, Mr. Speaker, that when you look at other 

jurisdictions, when their particular tax revenue measures kicked in, 

that particular month you're going to have a percentage increase. 

That's exactly what you see here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, in Ontario where there is a 

boom, one would expect inflation; in Saskatchewan where there is 

a bust, one should not expect inflation to be happening at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Premier, that inflation report, 

which I have here, which is your publication, does not include the 

7 cent a litre gas tax, and that more than offsets what you refer to 

in the prescription drug plan. If anything, that report, Mr. Premier, 

understates the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I believe that the hon. 

member's preamble is getting a little long, and I would ask him to 

please get to his question. 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I was about to do that, Mr. Chairman, and I 

want to say that this report understates the inflationary impact of 

the government's policies. And I ask the Premier: — how can you 

justify this huge increase in the cost of living for Saskatchewan 

families, all directly attributable to your government's policies, 

while at the same time you have imposed a two-year wage freeze 

on thousands of Saskatchewan families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I point out, and statisticians 

will find out who is correct in this. And I will . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Okay. Well in my . . . in the paper I'm advised . . . 

I just want to make sure . . . I'm advised, and we can go back and 

check it for sure, but I'm advised that the rebate on the drug 

program is not included in that index, which would make a 

significant difference. Now if that's not the case, then the hon. 

member has a point that it is that much larger than it should be. 

 

I also want to point out to the hon. member, is that when we are 

looking at economic development in the province of 

Saskatchewan and we're protecting low income, and at the same 

time as the hon. member wants to see growing economic activity, 

and at the same time he wants to see balanced budget and more 

money for health, he stands up in the legislature and says, but you 

can't get more revenue. 

 

Well obviously, Mr. Speaker, and the media knows this, you can't 

have it both ways. You can't offer a $1.2 billion housing program 

at one point, turn around and say that you're going to have more 

money for health care at the same time and, Mr. Speaker, say that 

they're going to cut taxes at the same time . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. I 

would ask for your co-operation. Question period is ended, and I 

now recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Legal Proceedings Regarding Collapse of Investment 

Firms 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, with regard to one action being 

taken by the government with regard to the financial situation in 

the Principal Group of companies, legal proceedings are ongoing 

in Alberta in relation to the difficulties recently encountered by 

members of the Principal Group of companies. These proceedings 

include actions relating to First Investors Corporation and in 

Associated Investors of Canada Ltd. pursuant to The Companies' 

Creditors Arrangement Act, and a bankruptcy proceeding resulting 

from a petition filed by Principal Group Ltd. Further, we are 

advised by the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation that it 

intends to proceed on Monday, August 17, to seek an order under 

The (federal) Winding-up Act in relation to Principal Savings and 

Trust. 

 

I digress quickly so that the public may understand that, I  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1802 

 

 

believe, it's accepted that an action under The Winding-up Act will 

anticipate that assets are at least equal to liabilities, as opposed to 

an action under The Bankruptcy Act, which would indicate that 

liabilities exceed assets. 

 

Saskatchewan officials have closely monitored the progress of 

these proceedings. They will result, among other things, in an 

investigation of the financial circumstances of the companies 

involved. That financial inquiry in Alberta has recently been 

expanded by court order. In order to ensure that the Government 

of Saskatchewan receives full, accurate and timely information, 

and is in a position to make any representations that may be 

necessary in those proceedings where the province is permitted to 

appear by the court, we now intend to, as a first step, retain private 

counsel in Alberta to represent the province of Saskatchewan's 

interest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to reply to this rather 

remarkable statement. We have a situation, Mr. Speaker, where 

many thousands of people have lost money through the Principal 

Group, through First Investors, Associated Investors, and perhaps 

Principal Savings and Trust Company. We have urgent requests 

by these thousands of people that the government act, and that 

they have now announced that they're going to hire a lawyer in 

Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the face of investigations by the Government of 

Alberta, the Government of British Columbia, the Government of 

Nova Scotia, this government announces they're going to hire a 

lawyer in Alberta. Now, Mr. Speaker, this situation requires two 

things of this government. Once, that we have a thorough and 

complete investigation of activities in Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — . . . so that Saskatchewan people may 

know the loss and the hurt which has been suffered by 

Saskatchewan people because of the policies of deregulation of the 

government opposite, policies which, they freely admit, have 

meant that they have done next to no regulation with respect to 

either Associated Investors or First Investors or Principal Savings 

and Trust. 

 

And the second thing that needs to be done is that this government 

commit itself to assist in every way it can, those people that — it's 

not fair to call them investors, they are essentially depositors — 

people who lost their money because they put money into First 

Investors or Associated Investors or Principal Savings and Trust, 

all three of which were regulated, or should have been regulated, 

by this government, and were not. 

 

And because of that negligence, and because of the overt policies 

of deregulation of the government opposite, these people have lost 

tens and hundreds of thousands of dollars, millions of dollars. We 

should have had action.  

What we have, Mr. Speaker, is an announcement that they're 

going to hire a lawyer in Alberta. It's not good enough, and it will 

be seen to be not good enough by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Additional Protection Offered by Drug Plan 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House this 

morning to explain how the provincial government is responding, 

and will continue to respond to those small numbers of people 

who, because of unique circumstances, may require additional 

protection. 

 

However, let me begin by outlining how the drug plan is already 

designed to protect all of us, and even now, Mr. Speaker, how it is 

designed to meet the special needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Firstly, Mr. Speaker, I'll comment on the deductible levels. These 

levels, which are $50 per year for single seniors, $75 per year for 

senior families, and $125 per year for other families, have been 

designed with a sensitivity to the differing needs of Saskatchewan 

people. Among drug plans in Canada, these deductibles are the 

most generous. I cite the example of Manitoba where deductibles 

are $75 for single seniors, as opposed to $50 here. As well as, I 

remind the members that deductibles in British Columbia are $275 

for families, compared to $125 here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not comment on the refunds that people are 

eligible to receive from the drug plan. These refunds in the amount 

of 80 per cent . . . or I will now comment, I'm sorry. 

 

These refunds in the amount of 80 per cent of costs above the 

deductible are indeed most generous, Mr. Speaker. The drug plan 

has already refunded hundreds of residents for claims sent in — 

some in as fast as 14 days, and all in less than 30 days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite, again peddling fear, and we saw 

some of that here yesterday, try to create an image of drug plan 

changes as harsh and cruel. Allow me then to provide an outline of 

the special benefits and considerations that are already in place. 

 

For people receiving social assistance, the drug plan has not 

changed at all. Benefit drugs continue to be available to these 

people for only $2 per prescription, and in many cases for not cost 

— protection just as before Mr. Speaker. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, for residents of licensed special care homes the 

drug plan has not changed at all. These people continue to pay 

only the minimal amount of $3.95, just as they did before. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have over 1,600 people who are 

registered under special programs of the health department. These 

people who have chronic renal disease, conditions of paraplegia, 

or cystic fibrosis receive their prescriptions at no cost, just as they 

did  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1803 

 

 

before. I repeat, that for these groups of people like the others I've 

just mentioned, the drug plan has not changed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important for all Saskatchewan people to know 

how we have responded to the desperate situation of people 

enduring the final stages of terminal illness. Through the drug 

plan, these palliative care patients now receive their prescription 

drugs free of charge. This is an improvement in benefits. Under 

the old plan these people were paying $3.95 for prescriptions. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they pay nothing. 

 

There are also some specific drugs that, because of such 

extraordinary expense — sometime as much as $20,000 per year 

to use an extreme example — are provided free of charge to 

Saskatchewan people. I cite the example of cyclosporin — a drug 

used to counteract the rejection of tissue transplants — payment 

for this drug and a number of others have been reduced, Mr. 

Speaker, from $3.95 to zero. We have also continued the special 

consideration given to people when they obtain insulin and testing 

agents for diabetes. 

 

You will see from the comments I've outlined, Mr. Speaker, that 

this government did indeed show sympathy and caring while 

making the necessary changes to the drug plan. And yes, Mr. 

Speaker, we intend to do even more — even more to ensure that 

no Saskatchewan person is excessively burdened by changes to 

the drug plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of all the action we've already taken in 

recognition of the special needs of people, we have further 

recognized that there may still be a few individuals who will not 

be fully able to deal with the changes. 

 

Over the period of the last few weeks, we have been assessing the 

correspondence and information these people have brought 

forward. These cases, Mr. Speaker, are currently being handled. In 

some of these, I've asked the drug plan to follow up and obtain 

more detailed information in order to see if further consideration is 

indeed warranted. 

 

Other people, Mr. Speaker, about 25 in all thus far, are now being 

contacted by drug plan officials and are being provided with ways 

to reduce their up-front costs immediately, and for a sufficient 

time to allow them also to provide additional information which 

may be required for further evaluation. 

 

These cases, along with any others that come to our attention, will 

be assessed by a review panel which I have established. This panel 

will be composed of representatives of the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons, the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association, and 

people who work within the drug plan. In some of these cases, Mr. 

Speaker, payment of only 20 per cent of total costs will be 

required, and therefore no claims need be made. Sometimes this 

will apply to the whole family, sometimes to specific individuals. 

 

In still other instances, certain of a person's drugs may be 

exempted from full, up-front payment and be available for only 

the 20 per cent. Other provisions may simply but  

importantly involve the priority processing of claims. 

 

Mr. Speaker, different circumstances may therefore lead to 

different solutions. Assessments will be based on such factors as 

level and type of drug use, cost of the drugs, disease condition, 

number of family members with chronic disease, brands of drugs 

used, and any number of other factors which make it impossible to 

broadly apply some specific criteria. 

 

Correspondence to date confirms my belief that these cases are 

few in number. Because each may have unique characteristics, 

they will each be considered separately, and not as part of some 

set of criteria that is cast in stone and cannot be flexible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recognize and sympathize with the concerns that 

have been brought forward. Accordingly I have, and this 

government has, taken action — action, Mr. Speaker, that will 

continue to support our belief in fair, consistent, and responsible 

protection, and, Mr. Speaker, action which will help us to further 

our long-term commitment to health care in this province of 

Saskatchewan 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we see here, Mr. Speaker, a 

government which is in some disarray. And we see a modest but 

important victory for the people of Saskatchewan. Over the past 

several months, the PC government has been deliberately 

undermining medicare in Saskatchewan. And for thousands of 

people they have effectively destroyed the prescription drug plan. 

 

The changes are causing great hardship to a goodly number of 

people in Saskatchewan. The PC plans, the PC drug plan which 

they just put in, is certainly a betrayal of their election promises — 

assuredly that — and, I say, a betrayal of medicare. 

 

When the government first announced its attack on medicare, 

when they first placed their expensive radio and television ads and 

newspaper ads, there was no mention of any special arrangements 

— none whatever, no mention of any special assistance or unique 

cases. But the public have risen up in wrath and they have forced 

the minister to make some changes. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Small as they are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Small as they are, and inadequate as they 

are. 

 

This minister insists that he must do it in . . . by the dark of night. 

He says he has a review panel, but he doesn't say the panel will be 

making those decisions. And I invite anyone to read his statement. 

They will be looking at them, but the decisions will be made by 

the minister and his staff. And I certainly question their 

impartiality. Yes, indeed. 

 

If the panel had been going to make the decision, you could be 

assured that the minister would have said so. But he does not say 

so. He says they will be subject to review  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1804 

 

 

by the panel, but not decision by the panel, and that, I think, is key. 

One further point, Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat. The 

minister suggests that somehow he cannot have any rigid rules. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You suggest it's somehow no better than 

the professionals. 

 

(1045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the member for Weyburn 

will undoubtedly have an opportunity to enter into the debate at 

some appropriate time. I am now replying to a ministerial 

statement, which was uninterrupted from this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. Allow the Leader of the Opposition to continue his 

remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — One final point, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister is suggesting that there is no way that he can set out rules 

because everything is unique — he is, obviously, after having 

outlined about five or six specific rules which he has for 

everything from cystic fibrosis to something else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have in the past been programs in this province 

— something popularly called medical social aid — where people 

who had low incomes — not low enough to be able to get public 

assistance, but with a low income and with substantial medical 

costs. There were rules; there was a program; they got a card; they 

could get free drugs. Somebody then could make up rules, could 

have rules that were there and available for the public to see, so 

that we knew there wasn't favouritism. 

 

The government opposite says that's beyond them. They must now 

deal with each person, send them begging — begging because 

there are no rules. And when there are no rules, what else do you 

call it but saying: — here is my specific situation; I know that I 

don't qualify for any help; would you please give me some help? I 

call that begging. 

 

And I say to the minister, even if you will not set up such a system 

now, will you, as your system operates, examine the basis upon 

which you are granting assistance, and then set out some rules so 

that people will know that they are being fairly dealt with. And 

they are not being dealt with according to the caprice of the 

Minister of Health and his officials — a minister and a department 

which has, at least in my judgement, shown a fair amount of 

caprice in administering programs in the past, and for whom the 

public of Saskatchewan does not have implicit confidence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, I ask you. We welcome this 

small addition — this small but useful improvement. We welcome 

this retreat on your part. We wish that you would make it a more 

formal structure so that the public of Saskatchewan will know that 

they are being dealt with fairly, and in the same way their 

neighbour is being dealt with, and not according to some hidden 

rules which you are unwilling to disclose. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, before order of the day, in order to 

deal with any innuendoes that may have been left from question 

period, and to make the record absolutely clear, I would like to 

table a copy of the letter that I referred to in my question during 

question period. It is dated July 30, 1987, addressed to me, and it 

is signed by Mr. J. P. Butzelaar of Saskatoon. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It has been some 

time since we have been back on the estimates for Energy and 

Mines, and I would like to take the opportunity to reintroduce the 

officials. To my immediate right is the deputy minister, Mr. Bob 

Reid; to my immediate left is Mr. Bruce Wilson; behind me I have 

Mr. Les Beck, and Mr. John Reid, the associate deputy. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we had dealt with several questions that I had 

given a commitment to the critic for Energy to come back with, 

and I would like to deal with those, beginning with the estimates 

today. 

 

The member from Saskatoon South had spoken to me yesterday in 

regards to a question on the NewGrade legal fees, and I believe it 

had also been raised in the previous estimates for Energy and 

Mines. The question had been what does Saskatchewan . . . What 

have we paid for legal fees in getting NewGrade and the upgrader 

up and running? Mr. Chairman, the legal fees paid by, or on behalf 

of Saskatchewan, over the four and a half years since April, 1983, 

for the NewGrade project are $390,000. The law firm paid to is 

MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman. And, Mr. Chairman, any of the 

fees paid by Saskatchewan are reimbursed by NewGrade, which I 

believe I had relayed to the member at that time. 

 

Other questions that we were asked to bring information back, and 

I believe I sent the member a fairly healthy package of 

information, healthy in terms of its size. There are two other areas 

that he has not received yet, and I would like to table the 

information, plus send some across to him. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the issue that I am dealing with had to do with the 

question, not only from the member from Saskatoon South but the 

Leader of the Opposition, and would we table all the agreements 

that the government has as it relates to the NewGrade upgrader, or 

the Co-op upgrader. 

 

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1805 

 

 

I believe at that time I had indicated that I could not do that 

because of the confidentiality clauses. However, I did give a 

commitment to the opposition that I would speak to the parties 

involved, and that included the Co-op Refinery and the federal 

government. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we undertook to do that. We contacted verbally 

and with a letter, and the answer that I received from Federated 

Co-operatives Ltd. I would like to quote one line, and it simply 

says: 

 

The disclosure of these agreements would have significant 

commercial prejudice to both NewGrade and CCRL 

(Consumers' Co-operative Refineries Ltd.) 

 

Mr. Chairman, I didn't find the response surprising. As we stated 

earlier, we believe that it was good and sound business practice to 

keep certain commercial information confidential. Not all, but 

certain. 

 

We also stated, and we still do, that confidentiality is necessary to 

protect the upgrader and the Co-op Refinery. And we also, Mr. 

Chairman, believed that we owed it to the people of Saskatchewan 

to protect and promote the success of these ventures. Mr. 

Chairman, confidentiality of commercial documents is a 

long-standing and prudent practice of government. 

 

Allow me to quote from Hansard on this topic, and I quote: 

 

If we are in a competitive business, we expect to reveal to the 

public the same information that our competitors reveal to 

the public. If our responsibility is to operate those industries 

for the benefit of the Saskatchewan people, to get the best 

possible return for them, we will give to the public the same 

information that our competitors give. And we will not give 

our competitors any advantages that they are unwilling to 

give us. That seems to me to be a straight matter of prudence, 

if in fact we are to discharge our responsibilities to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the statement should sound quite familiar, at the very 

minimum, to the Leader of the Opposition, but I would also hope, 

perhaps, to the member from Saskatoon South. The member from 

Regina Centre, perhaps he remembers. The member from Regina 

North. 

 

That statement was made by the Leader of the Opposition in April 

4, 1979, when the Leader of the Opposition was the premier. And 

it relates to a project that the government of the day had going at 

that time. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I can only conclude that apparently confidentiality 

of commercial arrangements is important when you were in 

government, but when you are in opposition, it is not. Quite 

frankly, I don't understand that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the Opposition received a copy of a 

letter that was sent to me by the president of Federated 

Co-operatives, and I trust that he and his colleagues opposite will 

acknowledge that our stance on  

the confidentiality was a proper one. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to table in this House the letter from 

NewGrade. But before doing so, I would like to read from a clause 

within the letter. And it states, Mr. Chairman: 

 

Any disclosure of this agreement . . . 

 

And we are talking about the operating agreement — not the 

guaranteed loans agreement, but the operating. 

 

Any disclosure of this agreement would result in a disclosure 

of the pricing and other operating arrangements between 

NewGrade and CCRL. We do not feel it is reasonable to 

expect us to disclose operational information to competitors 

which competitors are not required to disclose to us. 

 

Additionally, the upgrader process itself has been provided 

to NewGrade under a licensing agreement with Union Oil 

Company of California. NewGrade and CCRL have each 

signed a confidentiality agreement with Union Oil to keep 

the operating information relating to this process 

confidential. 

 

For these reasons, CCRL respectfully requests that the 

government does not make the project agreement or the 

operating agreement a public document which would be 

available to our competitors. 

 

They go on to say, Mr. Chairman, that they are extremely sensitive 

to the need for government to provide information to the 

legislature, that the disclosure of these agreements would have 

significant commercial prejudice to both NewGrade and CCRL. 

 

The Federated Co-op has no objection, and supports the provision 

of such financial information to the legislature as may be provided 

to disclose the expected economics of the project, the financial 

structuring, the financial arrangements at the appropriate time. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I would hope that it is to the satisfaction of the 

member from Saskatoon South, that he would now agree that there 

was nothing to hide. We were stating what was a common 

practice, not only within this government's time, but within the 

opposition time. 

 

(1100) 

 

I invite the member to go back and read April 4, 1979 in terms of 

what the premier of the day, his leader, had to say. Basically, he 

has said the same thing that I have said, and he's gone one step 

further and he basically said at that time the same thing what the 

Federated Co-operatives Ltd. is saying. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to table the letter that was sent to Mr. 

Masse, Mr. Wayne Thompson, the chief executive officer of the 

Federated Co-operatives Ltd., along with  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1806 

 

 

their letter that was sent to me in return. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there is another area much more complex, much 

more extensive that the member from Saskatoon South had raised. 

And I believe the main context of the question was something like: 

— draw for me what it would be if the policies had not changed 

after 1982. Where would we be today? Not quite, but thereabouts. 

He may clarify it if he wants. 

 

I believe that the hon. member from Saskatoon South asked what 

revenues would have accrued over the past five years if the NDP 

policies had remained in place. The impact of keeping the NDP 

policies, Mr. Chairman, would have not . . . in my mind would 

have been disastrous. They would have not done what the member 

from across the way has insinuated. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in relation to what has happened under the policies 

of this government, the NDP policies would have resulted in — 

I'm talking about prior to 1982 — about 5,900 fewer oil wells 

being drilled; about $1.4 billion less in investment; 2.4 billion less 

in the value of the oil production; and over that period of time you 

could estimate approximately 27,000 fewer direct and indirect 

person-years in jobs. 

 

Mr. Chairman, when we took a look at what the member wanted, 

and when he posed his question, I guess it came to my mind that 

perhaps there was a lack of knowledge and understanding, and I 

believe that that's reasonable to expect because the area is complex 

and you're dealing with many factors and many figures. Basically, 

there was a lack of knowledge, of understanding within the oil 

industry itself. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the member from Saskatoon South said to assume 

that there would have been 800 wells drilled per year. He left the 

impression with that assumption that the drilling levels are 

independent of factors such as economic conditions . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did Imperial Oil write that speech for you 

in sound-track? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Not quite. 

 

Nevertheless, Mr. Chairman, under the NDP policies there's one 

thing that I do agree. And that is, that it is highly unlikely that 

drilling would've exceeded 800 wells. So with that figure of 800 

wells, the member and I agree on. 

 

He also asked us to assume that oil production remained at 9.3 

million cubic metres. Production in 1982, Mr. Chairman, was 8.1 

cubic metres, not 9.3. With only 800 wells drilled per year, there is 

no way that production would've continued at that level each year, 

due to the depletion of recoverable reserves. And that's a natural 

depletion. 

 

He also suggested the royalty rate, when we do our calculations, 

be 54 or 59 per cent. Now I'm willing to do only so many things in 

terms of hypothetical, but there is a point where you have to be 

realistic. Mr. Chairman, the average royalty tax rate for the first 

half of 1982 was less  

than 30 per cent after accounting for the grants under the NDP 

incentive program. And he asked that all the factors be taken into 

place. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the member specified in an array of assumptions in 

asking his questions, but we took them and we assembled the data 

based on what he suggested the best that we could. The bottom 

line, the member asks for, the bottom line is that we have 5,000 

more wells in production today than we would have had if the 

NDP policy has have remained in place. 

 

Those wells are producing oil, Mr. Chairman. Jobs were created in 

the drilling of those wells. Jobs continue because of the need to 

maintain those wells in the service and supply sector and, of 

course, to move the oil to market. Those wells are paying 

royalties, Mr. Chairman, royalties that wouldn't have been there. 

And they are assisting in financing such as health and education 

and other government programs. 

 

Mr. Chairman, over 1982 to 1986 period, $566 million more in net 

royalty and tax revenue was produced than if the NDP policy had 

remained place. Let me put it another way when the member asks 

for the bottom line. We would've had, under the NDP policies 

with all the assumptions built in that the member has asked for, 

$566 million less. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to touch on a few of the figures and the 

assumptions — what went into it — before I table the information 

and give it to the member. I could give it to the member and leave 

it at that and let him raise it as he wishes, which he will probably 

do so anyway. And that's fair. But I think it's important that it be 

stated in this House and on record. And I also think it's important 

for the members that sit in here. 

 

Mr. Chairman, on some of the assumptions that we're asked to do, 

for instance, the 800 oil wells, he said take each year, 1982 to 

1985, 800 oil wells drilled each year. We did that in doing the 

calculations. But, Mr. Chairman, in taking the assumptions in 

1986, they would have had only 200 wells drilled. The decrease in 

drilling due to decline in oil prices from '85 to '86 was assumed to 

be proportional to that which actually occurred. We also put the 

assumption in, when the member for his benefit is looking at the 

figures, that 80 per cent of the oil wells drilled are actually 

completed. For every hole you drill, you don't necessarily come up 

with an oil well. 

 

On the category that will be in the document, Mr. Chairman, is oil 

industry investment. There is an assumption built in there, Mr. 

Chairman, the same cost per well drilled, through the oil industry 

investment, divided by the oil wells drilled, as in actual case. We 

did not include any upgrader expenditures in this analysis. 

 

On the third category, to do with the direct and indirect 

employment, with the figures that the member will see, there was 

temporary employment direct that is determined from drilling. 

And then we took an average factor of 0.65 person-years per well 

drilled. That was the figure used. The permanent employment, the 

direct related to the operation of a well, is based on an average of 

0.3 jobs per producing oil well. For any given year,  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1807 

 

 

additional employment due to the new wells is added on. An 

employment loss due to the abandoned producers in the shut-in 

wells is subtracted off. We also used a factor of 2.1, Mr. 

Chairman, and applied it to the direct employment to determine 

the total employment. And by total, I mean direct and indirect. 

 

On the oil production, Mr. Chairman, in doing the calculations, the 

actual production for the first half of 1982 amounted to 21.9 

million barrels — that's the actual production — approximately 75 

per cent of capacity. There was a decline rate of 10 per cent per 

year, and it was assumed for the old and new production. The 

EOR (enhanced oil recovery) production was assumed to be 

equivalent to that which was actually observed over the five-year 

period. Mr. Chairman, there are shut-in levels related to 

unfavourable operating economics, and were assumed, based on 

the capacity of the production levels. 

 

One category, Mr. Chairman, that the member will be interested in 

is the Crown royalty and the freehold production tax revenue. 

January 1982 the royalty tax formulas were assumed to be 

maintained throughout the forecast period for conventional 

production. There was an EOR royalty tax regime announced in 

April of 1982 by the NDP; I believe it was just before the election. 

And we made the assumption, Mr. Chairman, that that was to have 

been implemented July 1, 1982, given the scene from the member 

from Saskatoon South. 

 

The actual average royalty tax rates for the first half of 1982, by 

the old and the new categories, were 37.4 per cent, 23.5 percent, 

and 30.3 per cent, respectively. The average royalty tax rates for 

these categories were reduced each year to reflect the normal 

decline in the productivity of the wells. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we had to take a look, and we made an assumption 

on the NDP incentive program. It was assumed that programs 

under the oil and gas incentive regulations from 1978 would have 

been continued without change. That was his question. 

 

Our policies, what would happen with our policies? Well, Mr. 

Chairman, 1982, it would be the same as the actual payments; 

1983, Mr. Chairman, would be $1 million higher than the actual 

payments to account for some catch-up because of a growing lag 

in the payment schedule; 1984-86, Mr. Chairman, it was based on 

80 cents per barrel of oil production. 

 

Mr. Chairman, on the net Crown royalty and the freehold 

production tax revenue, what we took was the Crown royalty and 

the freehold production tax revenue, less the NDP incentive 

program payments. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there's about four other categories that the member 

will be looking at, but the last one, last two actually, the total net 

revenue in the NDP incentive program liability — for it's 

something that the member never chooses to raise, and I suppose 

if I were him I may not either — the net Crown royalty and the 

freehold production tax plus the bonus . . . (inaudible) . . . revenue 

plus the export tax flow-back revenue. And while all of that is 

technical jargon, I believe that if the member is to be fair and 

realistic in what he's going to be looking at, he  

must recognize the technicalities of the questions that he's asked. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the actual incentive liability under the program — 

and I'm talking about the NDP program — was $303 million by 

the end of 1982. And just to refresh the member's memory, the 

program we're talking about is the NDP incentive program that 

paid 75 per cent of the actual cost of drilling a well. Didn't matter 

if oil was found or if it was dry, they paid the cost. Unfortunately, 

Mr. Chairman, they left a liability in 1982. And that liability is on 

the books to the taxpayers to this day, of $300 million. 

 

Mr. Chairman, all these factors were taken in, in addressing the 

member's question of: — what would the figures look like under 

the NDP program? And I will send a copy of this over to the 

member, and I would like to table one in the House. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I've heard several figures thrown around over the 

last couple of days again. I heard a member in the House stand up 

the other day and said it was 200 million per year that is given to 

the oil companies; yes. Then I heard the figure three by another 

member. I've heard the figure of a billion. I've heard the figure of 

800 million and 900 million. 

 

Mr. Chairman, if the members are going to do their job in terms of 

being opposition and scrutinizing government figures, I believe 

that they have to do their homework and they have to look at the 

actual figures as opposed to their resolutions and their 

philosophies and what happened in the past. They can't ignore it in 

total. Obviously, they can't ignore it in total if there's a $300 

million liability on the books today from an NDP program. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Chairman, it is still obvious, the program that has been put 

into place, and the policies under the PC government since 1982, 

have been extremely successful. 

 

And I challenge the member — I challenge the member to go out 

and to consult, not only with the industry, but the communities, to 

find out if, in fact, that’s true. We have faced over the last few 

years, some tough times within the oil sector, such as agriculture, 

and potash is also facing some tough times. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we recognize that we are dealing with a world 

commodity. We do not control the price, but we do have a certain 

degree of ability to try and make things work in Saskatchewan 

within the world market itself. 

 

The NDP, Mr. Chairman, have taken the view that the deficit has 

been created by the give-aways to the oil companies. And 

yesterday I did an open line show, and one of the phone calls had 

the suggestion that this deficit wouldn’t have been here without 

this give-away. And there’s nothing further from the truth. You 

only have to go through the records over the past few years to see 

what has happened in terms of oil revenues, and the gas revenues 

— oil wells/gas wells — Mr. Chairman, and the jobs that come 

with it. 

 

The reality is that there are 5,000 more wells pumping in  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1808 

 

 

this province today because of that program, paying royalties, than 

what there was under the NDP . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  

 

Now he ways, what are we getting? 

 

He is so totally ignorant of the concept that there is a world price 

set for oil. It falls and it moves up. Of course when it goes up, the 

revenues are going to be higher. 

 

Now I’m not sure what the member from Saskatoon South would 

like to see us do. Perhaps he thinks we have the ability . . . that we 

have the ability to set the price of oil at $30. I would suggest that’s 

what he believes we can do. He knows that’s wrong, and he would 

do a better service to the people of Saskatchewan, and to the 

industry itself, in getting his facts straight, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman I want it 

to be noted that the minister went on for 23 minutes, and I don’t 

know how many days we’ve been in the estimates. I’d expected 

that she would make that opening statement when we started our 

estimates, and not when we’re in after about two or three weeks. 

 

But it took her a while to get her facts together. But I want to say 

to the minister when she said that about ability — I never accused 

the minister of having any ability at all, Mr. Chairman. I want that 

on the record. I did not accuse her of that. 

 

Madam Minister, I told you a little while ago that I was not going 

to pursue the NewGrade upgrader any longer. But I did, in private 

discussions with you, indicated to you my personal concern, my 

personal concern about governments being too secretive. I really 

think that not only in Saskatchewan, but across Canada, it is about 

time that governments are much more open. I know, as I indicated 

to you also, that it is easier when you’re in opposition — much 

easier in opposition than when you are in government — but I do 

believe that we must make extra effort when we put at risk $700 

million, or close to $700 million, of public money. We must make 

certain, as a government . . . You, as a government, must make 

certain that you do not put into the agreements, or into the 

contract, any materials that the public should have a right to know. 

 

I think it would have been possible for you, and in discussing this 

with the people from NewGrade, and others who I will not 

mention . . . and others, they clearly indicated to me that the 

contracts could have been signed in such a way that the 

confidential material, which would hurt CCRL's (Consumers 

Co-operative Refinery Ltd.) competitive position, could have been 

excluded from the agreement if you so had desired, or so had 

demanded, or if the federal government had so demanded. 

 

And I'm not going to belabour the point, but Madam Minister, I 

want to make it very clear and put it on the record that you cannot 

lay the blame on the third party, or on the federal government, 

because I don't think you made one ounce of an effort to exclude 

that confidentiality material from the record, or from the 

agreement, because I believe that you didn't want to make it 

public. 

And, Madam Minister, I think some of your statements that you 

have made on the difference between heavy oil and conventional 

oil, and whether or not the upgrader will be successful, are 

completely out of line with what you decided in the agreement. 

You told me that the break-even point for the NewGrade upgrader 

was $5. That is simply not the fact — that is simply not the fact. 

 

As I said before, I’m not going to belabour this point because there 

are other issues I want to get into today, but I will leave that. But I 

do not think that you do the public any service whatsoever as a 

minister of the Crown by not insisting, with the other partners, that 

we try and make as much public as we can, so it can be discussed 

in this legislature, and so that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan will know that the investment that they have made 

is a sound investment. 

 

And I don’t want you going around saying that the opposition 

wasn’t concerned about the CCRL’s competitive position, because 

we are. But I do want to tell you that you have an obligation as a 

minister of the Crown to try and make available to the people of 

Saskatchewan — and that is in this legislature to the opposition — 

all the information that you can, to make certain that the public 

knows whether or not a good decision has been made on their 

behalf. That is all that I want to say about the NewGrade upgrader. 

I want other areas that I want to get into today, and it looks like 

maybe next week. 

 

Madam Minister, I’m not going to go through the materials that 

you presented, because you didn’t take my assumptions, you 

simply took other assumptions, and therefore we could go into 

those arguments that you have made, and we’d be in an entirely 

new debate already. 

 

What I want to say to you, Madam Minister, is this: — that in 

1982 and previous to that, from 1971 to 1982 — I believe my 

figures are correct — the price of oil averaged about $10.79 a 

barrel. From 1982 to 1985 the average well-head price of oil was 

27.9 or $27.90 — I believe those were the figures you gave me. 

 

And I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, that the production 

increased and your revenue dropped dramatically. Your 

production increased, your price was more than two and a half 

times than what it was from 1971 to 1982, and your revenues 

decreased substantially. One has to ask the question: — where did 

those revenues go? From 1982 to 1985, when the price of oil went 

up by two and a half times, your production increased, but your 

revenues went down. What did you do with the money? 

 

And it’s clear, Madam Minister, that you gave that money away in 

decreasing your royalties. And Madam Minister, it is no secret . . . 

it is clearly no secret when we go to the oil company profits, and I 

have a list here. I have a list here. Who made the money? Did the 

people of Saskatchewan get this money? Of course not. Here it is, 

a headline: — “Imperial profits up 84 per cent.” “Oil industry 

profits 3.7 billion.” “Gulf avoided 1 billion in taxes.” Turner says 

— who’s Turner? — Turner says, “Texaco profit rises by 28 per 

cent in third quarter.” “Oil profits recover sharply.” “Four majors 

make 1.42 billion.” And  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1809 

 

 

on and on it goes. 

 

Madam Minister, last February or March, I believe the federal 

minister, Marcel Masse, again made some concessions to the oil 

industry of $350 million, and I indicated to the press at the time 

that I was not opposed to concessions being made, as long as those 

concessions went to the small oil companies — as long as it went 

to the small oil companies. And I made the same statement about 

your concessions that you made last January. As long as the 

concessions went to the small oil companies, and as long as it 

went for developmental wells, I was not opposed to concessions 

being made. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do you know what he’s talking about? 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’m awful slow. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I’m terribly disappointed that the member from 

Weyburn has intervened again, not from his seat, but from the 

floor of the House — but not in his seat either. 

 

Madam Minister, Bill Whelan, the Saskatchewan manager of the 

Canadian Petroleum Association, said this of the federal 

incentives. He said the program will benefit the large companies 

represented by this organization. They were not getting 

concessions to the small oil companies. 

 

Madam Minister, I think you have a real problem from your 

political perspective. And that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I think your party has a read problem. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I see where the Deputy Premier wants to get into 

this debate, and I gladly will permit him to do so, but if he wishes 

to, I would appreciate if he would stand up and make those 

suggestions. Otherwise, I wish he would abide by the rules, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I believe that you have a 

problem because you are dependent on your political contributions 

from the major oil companies and the major companies here. And 

I have here: — “Grits and Tories corner the big money despite 

NDP popularity surge.” And here we have, Madam Minister, I 

think the real reason why concessions are made. It says the big 

banks, the biggest corporations, the investment dealers, 

accountants, land developers, and, Madam Minister, the energy 

companies made large contributions to the governing Progressive 

Conservative Party, and, in may cases, similar amounts to the 

Liberals. Madam Minister, I think that is the problem . . . that is 

the real problem that you have. 

 

It has nothing to do . . . your reduction in royalties has absolutely 

nothing to do with the oil companies being able, or their ability to 

drill wells in this province. They drilled wells when we were the 

government. They’re drilling wells when you are the government. 

 

Certainly, Madam Minister, I can’t argue with you that in some of 

your years the oil companies drilled more wells  

than they did under our government. Who wouldn’t? With the 

huge tax incentives that you gave them, and tax concessions, who 

wouldn’t want to drill wells? And in many instances, Madam 

Minister, they weren’t developmental wells. They were in-fill 

wells. Because you changed the rules. They knew where the oil 

was, and they simply went and drilled for the concessions that you 

gave them, for the incentives that were there. Not because they 

were looking for new oil, but they could make money on the 

royalty concessions that you made. 

 

So what happened, Madam Minister, is simply this. You pumped 

out more oil out of known wells, limited oil supply . . . limited oil 

supply was pumped out, out of known wells, known oil wells. 

And what have we got? What did the people of Saskatchewan get 

for that? We have less oil, and we probably will run out of oil, 

conventional oil, in the next 10 to 15 years — very limited supply. 

And secondly, your revenues went way down, and the oil 

companies walked away with the profits. That’s the situation that 

we have. 

 

And, Madam Minister, we could go on and on and on in this 

debate. The bottom line is that had you even kept the royalties, had 

you even kept the royalties in place that you had in place in 1983, 

this province would have been much better off — much better off. 

 

(1130) 

 

And I can tell you, Madam Minister, that it doesn’t make any 

difference how you argue the point. You gave away 1.5 to $1.7 

billion in incentives which should have accrued to the treasury, 

and that is one of the reasons why you have this huge deficit. It is 

not the only reason. Some of the other reasons is mismanagement 

in may other areas. You gave away money to Pocklingtons, and 

through your patronage you have given away 10 to $20 billions. 

But those are minor compared to the huge concessions that you 

made and that you did not get the revenues that you should have 

for the oil. 

 

Madam Minister, I’m not the only one that’s saying this. I want to 

read to you from John Lloyd Price who works for a brokerage 

house of Gordon Capital Corporation. And this is what John Lloyd 

Price says. Lloyd Price says: 

 

Cash is pouring into the oil patch at an unprecedented rate. 

 

I won’t read the whole article, but he goes on to say: 

 

The analyst (referring to John Price Lloyd) says when oil 

company budgets were prepared last fall, virtually every 

company in the industry based its 1987 spending on an 

international price of U.S. $15 a barrel. 

 

Fifteen dollars a barrel. I want you to note that Madam Minister. 

 

However, crude prices are likely to average more than U.S. 

$18 a barrel this year. 

 

Now listen to the next line: 

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1810 

 

 

Since each U.S. $1 barrel price increase adds $700 million to 

the industries pretax flow at U.S. $18 a barrel, the industry 

will have an extra $2 billion. 

 

Says Lloyd Price: 

 

Combined with grants estimated at 300 million, the industry 

could end up this year with 3.5 billion more than it budgeted 

on last fall. 

 

Madam Minister, that is based on $18 a barrel. Today the price, I 

believe is 21 or $22 a barrel. Let us say that it averages $5 a barrel 

higher than . . . pardon me, let’s say it averages $20 a barrel. 

That’s $5 more than the oil companies had anticipated. That 

means, Madam Minister, that the oil companies will have an 

additional $5.66 billion — $5.66 billion. 

 

Is it any wonder, Madam Minister, that we read headlines of the 

kinds of profits that are made by the oil companies, by the big oil 

companies, when Imperial says their profits have gone up by 84 

per cent. That wouldn’t be so bad, Madam Minister, if those 

profits and that money was used for investment purposes. But 

much of that money, Madam Minister, if those profits and that 

money was used for investment purposes. But much of that 

money, Madam Minister, is being used to pay off huge debts that 

oil companies and energy companies have incurred in take-overs, 

producing not one single job, not one single job, but consolidating 

the companies that are available into fewer and fewer hands and 

into bigger and bigger corporations. 

 

That’s what some of your concessions have done. That’s what the 

concessions have done of Alberta, and that’s what concessions 

have done of the federal government. And that’s why, Madam 

Minister, I am so opposed to the royalty changes that you have 

made, because much of that money is being used to pay off huge 

debts that foreign companies have incurred by huge take-overs, 

not in the energy field, but in the diverse fields that they have 

invested in. And that, Madam Minister, is of absolutely no benefit 

to the people of this province — absolutely no benefit. 

 

Madam Minister, I do want to give an opportunity to some of my 

people on this side who have questions that they would like to ask. 

And I would like to see if we can get through the oil part of these 

estimates within the next half hour or so. And so I will now turn it 

over to my colleague, the member from North Battleford. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I would like to respond to what the member 

from Saskatoon South has had to comment on. 

 

Just briefly on the upgrader. Though he wishes not to deal with it 

any more, I think it deserves a further statement. I, quite frankly, 

am amazed at the position that he takes. 

 

He speaks out of both sides of his mouth. When he’s in 

government, he fully supports, as laid out in Hansard in April 4 of 

1979, the reasons why some commercial aspects of an agreement 

cannot be tabled. He speaks, Mr. Chairman, out of both sides of 

his mouth. 

Now that, in my mind, raises an issue of his motives and his 

credibility within the questioning of these estimates. Mr. 

Chairman, clearly we do not, did not, and do not want to 

jeopardize the position of the Co-op Refinery. The member has 

said he does not want to do that either. 

 

The rate of return that I have given the member, I had said to him 

. . . or the differential, that it was $7, based on a rate of return for 

the refinery. If you wanted a break-even point, it was $5. But for 

the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s not true. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — He says it’s not true. Then I ask the member 

to table the information, that whatever he might have that indicates 

that that is not true. Sooner or later, Mr. Chairman, the opposition 

and their allegations must stand behind them and must be held 

accountable for them. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the differential to make the upgrader a success is 

$7. That includes a rate of return. A break-even point is $5. I 

challenge the member, when he says that is not true, to lay his 

figures on the table, and why it isn’t true. 

 

I believe, when he’s talking about oil and the oil companies, that 

he is dealing with a lot of rhetoric, a lot of NDP philosophy, and a 

lot of incorrect figures. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think we all — you know, when it comes to oil 

companies, and I’m no different than anybody else when I drive 

up to the pumps to fill my car up with gasoline — I think 

everybody at one time or another would like to get out and 

perhaps give the pump a good kick. It’s the type of an expenditure 

that we constantly do. We know we need it if we are going to be 

travelling, and yet we begrudge it when we have to pay for it. That 

is precisely how we think of the oil companies — connected to the 

gas pumps every day or every week when we have to fill up our 

cars. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, I want to tell you that in Saskatchewan the oil 

industry consists more of the small companies, as the member 

says he’s in favour of, than the majors. I think the member would 

find it interesting to the numbers of investors and players in the oil 

patch — small, not the large corporations that you are talking 

about — has increased by 30 per cent under this government, 

under this government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We congratulate you for that. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That’s good. I’m glad you do. So let’s not 

confuse the issues as to who’s running the oil industry in this 

province when you are up on your feet and talking about it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I want you to get the best deal for the 

people of this province. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — He wants me to get the best deal, Mr. 

Chairman, for the people of this province, and I believe that is 

exactly what we have done, for these reasons, Mr. Chairman. I 

think the member would agree that to invest  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1811 

 

 

in the oil industry is very risky — high risk. Should you be doing 

it with taxpayers dollars? That’s a question I have. Should you 

take the taxpayer dollar, that the plumber and the welder and the 

waitress have worked very hard for and pay to government, and 

invest it into an industry that is extremely high risk and very 

costly? 

 

He’s talked about some of the profits that come back. That level of 

profits is also an indicator of the types of money that are required 

to go back in. I would suggest that the average well in 

Saskatchewan probably costs about a quarter of a million dollars 

to drill, with absolutely no guarantee that you’re going to get a 

drop of oil or a drop of gas. No guarantee. 

 

So I ask the member . . . he says the best deal for the people of the 

province. I’m going to ask him to compare, for just a minute 

again, an incentive program. Both parties agree that there is a 

need, when it comes to the oil industry, for some kind of an 

incentive program. And the reason I say that is because I took that 

quote from the Leader of the Opposition. They agree. So the 

question becomes: — which incentives . . . what kind of an 

incentive works the best? The next question becomes: — what 

kind of an incentive is the best deal for the taxpayers? 

 

Now you have some options. You can take government dollars, 

actual cash dollars, and give a cash grant to the oil industry. You 

could perhaps do a system of tax credit where you’re not giving 

actual tax dollars, or perhaps you could do what we did. And we 

simply said, if you drill and you find oil, the royalty structure does 

not kick in for a year. Now that’s very simple, Mr. Chairman. No 

taxpayer’s dollar was put at risk, as it was under the NDP 

program. And you have only to look at the $300 million liability 

that is owing on the books today. That’s taxpayers’ dollars. And 

interestingly enough, when you look at the breakdown as to who 

that money is owed to, it’s the major oil companies — the big 

guys. 

 

There’s no doubt, and I will find a quote from his leader, that the 

NDP incentive program worked to the betterment of the bigger oil 

companies — there is not doubt about that, and that’s a quote from 

the Leader of the Opposition — because it encouraged the 

transferring and buying and selling off of credits under the 

program. 

 

The other thing that program did, besides giving actual cash to an 

oil company, was: — they didn’t have to produce any oil before 

they got the money. If you drilled a dry hole, the NDP gave you 

75 per cent of the cost of drilling the dry hole — the money that 

the taxpayers gave the NDP. Now what’s the best deal for the 

people of the province? I suggest, under this program, the best 

deal has been done. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we did not need to take taxpayers’ dollars to put 

into a very high-risk industry. Over a period of time, we received 

5,000 more wells that are paying royalties today, regardless of 

what the price of oil is. Low or high, it’s paying royalties today — 

wells that will be paying more royalties when the price goes up, 

because of a price-sensitive royalty structure that we put into 

place. 

 

I also suggest it has been successful, in terms of its employment, 

with a price-sensitive royalty structure. It’s  

given an element of stability which, in fact, encourages more 

service and supply companies to consider coming into this 

province. The scheme itself has also given greater incentive to the 

smaller guy than the big guy that all of us like to kick around the 

block. 

 

What’s the best deal? I would suggest, if the member, the Energy 

critic, the hon. member from Saskatoon South were to put out the 

facts of the NDP program and the PC program, the people would 

judge for themselves. And I know that is precisely what he does 

not want to do. 

 

The member alludes to all these in-fill wells — all these in-fill 

wells. I want to inform the member, and it’s open — the books in 

the Department of Energy and Mines. He can go and he can look, 

and he will find less than 10 per cent — less than 10 per cent, Mr. 

Chairman — was on in-fill wells. 

 

I also want to inform him, so that he gets a good sound look at the 

total picture, that in-fill wells are only drilled for specific reasons. 

Not anybody can get a permit to drill an in-fill well. There has to 

be a reason. And they have to demonstrate, before getting that 

permit, that the oil that will be recovered from that well would’ve 

not otherwise been recovered. And there are some technical 

reasons for that that the member could go over with some of the 

officials out of the Department of Energy. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Chairman, I am amazed when I heard the member talk about 

the royalties that were given away and changed. You know, Mr. 

Member, that royalty structure was not changed until December of 

1986, but you were quoting me figures from 1983. Now how do 

you square that off? The royalty structure . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . no, listen now. The royalty structure did not 

change — did not change until December of 1986. Mr. Chairman, 

at that time there was a price sensitive structure put into place, and 

while he may not like to hear it, and he says I have everything 

mixed up, I would suggest perhaps that’s in reverse. 

 

I want to talk for a minute about what the member from Saskatoon 

South was referring to about the cash flowing in — the $15 a 

barrel, the $20 a barrel. I’m glad the cash is flowing into the 

industry because it alleviates certain problems, not only on 

government, but on people in producing provinces in this country. 

We all know that when any important, large industry like 

agriculture, oil, potash, whatever, gets into great difficulty, that the 

pressures are put on government, and in fact, Mr. Chairman, those 

pressures, in turn, become the taxpayers’ pressures. 

 

So if the cash is flowing in from the private sector, I think that’s 

good, and I think it’s probably needed because we went through a 

year where it wasn’t flowing in. And when the cash does not flow 

into the industry, Mr. Chairman, what you see happening is no 

drilling. You see the reserves gradually depleting, and there comes 

a point when you can no longer feel that you were even close to 

being self-sufficient in trying to guarantee any kind of oil supplies. 

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1812 

 

 

More importantly, Mr. Chairman, we know what it does to our 

revenue base. We know what it does to the communities. I look at 

a community like Oxbow. I even go to the east of the province, out 

in the Moosomin, Rocanville area. I go to a place like Kindersley, 

and I see businesses in 1986 that were having a tough go, some 

closing up — certainly businesses within the industry itself, 

closing up, and some on unemployment. People — welders for 

instance — getting no work. That spin-off is greater than just to 

the service and supply sector directed to the industry itself. You 

take a city like Weyburn — their hotels feel it, their coffee shops, 

grocery stores, real estate. The spin-off is immense. 

 

Now while we may not have the benefit of oil industry activity 

and money in every community in this province, I would suggest 

to the member from Saskatoon South that the spin-off even 

reaches into his beautiful city of Saskatoon — into his beautiful 

city of Saskatoon. If he would go around his city and take a look at 

some of the commercial ventures and the businesses, whether it’s 

Custom Trucks or some other industry, he will find out that there 

are jobs created. I ask him to go to Custom Truck in Saskatoon, 

and he will find that they in fact have jobs in there because of the 

oil industry. So I ask him to do that. That in turn, Mr. Chairman, 

creates a tax base within that particular community itself. 

 

Whether the price of oil is $15 a barrel or 20, Mr. Chairman, in 

putting in a price-sensitive royalty structure, we have in fact 

allowed the province to take its fair share and yet still leave 

enough that the industry will remain viable. And that’s the key, 

without a viable industry it gradually shuts in, and your revenues 

will drop off to nothing, to absolutely nothing. 

 

The member says the industry has an extra 2 billion from some 

report. Now, Mr. Chairman, I’m not about to comment on Texaco 

or anybody else who operate world-wide on their kinds of profits. 

But I do know when he says that the industry will have an extra 2 

billion that he will see most of that 2 billion put right back into the 

industry. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s not true. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, that is true, Mr. Member. If you think 

what it costs to drill one well . . . Mr. Member, if you think what it 

costs to drill one well, about a quarter of a million dollars, quarter 

of a million dollars, you know that you only have about four wells 

in $1 million. Take a look at the total number of wells that are 

drilled across Canada, and you will soon find that that will not 

meet that $2 billion dollars. 

 

Mr. Chairman, when the industry has a cash flow, a reasonable 

cash flow, it is put back into reinvestment within the industry 

itself. And he has only to look at the wells being drilled into 

Saskatchewan to know that in fact that is true. He says that they’ll 

probably pay their used debts with that. I don’t know what they 

will do with their used debts. It seems to me a debt is a debt, 

whether it’s used or not, and perhaps the word “used” is 

redundant. 

 

He also suggested that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, that’s 

what you said . . . that perhaps they would pay it on  

a debt in buying out another company. He will still find that it will 

be reinvested back into the industry sooner or later. 

 

You’re always going to have some companies that close up and 

get out of the oil industry, but for the most part, Mr. Chairman, the 

Saskatchewan companies that we are talking about, they reinvest 

back into the industry itself. That’s the only way it can keep 

growing. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to make one further comment on it in terms 

of the best deal for the people of this province. I want to go back: 

— that 5,000 more wells were drilled — $1.4 billion investment 

into this province; overall there was probably 27,000 more jobs 

that what would have been under your program over that same 

period of time. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I want to underline the fact that there was not 

a dollar, not one dollar of the taxpayers that was taken and put at 

risk in a high risk industry. Now that is a sign of a very successful 

incentive program when you look at the track record of the oil and 

gas industry within this province. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, you say that some of that 

spin-off effect of the oil activity has come to the city of Saskatoon. 

Boy, I wish we had the good old days back again. We got 11 per 

cent of our people in Saskatoon unemployed, Madam Minister. 

That didn’t happen under the NDP — didn’t happen under the 

NDP, Madam Minister. 

 

And let me tell you, Madam Minister, in Saskatoon we didn’t have 

11,000 people on the waiting list for our hospitals, to try and get 

into our hospitals. And we didn’t have our cancer patients waiting 

for six weeks to get urgent operations. If you call that a success of 

your oil royalty activities or your scheme, well the people of 

Saskatchewan will gladly tell you to put it back to what it was 

under the NDP. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to tell you that you say you created 

27,000 jobs. Why, by your own statistics, why did we have 24,000 

people last year leaving this province? — 24,000 people. And 

most of those, Madam Minister, were people between the age of 

20 and 35. Look at your own statistics; I looked at them this 

morning. And you’re telling me that you’re creating jobs. 

 

Our unemployment rate today should be zero. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What was it when you left office, Herman? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I’ll tell you what the unemployment rate . . . I’m 

glad that the member asked; I’m glad that the member asked. 

Because 4.7 per cent, 4.7 per cent was the unemployment rate 

when we left the office in 1982 — 4.7 per cent. And I’ll tell you, 

Madam Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . if the member 

from Morse wants to get into this debate, he’s quite welcome to 

stand up and enter this debate. 

 

I’m telling the minister that your royalty scheme just simply hasn’t 

worked. And by the way, Madam Minister, the word is huge — 

h-u-g-e — huge debts incurred by the  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1813 

 

 

big companies. And that’s what they are paying off. 

 

Madam Minister, these companies have received $5.6 billion in 

extra money that they hadn’t anticipated. If all that money was 

invested in the oil fields, an you claim, as you claim most of it is 

being reinvested, why then haven’t we go the activity in Canada, 

in Alberta and in Saskatchewan and in Manitoba, that you claim 

we have? Why isn’t it there? And I’ll tell you, Madam Minister, if 

you get your head out of the sand and look at what’s happening, 

the large proportion of that money is being used to take over other 

companies, other companies. And secondly, it’s being used to pay 

off debts that these companies have incurred. 

 

Thirdly, I’ll concede, Madam Minister, some of that money is 

being invested in the oil industry. And why shouldn’t it be? You 

say that the people didn’t risk $1 in a risky venture. Let me ask the 

minister: — what’s the difference if you forego $1.5 billion to a 

royalty scheme that you’ve put in place and therefore don’t collect 

the revenues that you would have if you hadn’t changed it, or in 

the people themselves, through Saskoil, would have invested the 

money? What’s the difference? All I’m saying is that if Saskoil 

would spend its money that it has made in Saskatchewan rather 

than in Alberta, yes, maybe we would have more activity, and 

maybe the people would get some returns on those royalties that 

you have put in place. 

 

Madam Minister, I think we’ll have to leave this field, because 

obviously you and I are not going to agree. All I’m saying to you 

is I believe that the people did not get the best deal. We should 

have collected another 1.5 billion, and we didn’t. You say that you 

created all this activity. I’m saying to you, by all these statistics 

that we have, that your government puts out, that the federal 

government puts out, we don’t have those activities; we’re not 

creating the jobs. People have to leave this province to find jobs 

elsewhere. We don’t have the money to finance our health care 

and social service and education. And what I’m saying to you is 

that it hasn’t worked. It hasn’t worked. 

 

Madam Minister, you can respond if you wish. Otherwise, I’m 

going to turn it over to the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, I do want to respond. Mr. Chairman, I 

take great exception when the member says, get my head out of 

the sand. 

 

I’m going to read to this House, and it’s a news release from the 

Petroleum Monitoring Agency details industry on the financial 

performance in 1986. And it’s a very sophisticated agency, and 

agency that deals with all the data and the statistics and everything 

that goes into, within to the industry: 

 

In 1986 (Mr. Chairman), the Canadian petroleum industry 

experienced the worst financial downturn of its 40-year 

history as a result of the dramatic decline in crude oil prices, 

from an average of $33 a barrel in January to an average of 

14.60 a barrel in July, stabilizing in the range of $20 to $22 a 

barrel by the end of the year. 

 

Mr. Chairman, it goes on to say: 

 

All the major financial performance indicators for the oil and 

gas industry were down substantially. Net income dropped 

190 per cent or 5.5 billion to a loss (Mr. Member from 

Saskatoon South) of 2.6 billion. Cash flow (you were talking 

about cash flow) from operations declined 34 per cent to 7.5 

billion, and net capital expenditures were down 33 per cent 

to 6.7. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this was based on 124 companies which account 

for some 90 per cent of the total petroleum industry revenues. 

Now somewhere there is a responsibility to this Assembly and to 

the people of the province in what you present as being factual and 

what isn’t, what either comes out of the bowels of the party 

machinery, or the party rhetoric. And somewhere there is a point 

where that has to end. 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. Chairman, the bottom line is that over 1982, our term of 

government, this province has received $566 million more, all 

things considered, with 5,000 wells more. And I want to remind 

the member across the way, the royalty rates did not change until 

December of 1986. He doesn’t seem to understand that; however, 

he does know there was an announcement made and that, in fact, 

is so. His give-away argument is nothing more than rhetoric and 

wishful thinking, and it’s for political expediency and nothing 

more, unfortunately, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to comment that it’s not 

worth while making a comment on those remarks. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Through you and to 

Madam Minister, I would like to make a very brief intervention, 

and I particularly am concerned about heavy oil developments in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I am wondering if the minister would tell me what the 

departmental language is that you use for classification of oils. I 

know that sweet . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. We’re having difficulty 

hearing the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Common language refers to sweet crude, heavy 

oil, and what I’d like to know is what the departmental language 

is, and how many different classifications of oils that you have? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — For royalty purposes, there is basically two 

categories: — non-heavy, which would be the sweet and the sour; 

and the heavy category. For physical descriptions, there is three, 

there is the light, the medium and the heavy. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — What is the criteria of classification for heavy 

oil? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Would you ask that again? 

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1814 

 

 

Mr. Anguish: — What is the criteria for oil to qualify as heavy 

oil? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — It is the API (American Petroleum Institute) 

gravity was 15 or less. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Could the minister now tell me what the 

incentives are, if any, for development of heavy oil reserves? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the member’s 

questions, as heavy oil is one of the key components to the oil 

industry within the province of Saskatchewan, and particularly up 

in his area and over to the Lloydminster area and down to 

Kindersley. It’s also no doubt, in terms of the predictions of where 

oil is going in reserves and the length of time, that heavy oil has a 

fairly bright picture for the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

The incentives that are in place . . . The royalty holiday on the 

drilling program is the same right across the board for all 

categories. On the royalty structure, the royalty rate for heavy oil 

is lower than light. 

 

We also have a research and a technology program in place, both 

from the research lab and at the field level, that companies get 

into. Plus, again on the royalty regime, there is a special category 

for enhanced oil recovery projects. And most of those, if not all, 

take place dealing with heavy oil. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Under the . . . I don’t know that you referred to 

it exactly as research and development, but basically it is research 

and development money that is available for enhanced oil 

recovery projects. I’m wondering if you could explain to me if 

there was money provided by the province of Saskatchewan for 

the enhanced oil recovery project in the Meota area, and I believe 

the operator was Canterra oil, or Canterra Resources. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I am informed that, yes, there was. That was 

started some years ago, and I do not have any detailed information 

with me on it today. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well, I would appreciate it if the minister would 

give me here commitment that you will provide that to me. I’m 

very concerned that the Canterra project is no longer operating up 

in the Meota area. And I think that we need to take a very close 

look at enhanced oil recovery projects because it is an area that 

will take a long time to develop adequate technologies so that 

we’re able to get the highest possible recovery of heavy oil out of 

the ground. And I think it’s important in terms of our future 

energy security. 

 

Could the minister tell me how many enhanced oil recovery 

projects there are in the province of Saskatchewan today, and if 

the province of Saskatchewan is participating in those enhanced 

oil recovery projects, and if so, to what degree? Is it Saskoil that’s 

participating in them or is it research and development money 

that’s provided through your department to the enhanced oil 

recovery projects? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the projects presently  

in the province — there are seven in the Lloydminster area and 

there are four in the Swift Current area. The dollars spent — last 

year we spend approximately $4.7 million. We expect to spend 

somewhat less than that his year. However, we believe that there is 

a need to increase in the future, some activity in this area. And we 

had made representation through the western diversification plan 

to have it included as a category. As the member will know, that 

has been done. And we will be looking at that area also. 

 

I want to come back to Canterra for a moment because it is 

important. And as the member will know, the project was shut 

down last year. And I would like for him to know why. The 

project was sustaining a lot of losses through its lifetime, and 

obviously the experimental project that was being tried on it was 

not working. It would be my hope, and we have been continuing 

discussions with Canterra that perhaps something else be 

considered for that method was not working and that perhaps they 

will look at something else to be tried out at the field level. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — So basically what the minister is telling me is 

that the Canterra operation in the Meota area is shut down because 

of the heavy losses. It wasn’t that the method of enhanced oil 

recovery was shown to be not very feasible. Is that what you’re 

saying? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Let me use this as an example. It’s one of 

those cases, you know, where they say the operation is a success 

but the technical part of it, I’m informed, was successful but it was 

not successful from an economic point of view. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — The seven projects, the seven other projects that 

you mentioned that are operating in the province, are they using 

the same method? And if they’re not using the same method, what 

types of methods are being used in enhanced oil recovery? Are 

they fire flood? Are they steam injection? What is the case? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I assume you’re talking of only seven . . . 

the seven in the Lloydminster area. There is a combination of the 

fire floods and the steam floods that are within those seven 

projects. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Would the minister refresh my memory as to 

what the method was on the Canterra operation? 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The method was steam flood. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Does the department have any estimate or 

guesstimate in terms of what the return on it has to be per barrel to 

make, say, the Canterra operation successful, but as you 

mentioned it, to meet the economic considerations? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — It was around the range of $12 when it was 

shut down, and they believe that in today’s world you would 

probably need about $25 at the well-head before anybody would 

undertake it again. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I assume that applies just to the Canterra 

operation, and I see the Minister shaking here head in the  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1815 

 

 

affirmative. Could you tell us, very briefly, what the estimated 

percentage of recovery is now on the enhanced oil recovery 

projects? Is there an average as to what the percentage of recovery 

might be? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — In keeping again with just the Lloydminster 

area, the recovery rate is about 5 per cent. With a successful EOR 

it moves up to 30 per cent, which is one indication as to why it’s 

so vitally necessary to ensure that the proper EOR projects go 

ahead. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — It seems to me that in the Lloydminster area, in 

the north-west corner of the province, there are extensive reserves 

of heavy oil, and I do agree it’s important to proceed with the 

enhanced oil recovery projects, and I think it’s something, as you 

have already said, that there should be increased participation or 

increased developments in those areas. And I’m wondering if your 

department or you, Madam Minister, have any new thoughts or 

could report on the current status of the heavy oil upgrader that has 

been proposed from time to time for the Lloydminster area? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — As the member knows, the Husky 

negotiations or discussions have been going on for some time. 

And I’m sure, coming from that area of the north-west corner, he 

feels some of the frustrations that I feel with the discussions. 

 

We are still presently negotiating and in fact will be meeting with 

Husky and the Alberta government on Monday. It is my 

understanding, at that time Husky will be presenting a proposal 

that will be dealing with the concept of a utility to both levels of 

government. We will sit down, the three of us, at that time, to see 

if we can come to an agreement that within the contents of the 

proposal that there is a possibility for the project. And by 

possibility I mean that it will be viable and it will be sound 

economics to go ahead with it. That decision will be made shortly 

after there is an agreement between the three on the proposal come 

Monday. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I don’t want to unduly delay these proceedings, 

so I have one final question. I’d like the minister, first off, to tell 

me what the system is for gathering heavy oil, and following that, 

the transportation of heavy oil to the NewGrade upgrader here in 

Regina, as to whether or not it’s going to be totally trucked, 

whether it’s partially trucked and pipelined, or whether there’s a 

mixture of light crude and heavy crude to get it through the 

pipeline. So I’m basically asking the gathering and the 

transportation system of oil to the NewGrade upgrader here in 

Regina. 

 

I have one other question that has no relationship to this. As I said, 

I want to be very brief. I have a number of concerns and questions 

about alternate energy, and at the same time as you’re answering 

my first question, I was wondering if you could provide me with 

the name of a person that I could communicate within your 

department, the Department of Energy and Mines, to 

communicate about alternate energy as it applies to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The gathering system is the pipeline, 

interprovincial, for the upgrader in Regina. I would  

suggest that you call John Reid, the associate deputy minister, in 

dealing with alternate energy. My office is always open also, if 

you would like to sit down and talk with me. John’s number is 

787-2494. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We briefly 

enter the estimates in regards to Energy and Mines. I have a few 

questions to pose to the minister in terms of a subject with which 

he has been dealing with over the last while in regards to a 

company called Star Valley oil reclaimers. And I know that the 

minister is familiar with the operation of Star Valley oil 

reclaimers. And this related to a company in south-eastern 

Saskatchewan set up with the help of economic development 

money which was received from the Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation, and which was set up for the purpose 

of reclaiming used oil from the oil wells and from the so-called 

ecology pits, and the excess dumpage that's taken out of the oil 

production. 

 

And, Madam Minister, my question is to you. The people at Star 

Valley oil reclaimers have contacted you numerous times in 

regards to some slight changes to the regulations in the province of 

Saskatchewan that would change the way in which used oil — oil 

that is presently being dumped into ecology pits and dumped into 

open pits throughout the province — that they would allow this oil 

to be reclaimed and to put back into the pipelines and sent out of 

the province, and thereby gain extra revenue for both the province 

and for the oil producers of this province. 

 

My question to you is, Madam Minister: — in the light of the fact 

that you have consistently refused to change the regulations to 

demand that oil producers in this province use the services of oil 

reclaimers — and not necessarily just Star Valley, but those oil 

reclaimers in the province — will you justify before the House 

now, why is it that you won’t require oil companies to recycle 

their oil so that we get rid of a potential and developing pollution 

problem in south-eastern Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’m aware, as the 

member from Regina Rosemont has suggested, as the Kinder 

operation, and plus some of the issues. I’m also aware that the 

member from Regina Rosemont I believe spent two hours in the 

Weyburn area one day in going over the issue. And I commend 

him for taking the initiative to get out and see what’s actually 

happening in the field. However, with all due respect, I would also 

suggest that perhaps he needs to spend more than a couple of 

hours, and that it would be worthwhile talking to more than simply 

one area of the industry in order to get the total picture. 

 

Before getting into the question, Mr. Member, I want to say that I 

have never said that I refuse to change the regulations. That has 

never been a statement. What I have said is I am willing to look at 

the regulations. I am willing to look at the regulations, but to date, 

given the statistics that we have, there has not been an indication 

that in fact there is a great crying need for any change in the 

regulations. 

 

I also want to send over to you, for your reading, a letter that was 

sent out on oil salt water spills, and it was a  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1816 

 

 

notice that was sent to all operators. I believe the allegation has 

been put out that we don’t bring the hammer down on the 

operators, and I want you to know that that allegation is simply 

that — an allegation without anything to back it up. 

 

Companies, Mr. Chairman, in this province, oil companies, are in 

fact required by law to clean up any spills that they have, or 

recycle. Now what is in regulations is that they can do this within 

their own facility. No, it does not state specifically that they should 

take it to a plant, a reclamation plant. It does not state that. But it is 

very clear, Mr. Chairman, that if they cannot handle it within their 

own facilities, they are still required to ensure that the clean-up 

and the recycling takes place. Now most of them know, Mr. 

Chairman, if they cannot handle it within their own facilities, they 

are going to have to find a facility that can. They would have some 

options on that, perhaps somebody else’s facility or a reclamation 

plant as the member has suggested. 

 

I would also like to point out to the member the difference because 

he has suggested that the Alberta regulations are much tighter. In 

fact, Mr. Chairman, they’re very similar. The only difference is 

that the Alberta legislation gives the option of reclaiming, 

recycling, at your own facility — by “own” I mean the industry. 

But it does mention you have the option of taking it to a 

reclamation plant. Yes, that’s in the Alberta legislation, but is does 

not require the company to do that. That is an option. 

 

(1230) 

 

The Saskatchewan legislation or regulations is one of doing it in 

your own facility. If you can’t do it, you must ensure that it is done 

somehow. That’s the only difference on them. 

 

I would also like the member from Regina Rosemont to know that 

in Alberta about 5 per cent — and this was a couple of years ago 

— about 5 per cent of the industries actually used the reclamation 

plants, and the other 95 per cent, Mr. Chairman, had their own 

facilities on site that they could do that. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to correct a couple of 

impressions that were left by the minister. 

 

First of all was the impression that I spent a total of two hours . . . I 

want to tell the minister I’ve spent a total of five days in 

south-eastern Saskatchewan, at my own expense, dealing with 

farmers and dealing with people involved in the oil industry . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

And I notice that the deputy minister’s made a comment from his 

feet. And if he’d spend more time fixing the road from the border 

to Carievale, and spend more time fixing Highway 13 down there, 

and if he’d spend a little time in his constituency, some things may 

happen. 

 

Madam Minister . . . Madam Minister, I’ve spent five days dealing 

with this — five days of my own time dealing with this problem, 

to look into it, because I don’t believe that it’s necessarily a 

partisan political issue. I’m glad to see that there’s an indication of 

change of direction on your part, because you wrote the people 

from Star Valley  

Reclaimers. In a letter from yourself to the people from Star 

Valley you have said, and I will be prepared to table this letter 

later, you have told them that the regulations in Alberta and the 

regulations in Saskatchewan are identical. And I believe the word 

“identical” was your own words. 

 

Now the second impression that you have left is a wrong 

impression. Oil companies in Saskatchewan are not required to go 

through a reclaiming process in their won facility or at any other 

facility. In Alberta, oil companies are required to. You go through 

a reclaiming procedure, which is why, given the fact that most of 

the major oil corporations or big oil corporations operating in 

Albert have on-site facilities, that 90 per cent, or 80 — I think it’s 

actually 87 per cent of oil which is reclaimed in Alberta is done on 

site and the 13 per cent is reclaimed outside of site. 

 

And that’s the difference, Madam Minister. In Alberta, the oil is 

required to be reclaimed; in Saskatchewan, it is not. That is why, 

Madam Minister, that is why we have supposed on-site facilities 

such as this. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. I must remind members 

they are not allowed to use displays in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I intended to table it as an example. 

The minister has . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. You can table it. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I intend to table it after I finish speaking, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The member is not allowed to use displays in 

the legislature. Order. If the member wants to table it, he can do so 

now. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I will table 

now the picture of one of the so-called . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Listen. I have the right to describe what I’m 

tabling. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I rise on a point of order. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — State your point of order. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, every member has the right to 

describe what it is they are tabling in this House. Are you saying 

that they don’t? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The member is allowed to describe it, but he’s 

not allowed to hold it up and use it as an exhibit. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Good. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’ll 

leave it on my desk. Mr. Chairman, I’m going to table one of the 

pictures that I’ve taken on my trips to south-eastern Saskatchewan. 

It is a picture of an ecology pit, a so-called ecology pit which is 

one of the  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1817 

 

 

on-site facilities that the Minister of Energy talked about. It 

consists of a large earthen square dug out of the ground, filled with 

oil and used oil, which have caused environmental hazards to the 

province. I will table that picture now, at this time. 

 

Madam Minister, as I’ve said before, it is obviously that you have 

made a change in direction and have not changed the regulations 

to do so, or that in fact you’re not familiar with the regulations and 

the differences in the regulations between Alberta and 

Saskatchewan. If you are now telling the House that you are going 

to require oil operators in this province to reclaim their oil either 

on site or through an oil facility, then I congratulate you on that 

change of direction. And it looks like the five days I spent in 

south-east Saskatchewan may have, may have in fact had some . . . 

bear some fruit. If on the other hand you’re not saying that . . . if 

on the other hand you’re not saying that and are trying to deceive 

the people of this province, they you’re not to be commended. 

Would you please tell us: — are you changing the regulations to 

require oil companies to process their oil through reclaiming 

facilities, either on site or off site? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, just briefly. I thought I had 

made it very clear to the member what the legislation or 

regulations were, and I think perhaps there is a misunderstanding 

on the word “reclaim.” In fact, Saskatchewan producers are 

required to reclaim — to use your word — their oil. That’s in 

regulations. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I will take the liberty of sending over . . . or 

sending to the member’s office a copy of the regulations, along 

with Alberta’s regulations. I will tell him: — we do not in 

regulations use the specific word reclaim, nor does Alberta. All 

right? So I think perhaps there’s a misunderstanding in terms of 

what word is used and what it means. 

 

I want the member to know that companies are required to clean 

up and to reclaim, or recycle, to use his word on the reclaim. The 

picture that you’ve referred to, I believe, as I’ve met with . . . of 

the Kinder Brothers, a couple of times and have gone through the 

pictures that they have taken. We have discussed the issue of . . . 

the picture in particular, I believe, that you had is an old picture. 

 

I want you to know that it is illegal . . . it is illegal, my friend, in 

this province, to store oil in earthen pits. And if in fact you have 

information and locations where that is happening, I would ask 

you to submit it to my office, or to the deputy minister of Energy 

and Mines, because it is illegal. And we will endeavour to look 

after it immediately, if you would do that. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 

Madam Minister, I heard you describe, for my friend from 

Saskatoon, financial difficulties experienced by oil companies 

over the last year. The fact is, Madam Minister, that the balance 

statements of the oil industry have improved very considerably 

this year. They’re making a buck, and they’re making a good buck 

in 1987. 

 

I wonder, Madam Minister, if the time has not come when your 

department should be considering reinstituting some level of 

royalties so that the people of this province  

get a fair return on their resource. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Member, I agree with the member, the 

oil companies are in fact . . . but if you look closer, you will see 

that it is on the retail and the refinery end where the profits are 

coming from, not the . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — Not true. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, my friend, that is true. You have a look 

at it. 

 

The royalty structure that is in place will take care of what you 

have suggested because it is price sensitive. When the price of oil 

goes up, the people of Saskatchewan get a greater share of the 

royalty. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Speaker, anticipating that the 

minister would have her remarks prepared for her by Texaco and 

Imperial, I brought along some statistics which I’d like to share 

with you. 

 

Madam Minister, it is true that the integrated oils made a profit 

which we as a society ought to be ashamed of over the last year. 

They did that because, when the price of their feed stock went 

down, the price of the retail product remained the same, and they 

raked off the difference. But, Madam Minister, the oil producers 

which we are talking about are also back making a dollar, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, anticipating, as I say, that you would take your 

information straight from the Canadian Petroleum Association, I 

brought with me some statistics quoted in the August 3 edition of 

The Financial Post. I point, Madam Minister, to companies such 

as Bahan Resources — not in Integrated Oil; Canadian Occidental 

— not in Integrated Oil; Pancanadian Petroleum — not in 

Integrated Oil; Suncor — not in Integrated Oil; and Kildonan 

Petroleum is not. 

 

These companies, Madam Minister, are all in the black; they’re all 

making a dollar. The Integrated, I admit, have made an obscene 

dollar over the past year, and you and the Minister of Consumer 

Affairs take some responsibility for that. But the oil producers are 

making a dollar right now, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, I suppose the question might be asked as to 

where the oil industry is going? I think the best judge of where the 

oil industry is going is what the investment community is saying 

about it. Madam Minister, the prices of the stocks of oil producers 

has been rising continuously. The index on the Toronto Stock 

Exchange of the oil producers — and that excludes, Madam 

Minister, Integrated Oils — the index for oil producers is higher 

now than it has been at any time in the past three years. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about the market generally then? 

 

Mr. Shillington: — The market generally; all right, our mutual 

friend asked about the market generally. Let me, for the benefit 

then of members opposite — I happen to  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1818 

 

 

come with that as well — give you some statistics about the 

market generally. While this may strike you as coming straight 

from the Commonwealth, this happens to come from The 

Financial Post as well. Over the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well I don’t know what the minister is call . . . the Minister of 

Education is calling a socialist paper; that’s not what The 

Financial Post has been thought of in recent times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — this is all taken from The Financial Post. 

Canadian industrials, over the past year, are up by 79 per cent, 

that’s a very healthy increase. What’s happened to oil? The 

producing oils, over the same period, it’s up by 333 per cent, 

almost five times as much as the index. So when you say what’s 

happened to the market? it’s up, but oil has increased a lot 

more. The index, Madam Minister . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. All members get as much 

opportunity as they want to ask questions in Committee of 

Finance. I would ask that the member . . . to let the member on 

his feet ask his question to the minister. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, I’ll end this and leave the 

question shortly. Suffice it to say that in the document which I 

gave you is a representative group of companies from the dozen 

different industries. The highest return, the highest profit 

margin is not the mines; not the forest products, for all that 

they’ve done; not chemicals; not steel. The highest profit 

margin of any industry is the oil industry. And this, Madam 

Minister, is coming out of a bad year. The time has come, 

Madam Minister, to reinstitute oil royalties. This industry is 

making a good dollar and it’s time they began to pay their fair 

share of taxes in this country. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I assume this is the document you’re 

talking about. When I look at this, Mr. Member, I quite frankly 

am not too sure where you get your figures from, except that 

it’s very clear that you are extremely selective. I don’t want to 

spend a lot of time on the major oil companies. There’s 

obviously a difference in philosophy between what makes the 

oil industry in Saskatchewan go, between you and I. 

 

We believe, in Saskatchewan it’s been the small companies and 

the small investors. You obviously put an emphasis on the 

bigger companies. I believe that the statistics will show you that 

we’ve been relatively successful, particularly as it pertains to 

the small investor and the small oil companies because they’re 

up by about 30 per cent in this province in accounting for the oil 

activity. 

 

I take a look at the sheet that you’ve given me, for example, the oil 

and gas, and I see change from 1986. You know, there’s a minus 

three in here; plus 1 per cent; plus 2 per cent; yes, there’s a plus 

19. If I look at the net income in the change from 1986, all I find is 

one company, and that’s Shell Canada, with the kind of increase 

that you’ve suggested — 256 per cent. I will remind you that Shell 

Canada is an integrated company. Shell Canada is an integrated 

company. Mr. Chairman, considering what happened in 1986, I 

think any kind of  

increase for any company — small, medium, or large — in 1987 

would have shown a substantial increase from where they were in 

1986. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the member says, you know, now that prices are 

going up, change the royalty structure so that we get more 

royalties. I will remind the member again that what was put in 

place for January 1 was a price-sensitive royalty structure. When 

the price goes up, the royalty goes up. If the price of oil goes up 

tomorrow, we will in fact see a greater share of the royalty come 

in to us. If that price, however, goes a way down, back to the $10 

as it was at one time, then yes, you will take a lower portion. But 

as it’s going up, Saskatchewan is receiving more royalties, and 

that system is already in place. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, I’m going to leave it at this. 

Suffice it so say that the . . . Since you refer to it, I want to read 

this to you. The increase in net income, the average, is 2,256 per 

cent. 

 

Madam Minister, you know and I know that the price of oil isn’t 

going to go up. But you know and I know that the oil producers 

have good balance sheets; they’re making a good dollar. And it’s 

time, Madam Minister, that you and your government began to 

extract a fair return on this resource so that the people of this 

province might have a decent health care system and a decent 

level of services. 

 

Madam Minister, you have increased taxes for virtually everybody 

else, but you somehow or other feel that if the oil industry pays a 

nickel in taxes, the world is going to split in two. 

 

Madam Minister, it is time the oil industry began to carry their fair 

share. And I suggest to you, at this point in time, in August of 

1987, they’re well able to do it. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I would agree. And as I 

indicated to the member, with the price of oil going up, the royalty 

structure that is presently in place will take care of that. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

you’ve known for at least the last two years that the large majority 

of Saskatchewan uranium that is exported to the United States is 

being sold to the United States and is not making its way into 

electrical utilities for use in nuclear power generation, but is rather 

making its way directly into the U.S. nuclear weapon arsenal. 

 

You’ve known, Madam Minister, for at least the last two years, 

that Saskatchewan uranium exports are being used by the U.S. 

Department of Energy, which takes ownership of them after 90 

days, for breeding plutonium for MX missiles. You’ve known, 

Madam Minister, that Saskatchewan depleted uranium is being 

used by the U.S. Department of Energy for manufacturing 

hydrogen bombs. And you’ve known that Saskatchewan uranium 

is being used by the U.S. Department of Energy for manufacturing 

heavy bullets to penetrate armoured tanks. 

 

Madam Minister, you have been fully aware for the last  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1819 

 

 

two years that when Saskatchewan uranium goes into those 

enrichment facilities in the United States, all three enrichment 

plants are run by the U.S. military. Their primary function is for 

nuclear weapons. Their civilian function is only secondary, and 

that enrichment for military and civilian purposes is taking place 

simultaneously. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, my question to you is this: — why have 

you not taken any action in the last two years to stop 

Saskatchewan uranium going into U.S. nuclear weaponry? Why 

have you not blown the whistle on a flagrant violation of the treaty 

that exists between Canada and the United States that says not a 

single molecule of uranium from Canada will go into U.S. nuclear 

weapons? It’s obvious that that treaty is being flagrantly violated. 

Why have you not blown the whistle on that flagrant violation? 

 

Will you now, Madam Minister, put a stop to a situation in which 

there is literally a little bit of Saskatchewan uranium in almost 

every U.S. nuclear warhead that’s being manufactured today? Will 

you put a stop to that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I am rather pleased, Mr. Chairman, to 

hear the thrust of the hon. member from Saskatoon University. I 

take it that he has somewhat modified his position, and his 

concern now is only in the monitoring of the selling of uranium, 

as opposed to shutting down the industry entirely. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there’s no doubt that there’s a general concern 

when it comes to selling a product that has potential to be very 

damaging to human beings and to the environment. And I 

believe that it was with thought in mind that the policy in 

Canada changed in 1965. Mr. Chairman, since 1965, Canada 

has permitted the exports of uranium only for peaceful 

purposes, and only where the importing country has signed an 

appropriate agreement ensuring that verification measures are in 

place. That must be done first. 

 

Mr. Chairman, because of this Canadian export policy and 

because of the verification processes administered under the 

auspices of the United Nations, Saskatchewan uranium is used 

only for peaceful purposes, with all the checks and balances in 

place. 

 

Mr. Chairman, under the agreement that Canada has signed, a 

nuclear co-operation agreement, all the uranium is tracked 

through the nuclear fuel cycle of the customer countries. And I 

believe the member knows that. In fact, I would consider the 

member to be a relatively good expert when it comes to 

uranium and its processes. I would admit, Mr. Chairman, that 

it’s probably not possible to trace every molecule that goes 

through there. However, I would say that Canada, or the 

Canadian safeguards policy, ensures that those nuclear 

materials are monitored fully as they move through the various 

stages of the fuel cycle. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that if the member has 

information that is contrary to the agreements that  

Canada has signed, that he has an obligation to give specifics to 

the proper authorities at the national level, to ensure that in fact 

the agreements are being upheld. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Madam Minister, you know that 

Saskatchewan depleted uranium, five-sixths of the uranium that 

we end up sending to the U.S. is not subject to any 

non-proliferation treaty safeguards at all. 

 

And you’ve heard for the last two years, Madam Minister, 

officials of the U.S. Department of Energy telling all North 

Americans that, in fact, large amounts of Canadian uranium are 

being used for military purposes. And you, Madam Minister, 

have chosen to ignore those facts, as has the Government of 

Canada. And I ask you today: — will you at the very least make 

a commitment to this legislature to undertake a public inquiry 

into the use of Saskatchewan uranium in U.S. nuclear weapons? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, no I will not do this. but I 

will add a rider to it. If the member has some specific details in 

the allegations that he has made, let us see them and then 

perhaps it will be considered. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, there are a 

number of topics that I would like to have covered. I would like 

to ask you at this time whether you would be prepared to 

undertake for me, if I sent to your office in written form, a 

number of questions on various topics — whether I can expect 

that they would be sent to me in written form some time in, let’s 

say, in the next month or two? Would you do that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes. I will endeavour to respond to 

whatever information you may want, keeping in mind that I will 

tell you if some information is impossible. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Okay, Madam Minister, that’s fine. I want to 

now leave this Energy topic and a number of questions I wanted 

to ask on oil. 

 

But I want to turn very quickly to coal. Madam Minister, as you 

know, Canada imports a lot of coal, in fact about 16 million 

tonnes, I believe. And it costs Canada approximately $1 billion 

for importing that coal. My question simply is, and I will put 

some more questions in written form, but: — have you had any 

discussions at all with the federal government in trying to get an 

agreement with the federal government whereby we could 

subsidize the transportation of coal from -s and the West to 

eastern Canada? 

 

My understanding is that that could create approximately 

30,000 new jobs in the coal industry, if we could supply all the 

coal that Ontario requires. All I’m asking is a very simple 

question: — have you had discussions with the federal ministry 

in this regard? And if you have had, could you make any 

presentations that you’ve made to him or to him, could you 

make those available to me and what was his response in this 

regard? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I can inform the member from Saskatoon 

South that there has been an action committee struck. I can 

inform the member from Saskatoon South that there has been 

an action committee struck on the initiative of the Premier of 

Saskatchewan. The action  

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1820 

 

 

committee includes the Premier of Alberta, the Premier of 

Ontario, and the Deputy Premier of the federal government . . . 

or Deputy Prime Minister, I’m sorry, Deputy Prime Minister. 

 

Along with that we have a committee of officials that have been 

working on the issue of transportation and some other issues, 

including research in terms of upgrading the coal. The reason 

for the committees — we agree that it’s job-oriented and that 

there is some room to move in terms of western Canada being 

able to supply eastern Canada with a greater supply of coal. 

And that is the purpose for the action committee that has been 

initiated by the Premier. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, Madam Minister, I did ask if there are any 

presentations that have been made, would you make those 

available for me. If they’re not of a confidential nature, would 

you make those available to me? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I want to turn very quickly to 

natural gas. You have indicated that you want to deregulate and 

have deregulated some portions of the natural gas. Can you tell 

me, for example, in your deregulation, you’ve also talked about 

deregulation, you’ve also talked about self-sufficiency in 

Canada. Do you still think you’re going to meet your deadline 

of about 1990 of self-sufficiency in natural gas? What studies 

have you done in this particular area and could you tell me, very 

quickly, is that still a reasonable date for self-sufficiency, 1990? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we have done better than 

that. We are capable of supplying all our own needs right now, 

and if you would like, we will supply you with some 

information to indicate the capacity and the reserves. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I want to quick . . . just return 

very quickly to the oil. You indicated last January that you 

anticipated about 11 or 1,200 wells to be drilled. I want to be 

very clear on that. Were you talking only of oil, or oil and 

natural gas? 

 

And secondly, what impact has the federal minister, Masse’s, 

incentives been. My understanding is at the time you said that 

you expected another 500 wells to b e drilled. And do you 

anticipate that we are going to be drilling the number of wells 

you said, plus what we expected from Marcel Masse? And can 

you very quickly tell me how many gas and oil wells were 

drilled as of today, or the last indication that you had? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The 11 or 1,200 . . . I believe it was 1,100 

wells that I had estimated — that’s oil wells. In reference to the 

federal program that Mr. Masse brought down, I believe that 

you will probably have a better monitoring system or an idea of 

the uptake on that program into September and October, 

because it was really not up and running, the office in Calgary, I 

believe, until the end of June or mid-July. 

 

I think, for instance, our June land sales being what they were, 

they were well over what we had estimated, is one indication of 

the success of the program, or the potential  

success. The September sale will be another indicator. 

 

And your other question was . . . the total number of wells is 

303 oil, 103 gas wells. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do you still anticipate to meet your 

target? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I’d ask the members to ask 

their questions from their feet. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, do you still anticipate to meet 

your target? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, we hope to. As I said, by the end of 

September or October we’ll have a better idea if we, in fact, are 

going to be close on that number. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — One more question. Madam Minister, the 

Provincial Auditor made a statement in his report where he says 

that, given the importance of the file, the petroleum master file, 

he indicates that you are four months behind. This is a very 

important file because it verifies the revenues and the royalties 

paid in petroleum and natural gas to your department. And in 

order for you to verify this, you must have it up to date. He’s 

very concerned about the four month delay. Can you tell me, 

have you rectified the situation, or where are we at the present 

time? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we have rectified the 

situation. We are within a month of bringing it totally up to 

date. And I think, for the member’s benefit, it is one indicator of 

the success of the incentive program because of the number of 

wells, and the increase that came on the records, and the 

department having to deal with it. But we are dealing with the 

auditor’s report. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Minister, I don’t want to prolong it. It could also 

be for lack of staff, as we found in some other areas, but I don’t 

want to get into the argument today. Madam Minister, I do have 

to ask one further question. can you tell me where the phantom 

upgrader is at — the Lloydminster upgrader? Are we on stream 

with it? Where are we at? Do you expect to make an 

announcement on it soon, or are the people that are involved in 

it, are they still insisting on a floor price, or where are we at 

with the upgrader? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, let me say this, if it’s quickly: — I 

gave the answer to the member from North Battleford, and it 

will be in Hansard tomorrow. Is that quick enough? 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 23 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 

  



 

August 14, 1987 

 

1821 

 

 

Vote 23 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, the figure for mineral 

revenues is awfully low. It’s . . . just appears inordinarily low. 

Am I . . . Is there some explanation for that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I just want to clarify so we’re talking 

about the same thing. Page 6, mineral revenues — is that what 

you’re on? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes. Yes, that’s what we’re on. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That’s extra money for auditing under the 

mineral revenues. this is supplementary. 

 

Vote 23 agreed to. 

 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Resources Division 

Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 

 

Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 1 agreed to. 

 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy Security Division 

Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 47 

 

Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 47 agreed to. 

 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Loans, Advances and 

Investments 

Energy Security Division 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 63 

 

Vote 63 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Resources Division 

Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Carried. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy Security Division 

Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 47 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Carried. 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Loans, Advances and 

Investments 

Energy Security Division 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 63 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 63 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 

 

Vote 23 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d now like to thank the officials. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to express my thanks 

to the officials for bearing with us through these estimates, and 

I also want to take this opportunity to thank the minister. I know 

we haven’t always agreed on the way we should deal with the 

resource issues, and no doubt we never will. But I think that’s 

what this forum is all about. I want to thank the minister and 

thank her officials. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I, too, would like to thank 

this Assembly for its co-operation, and a special thank you to 

the officials. We have been through a year where there has been 

some very important issues facing us, and some in the very near 

future. And I think of questions in terms of potash and uranium, 

being able to export our raw resources, are very important 

questions for the people of this province; also the issue of 

deregulation of natural gas and the effort to try and build an 

industry within this province. And the officials in the entire 

department have responded, indeed, in the best manner that they 

possibly could for the Saskatchewan people. 

 

I also want to thank my critic who often gives me forewarning 

about questions coming forward, and that gives us an 

opportunity to find some answers for him. We may have our 

political and our philosophical differences when it comes to the 

management of the resources in this province, but if there’s one 

thing that we both agree on, it is that this province is rich in 

resources. And those resources are necessary for the 

development, in an orderly fashion, for the benefit of workers 

and jobs in this province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:14 p.m. 

 

 


