













































July 30, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 July 30, 1987 

 

1491 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Extension of Crop Year 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today is 

to the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

On Tuesday we were told that the Government of Saskatchewan 

wrote to the federal government on July 9 to request an 

extension to the end of the crop year, which is tomorrow, and it 

was stated that the federal government is considering that. 

 

Since tomorrow is the last day, Mr. Minister, and many farmers 

are in difficult straits, can the minister update us on this? And 

can you tell us: has the federal government agreed to an 

extension so that all farmers can have an equal opportunity for 

delivery, so that they can make their deliveries before the drop 

of 20 per cent comes tomorrow? Can you tell us that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have been concerned for 

some times — weeks and, frankly, months — that with the drop 

in prices that farmers should be able to deliver as much grain as 

possible in this current crop year, as opposed to the 1988-89 

crop year. 

 

As a result of that, I have been in frequent contract with federal 

cabinet ministers — both in terms of the wheat board, in terms 

of the Deputy Prime Minister, in terms of members of cabinet, 

federally — from western Canada advising them to be aware of 

the fact that farmers will want to deliver as much grain as 

possible and to allow for that flexibility. 

 

Right now we have put together a position and an argument 

with the federal government that they will accommodate 

farmers who are facing particular problems, unique problems, 

so that we can get as much grain into the system as possible and 

have extensions on into August as a result of particular unique 

situations that would take place here in western Canada. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

the crop year ends tomorrow. Surely you have some indication 

from the government as to exactly what their position is on this. 

We’ve all had contacts saying, look, we need an extension. 

Farmers still don’t know what’s happening. Surely you in your 

position, talking to the federal government, have some idea and 

can tell farmers what’s happening, because tomorrow is the day. 

Can you assure us through your correspondence, and vocally or 

written, with the federal government that there will be an 

extension on the crop year beyond tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the hon.  

member that we have been in touch and in contact and in 

negotiations and informing the federal cabinet ministers of the 

deadline for some time now. We have been in contact with 

them; our members of the legislative have; our caucus 

committee, I have. We will be meeting and continue to meet 

with them to inform them of the need to extend it and to provide 

as much opportunity to deliver grain in this crop year as 

opposed to next year. 

 

So the member can rest assured that members on this side of the 

House, and certainly my staff and my caucus and the agriculture 

caucus, from the minister to the Premier’s office, has been in 

touch with both Mr. Mayer, the Minister of Agriculture, the 

Prime Minister, the deputy Prime Minister, and we will 

continue to do so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Increase in Rates by Farm Credit Corporation 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Yes, a new question, Mr. Speaker. It is clear 

that the farmers again are left in limbo by the federal 

government and this provincial government, which is very 

disappointing. 

 

My new question, Mr. Minister, is to do with the Farm Credit 

Corporation increasing their rates. They’ve increased their rates 

one and one-half, one and three-quarters per cent, which you 

will know, on a quarter section of land selling for $100,000, 

which is roughly the average Farm Credit Corporation loan, that 

means $1,500 out of every farmer’s pocket for one-quarter 

section or $10 an acre they’re going to have to add to pay that 

loan. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question: has the Government of 

Saskatchewan communicated its concern about this 

announcement to the Mulroney government? And if so, can you 

table that communication later today so the farmers will know 

exactly what position you’ve presented on their behalf? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member stands on 

his feet and says that we have again left the farmers in limbo 

with respect to interest rates and with respect to going to bat for 

them in terms of income. 

 

Let me respond, Mr. Speaker, by pointing out that this 

administration protected farmers against high interest rates 

when the former members wouldn’t even look at it. I want to 

make that very clear so when he stands up and talks about 

defending the farmers . . . the NDP have no idea what defending 

the farmers means. When it talks about farm credit interest 

rates, Mr. Speaker, they were running at 18 or 20 per cent and 

the NDP wouldn’t do a thing for farmers. So he has no business 

standing up and saying that he will defend farmers with respect 

to interest rates, FCC (Farm Credit Corporation), or deficiency 

money, or any other kind of money, because when he had the 

opportunity and his party did, they neglected to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Order. Order. 

 

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1492 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — And they can holler order all they like, 

Mr. Speaker, but they know it’s the facts, that interest rate 

protection comes from this side of the House with the PC party 

here, and not from the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

may wish to talk about the past; I am interested in the farmers’ 

difficulties of today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — I will repeat my question. With an average of 

roughly $100,000 loan, which represents about one quarter of 

land in the past the way sales went, which represents $10 an 

acre increase for a one and a half per cent increase, I ask you 

again, Mr. Minister, has your government communicated its 

concern to the federal government about the increase in the 

Farm Credit Corporation loan, and if so, what has that reply 

been? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, many people in 

Saskatchewan learned from the past, and that’s why they want 

to have an administration that will protect farmers in the future. 

Now today, Mr. Speaker, at the last ministers’ conference in 

Quebec City, Saskatchewan took the position with respect to 

lower interest rates and a stronger FCC role in providing 

interest and low interest measures to people all across Canada, 

and particularly the western farmers. 

 

That position, Mr. Speaker, was presented and is published as a 

matter of course in the fact that we attended those meetings and 

we provided information on equity financing, we provided 

information on interest rate protection, and also reviewed the 

entire package with respect to low interest loans to farmers 

from various kinds of institutions. 

 

We have met with the credit unions, with the financial 

institutions, with FCC, talked about it with the federal Minister 

of Agriculture. And it goes back for a series of years, Mr. 

Speaker, where our administration and this government has 

stood up and protected farmers and spoke on behalf of farmers 

against high interest rates. 

 

It, Mr. Speaker, was responsible for us getting elected in ’82 

and again in ’86, and we will continue to state . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

history shows us this: 1982 - 16 to 17 per cent interest rate, 

Farm Credit; Bank of Canada, 14 per cent. ‘84 - 14 to 15 per 

cent; Bank of Canada, 9 per cent. And it goes on, consistently 

higher. 

 

That’s the position the federal government has taken, and you 

have done nothing about it. Can you assure the people of 

Saskatchewan by telling them that the federal government . . . 

what your position is? Tell the people of Saskatchewan what 

your position is in relation to the federal government’s interest 

rates. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me just reiterate. I have 

put the position forward many times that interest rates have to 

be lower to farmers, both provincially and federally. And I’ve 

done it in Ottawa, and I’ve done it at national meetings with the 

first ministers, and I’ve done it at ministers of Agriculture 

meetings. I want to make that point very clear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me also point out that when no other 

administration would do it here, we provided a billion dollars at 

6 per cent interest rates — here, right in the province. And 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and members across this 

province know that 6 per cent interest rates were the best that 

they could find any place in Canada, one of the best in North 

America. As a result of the request for farmers, this 

administration acted, and we will continue to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Extension of Current Crop Year 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I’ve a question to the Minister of Agriculture, 

the Premier. And again in respect to the crop year, current crop 

year, which closes on July 31, Mr. Premier, you indicated that 

you’ve made representation to the federal government, asking 

them to extend it. 

 

I ask you: would you be prepared to table in this House what 

representations you have in fact made? Secondly, I ask you: did 

you indeed contact the federal government yesterday? And if 

indeed you haven’t, will you contact the federal government 

today and come to this House and indicate what their decision is 

so the farmers will be advised? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have been in contact with 

the federal government personally, at meetings with the Prime 

Minister, at meetings with the ministers of Agriculture. I have 

sent them correspondence. I have talked to them on the 

telephone. I meet with them quite often. And if there is anybody 

in Canada that talks to them more about agriculture, I’m not 

quite sure who it would be, except the Premier of Saskatchewan 

and the Minister of Agriculture talking to federal counterparts 

and provincial counterparts about low interest rate protection, 

about quotas, about income stabilization, about access to 

markets into the United States and other places in the world. 

 

In fact, raising for the first time I believe in some history, if not 

in Canadian history, agriculture on the table at the first 

ministers’ conferences, when we meet, is now a number one 

topic and a major issue. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. member: yes, we’re in 

constant contact — in person, by telephone, in my office, in 

their offices, and through negotiations. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. 

Mr. Premier, we agree that you do a lot of  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1493 

 

talking. What we’re concerned about is results, and I ask you 

very simply question . . . you have no decision from the federal 

government that’s what you’re saying to us here. You have 

indicated you made representations. I ask you, did you make 

representations yesterday, because today in the end of the crop 

year? If you haven’t, will you do it today, and will you report to 

the House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, again it 

shows, if I might, that the opposition are way behind when it 

comes to agriculture issues. We’ve been raising this issue for 

weeks and weeks and weeks with the federal government. It is 

now two days, Mr. Speaker, before they’re about to change the 

crop year and the opposition jumps on its feet and want to show 

the media and everybody else how concerned they are with 

agriculture. 

 

Well, they’re way behind in agriculture. We’re way ahead of 

you. We’ve been at that case for weeks and weeks and weeks. 

You just popped up and thought, well we better do something 

on agriculture because it’s the close of the crop year. Well good 

luck! 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Increase in Rates by Farm Credit Corporation 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 

Premier, and it deals with the FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) 

increases. The Premier will be aware that, according to reports, 

interest rates charged by the Farm Credit Corporation are going 

up on loans approved after July 20 — that’s a week ago. And 

the interest rates are going up by 1.5 per cent, and other figures 

even higher than that. 

 

My simple question to you is: you will know about this decision 

by the Farm Credit Corporation to raise interest rates for 

farmers; have you protested that decision to the federal 

government so that that decision can be reversed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Very briefly, Mr. Speaker. I have 

protested the high interest rate decisions by the federal 

government and by financial institutions. I have proposed 

alternatives. I have listed several things that they could do, 

including having new position taken by FCC to provide low 

interest loans to farmers and keep it low. And I have provided, 

Mr. Speaker, the lowest interest rate protection package in the 

history of Saskatchewan or Canada in my own jurisdiction. So 

on all three centres and in all three areas I believe that it’s a 

reasonable response. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m sorry 

I didn’t make myself clear. I wasn’t asking for a review of 

interest matters with the federal government or with the 

chartered banks. I’d be happy to do that on another occasion 

and can discuss the dismantling of the farm purchase program 

and that sort of thing on another occasion. 

 

Right now I am asking about the specific decision made  

by the Farm Credit Corporation in the last 10 days, or at least 

announced in the last 10 days. Will you indicate to this House 

whether you have protested that decision and whether you have 

any indication that it will be reversed. I’m asking about this 

decision. This is the one which we can do something about 

now. Have you done it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, long before the decision to 

make a change in FCC rates, we were making representation. 

And again it goes back to my argument, Mr. Speaker. We have 

been making representation for weeks and months to the federal 

government with respect to low interest loans for farmers, new 

methods of equity and new methods of credit for farmers, for 

weeks and months — not just 10 days, not just a week, or not 

just before the crop year changes. So yes, I have been making 

representation continually. 

 

Do I know what the federal government will do, or whether 

they will modify the program? I can only say I can’t speak for 

them. I’ve given them representation. I have, Mr. Speaker, 

asked on several occasions to have various kinds of 

modifications made. Some cases they do, and some cases they 

don’t. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 

Premier freely admits that he’s made representations on a broad 

range of issues involving interest rates. And obviously the 

representations have not been effective with respect to the Farm 

Credit Corporation, because after your representations they’ve 

announced an increase in rates. 

 

What I’m asking now is: in the light of the failure of your 

general representations, indicated by the fact that the FCC has 

paid no attention to them, will you now make representations 

with respect to this specific decision? Have you made them? If 

not, will you make them, so that the farmers of Saskatchewan 

can be protected against this further increase in their input costs, 

which we all know are causing serious difficulties for 

Saskatchewan farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member premises 

his remarks by saying, in the general failure of my attempts to 

change policy in Canada, will I respond now. 

 

I mean, I could say to the hon. member I have personally 

requested $1 billion for farmers. I have personally put my 

reputation on the line to receive support for farmers in this 

province. I have asked for changes with respect to elevator 

tariffs, with respect to freight rate tariffs, with respect to interest 

rates, with respect to producer cars, with respect to stabilization 

programs, and I’ve got a long list of them. 

 

So I would hate to have the hon. member leave the impression 

that: one, that I don’t defend farmers; or, two, that I haven’t 

been at least somewhat successful. 

 

I will say, in this case, I’ve asked for lower interest rates. I will 

continue to ask for lower interest rates. And I do not  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1494 

 

agree, and they know that I do not agree, with respect to the fact 

that FCC rates would increase. I’ve made that very clear. I will 

continue to make it clear. I have in the past, and I will in the 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Possible Strike of Grain Handlers 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order! Order. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — My question is to the Premier and it has to do 

with the movement of grain and our grain handling system. In 

past years, strikes at various places in the grain handling system 

have caused farmers a great deal of concern. 

 

My question has to do with press reports of a possible strike by 

unions representing railroad workers. Mr. Premier, what action 

have you taken? What discussions have you had with the 

federal government at this time? And what assurances have you 

been given? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if we could just get the 

co-operation of the members opposite, I’d be glad to address the 

question. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that farmers are concerned about the 

possibility of a general strike so that we would not be able to 

move grain. They want to be able to move grain, not only in 

terms of this crop year, but well into next crop year, because it’s 

going to be extremely important, particularly if we have good 

growing conditions. 

 

I can say this: I have been in touch with the federal government 

and, because of my concerns and others, that I will be meeting 

in my office with the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. 

Mazankowski, with Mr. McKnight, and talking about the whole 

question with respect to agriculture, with respect to interest 

rates, with respect to the strike, with respect to moving grain 

and, clearly, about extension of the crop year for farmers here in 

the province. And we’ll have a lengthy discussion at the highest 

levels we can in the cabinet office and in my office, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Collapse of Investment Firms 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, are you aware that some of the 3,000 

investors who lost their money with the collapse of First 

Investors and Associated Investors have joined together to take 

civil action? But are you also aware that most of the people who 

invested in those firms have lost their life savings and they 

don’t have enough money to join in that civil action? 

 

Since it was your government’s negligence that  

contributed to the collapse of those two firms, my question is: 

will you provide free legal advice or financial assistance to the 

investors so that all of them will have the opportunity to join in 

this civil action? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, we do not . . . 

we do not accept the premise that somehow the failure of these 

two companies are totally and . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. The member is trying to answer the question, and 

if we ask a question we should give him the opportunity to 

answer it, and I don’t think we’re doing that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, first of all we reject the 

suggestion by the hon. member that somehow it was the fault of 

the Government of Saskatchewan for the failure of the 

particular two companies. 

 

The second thing is, the solution to every problem that comes 

forward, as advanced by the member from Saskatoon Centre, is 

for the government to give free this or give free that or give free 

the next thing. Now there is in fact an action proceeding from 

people that have some of their investments. I understand that 

matter is proceeding before the courts, and that’s their right to 

do that, and it will unfold, Mr. Speaker, in the proper way of the 

court system. 

 

Government Assistance to Investors 

 

Ms. Smart: — I have a new questions, hopefully to the 

Premier, but since he isn’t answering the questions, then to the 

Minister of Justice. 

 

I want to know if you’re aware that British Columbia is 

considering this kind of assistance for investors. Lyman 

Robinson, the special investigator appointed by the B.C. 

government, says his inquiry will not only examine how the 

companies operated in British Columbia, but that he will, and I 

quote: 

 

. . . make representations to the . . . (government) . . . about 

what legal action can be taken by or on behalf of investors. 

 

So my question is, again, why won’t you help these investors 

who have no money, thanks to your negligence in failing to 

adequately regulate these companies? Why won’t your 

government help them to launch a joint civil action? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand from press 

reports that there are a number of Saskatchewan investors that 

are . . . or at least have retained counsel and are planning to 

commence legal action as a class action, as I understand from 

the press reports, with regards to this. 

 

Now the hon. member from Saskatoon Centre, as I indicated 

earlier, would have us believe, or would suggest somehow, that 

the Government of Saskatchewan 

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1495 

 

 should cover everyone’s legal costs in this particular action. 

 

Now we suggest that that is not the proper function of 

government to cover everyone’s legal costs, and as a result it 

would not be our intention to proceed that way. 

 

Potential Abuse of Gas Tax Rebates 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Finance. It deals with the 7 cent per litre PC gas 

tax. The minister has said many times that his gas tax rebate 

system is not open to abuse because the gas receipts will be 

closely audited. At the same time you claim that these cheques 

will not require a massive new government bureaucracy. You 

say the job can be done by no more than 100 students hired as a 

summer employment project. 

 

Mr. Minister, there are 650,000 licensed vehicle registrations in 

Saskatchewan. If they purchase gas an average of once per 

week, they will generate and turn in at least 33.8 million gas 

receipts. That means that each of your 100 summer students 

would have to process 338,000 gas receipts. Minister, where do 

you propose to find these super students? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Well, I wish you luck, Mr. Minister, in 

finding them, and I hope you can find them. And if you can find 

them, you should hire them now to bail out this government 

because of its fiscal mismanagement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Minister, if each of the summer students is 

required to check 338,000 gas receipts, how can you claim that 

these receipts are being carefully audited? It isn’t humanly 

possible. Why don’t you just admit that you didn’t think 

through how to deal with this red tape nightmare and that your 

rebate system is wide open to abuse? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, only an NDP would look at 

the hard way of doing something. Obviously those forms where 

the request for the rebate, the application for the rebate, is above 

the norm, would be pulled from the computer applications — 

very easily handled. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Telecommunications Service for Disabled 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, and I’ll give a copy to the 

opposition critic, Mr. Shillington, please. 

 

I’m pleased to announce, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications will begin operating an upgraded 

telecommunications service for the disabled  

effective August 1, 1987. 

 

On Saturday SaskTel will begin operating the relay service 

which was previously handled by Services for Hearing 

Impaired Persons, known as SHIP. As part of the improved 

service to the disabled, SaskTel will also administer and 

provide special telecommunications equipment previously 

handled by the Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living 

program. Registered hearing impaired persons or those wishing 

to communicate with the hearing impaired are able to do so 

through the SaskTel relay centre using a special 

telecommunications device for the deaf. 

 

SaskTel will continue to provide registered hearing impaired 

persons with free use of these units as previously supplied by 

SAIL. Hearing impaired people have been requesting better 

telephone service for some time. SaskTel will add two more 

access lines to the relay centre as part of the package of 

improvements to the service. SaskTel will assist registered users 

of the service with 50 per cent discounts for certain long 

distance and special surcharge calls under certain 

circumstances. 

 

There will be a 50 per cent discount on charges for volume 

control devices for registered hard of hearing customers, and 

free artificial larynx units will be supplied to registered speech 

impaired persons. SaskTel will assume the surcharge and 

administer the registration of telecommunication devices such 

as hands-free telephones, lightweight handsets, and automatic 

dialers, previously handled under SAIL. 

 

Detailed information on the discounts and other changes have 

been sent to all registered users and to groups which have a 

special interest in the needs of the disabled. Employees of 

Saskatchewan hearing impaired persons affected by the changes 

will receive priority in hiring by SaskTel. Normal turnover rates 

among operators should open up opportunities for SHIP 

employees who wish to work for SaskTel in the near future. 

 

I announced in the budget a monthly ability surcharge of 15 

cents per month will be added to each phone bill. I believe this 

to be a small price to pay to help improve the communication 

abilities of the disabled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

problem to which the minister has addressed himself is months 

late in coming. I and other members of this Assembly have 

been receiving complaints about this matter for some months. 

If, as this indicates, the minister has now got around to finally 

dealing with the problem, I doubt that he’s going to receive 

wide applause from those who use the service. I think their 

reaction will likely be: it’s about time. 

 

With respect to the transfer of the service, this has a number of 

troublesome aspects, one of which is that there’s going to be a 

number of employees who will be out of work. The minister 

said they will receive priority. If my job were on the line, I 

doubt that that kind of an assurance would give me very much 

comfort. I suspect that rather few of them will be able to find 

the type of  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1496 

 

employment which they had. 

 

Once again, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, we find this 

government sacrificing the interests of workers who work for 

this government and not giving it very much consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Collective Agreement with Sask Power 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise as minister 

responsible for Sask Power to offer a brief ministerial statement 

relative to a two-year collective agreement that was recently 

arrived at between Sask Power and the International 

Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local 2067. This agreement, 

Mr. Speaker, was signed yesterday. And this contract, Mr. 

Speaker, is the first major contract that conforms to the 

government guide-lines as stated by the Finance minister in his 

economic statement of March 5, 1987. 

 

As minister in charge of Sask Power, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate 

the hard work and the long hours that went into the negotiations 

which led to this agreement. Meetings began, Mr. Speaker, in 

November of 1986 and continued until May of 1987 when the 

agreement was finally arrived at. We recognize that it was a 

difficult decision for union members, and it shows that, like 

management, they recognize the financial difficulties of Sask 

Power and are prepared to be part of the solution, part of the 

corporations’ recovery plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As the House is aware, Mr. Speaker, Sask Power currently 

carries a debt of $2.3 billion. It requires 40 cents out of every 

revenue dollars, Mr. Speaker, just to service the existing debt. 

As minister for Sask Power, I appreciate the impact the union’s 

decision will have on the financial recovery of the corporation. 

By their responsible actions, Mr. Speaker, they are allowing the 

corporation some time to operating without incurring additional 

financial burden which it cannot afford at this time. 

 

I would like to thank the union members for their support of the 

corporation’s decision. The team spirit demonstrated at Sask 

Power is the kind of team spirit, Mr. Speaker, that I would 

encourage other bargaining units in the province to use in their 

negotiations. Consideration must be given to the financial 

constraints under which departments and Crowns and in fact all 

businesses are operating in today’s economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has experienced some difficult 

economic times as a result of the prices of those commodities 

that we deal in — potash, uranium, wheat, etc. However, with 

our knowledge, determination, and ability to adapt, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan people will always succeed. 

 

Commitment to Saskatchewan is everyone’s responsibility, and 

actions such as those of the employees of Sask Power, Mr. 

Speaker, will eventually . . . whether the members opposite like 

it or not, the actions of the employees of Sask Power, Mr. 

Speaker, will eventually benefit everyone in the province. And 

for that, we appreciate it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to note initially that nothing the deputy . . . none of the facts that 

the Deputy Premier referred to are unknown. Indeed, this is all 

information that’s weeks old. And I wonder about the limits of 

ministerial statements, when ministers simply comment on 

events that have taken place in the past. 

 

With respect to the specific contract, let me point out to 

members of the House that the problems which SPC experience 

come about largely because of the mismanagement of that 

corporation, not the least of which is you have replaced career 

public servants with political hacks who don’t know how to — 

at $200,000 a year — who don’t know how to run a 

corporation. And that is not, to put it mildly, the least of that 

corporation’s problems. 

 

It seems a trifle unfair, Mr. Speaker, that workers are asked to 

accept a disproportionate share of this burden, as they are being 

asked to do. The SPC employees probably had no choice. That 

doesn’t make it fair. It doesn’t make it fair that they should 

experience, in real terms, a decline in their wages while you 

people go on squandering public funds and managing that 

corporation like a bunch of drunken soldiers. They may not 

have any choice, but what we heard today, Mr. Speaker, is not 

fair; it’s not fair to the workers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Reduction on Long Distance Telephone Call Rates 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — A second ministerial statement, Mr. 

Speaker. As minister responsible for SaskTel, I am announcing 

today that long distance rates for direct-dialled, out-of-province 

calls will be reduced an average of 5 per cent effective August 

1, 1987. The new rates take into consideration the time and type 

of call and the distance involved. There will be reduction in 

rates for 11 of the 18 categories used by telephone companies to 

determine long distance charges. 

 

These reductions apply to calls placed to points outside 

Saskatchewan. Most SaskTel customers will enjoy decreases of 

from 1 to 14 per cent under the new rate schedule. As part of 

the change, there will be a revision to the way costs are 

calculated for operator handled station-to-station and 

person-to-person calls. However, there will be no change to the 

discount hours and discount rates currently offered for 

direct-dialled, long distance calls, made in the evening, 

overnight, or on Sunday. 

 

Details of the new rate schedule will be published in new 

SaskTel phone directories and will be available soon from 

SaskTel business office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskTel customers have not had a general rate 

increase since 1983. The corporation is able to carry out its 

ambitious plans to be the first telecommunications system in 

North America to bring individual line service to virtually all of 

its customers, and the ongoing program  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1497 

 

to convert the system to digital switching technology without 

requiring the kind of double-digit rate increases we have seen 

by some other telephone companies. 

 

I’m proud to say that because of the commitment of this 

government and good management by the people at SaskTel, 

Saskatchewan people are being charged the lowest monthly 

rates for basic local service in Canada. And this was confirmed 

by a consultant study last fall which examined all the telephone 

systems across Canada, using a complex formula to even out 

the wide variety of conditions telephone companies operate 

under. 

 

SaskTel will continue to provide high-quality communication 

services and to introduce improvements as new technologies 

become available, at the lowest possible cost to our customers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I want to applaud the government on one 

humanitarian gesture. Parents who now have to phone their 

children because they had to go to Ontario to seek work will 

now be able to make use of this. And I know the minister . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — The province might have been as well 

served, Mr. Speaker, if the children hadn’t had to go to Ontario 

in the first place. 

 

I just want to make one comment with respect to this, and that 

is that these reductions in long distance rates are to come about 

and are taking place throughout Canada. It occurs, not because 

this government has managed this Crown corporation 

exceptionally well; it comes about because of changes in 

technology. Other telephone companies, including the Bell 

Canada system, have reduced their rates. This government is 

following on the heels of that. 

 

We all, of course, applaud the technology which makes this 

possible. It’s a bit, I think, silly for the minister to claim that 

this action which follows out of other companies comes about 

because of anything they’ve done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 

 

At 10:42 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bill: 

 

Bill No. 25 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 

of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year ending on 

March 31, 1988 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:43 a.m. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, with 

leave of the Assembly: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the hon. members for 

Last Mountain-Touchwood, Redberry, Shaunavon, 

Moosomin, Arm River, Prince Albert and Moose Jaw 

South from Monday, July 20 to Friday, July 24, 1987, for 

their attendance on behalf of this Assembly at the 27th 

Regional Conference of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association in Saskatchewan. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1045) 

 

POINTS OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of 

the day, I wish to raise a point of order with respect to today’s 

question period. It also relates back to at least two other 

question periods. And in specifics, Mr. speaker, it pertains to 

the recognition of the hon. member from Kelvington, a member 

of the government side — in fact, I believe, Legislative 

Secretary to the Minister of Agriculture and Premier, himself — 

in the midst of question period, to ask a question. 

 

My point of order, briefly states, is based on these grounds. It is 

my contention, Mr. Speaker, that the question period is the 

forum, the primary forum, for the official opposition in the 

Legislative Assembly to ask questions of government members. 

It is not a situation which pertains for government members 

who have easy access to members of the cabinet, both in caucus 

meetings and in other forums. This is not a situation which is 

one that is recognized on a wide basis in any other jurisdiction. 

And to do so, I argue, Mr. Speaker, breaks the precedent and 

breaks the flow of question period but, more importantly, denies 

the official opposition its proper role of questioning members of 

the Executive Council. 

 

More specifically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the specific case of 

the member from Kelvington . . . And I raise this although it’s 

out of time, but by way of buttressing the argument today, in 

the case of the member from Wascana who, I believe, is the 

Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Education and 

continuing education, and to the member form . . . Gerich? 

Gerich? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Redberry. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Redberry, who also raised some questions, 

who is the official Whip; I argue that the authorities specifically 

deny their right to ask the questions. 

 

I draw to your attention, sir, in particular, from Beauchesne’s, 

page 134, point 370, questions by parliamentary secretaries: 

 

Those such as Parliamentary Secretaries (and I  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1498 

 

here now quote) who are clothed with the responsibility of 

answering for the Government ought not to use the time of 

the Question Period for the privilege of asking questions 

of the Government. Debates, November 5, 1974 . . . 

 

Now here is the incredible situation. In fact I would argue, Mr. 

Speaker, the ludicrous situation of the Legislative Secretary to 

the Minister of Agriculture asking the Minister of Agriculture, 

in government time, on the legislative time, questions which 

could have been answered by simply release of a press release 

to the press. 

 

And so I close my point, Mr. Speaker, by saying that what has 

happened heretofore, albeit out of time with respect to the 

member from Wascana, the member from Redberry, and in, 

today, the case from Kelvington, is out of order, and I say, Mr. 

Speaker, is the kind of thing which denies the opposition what it 

is intended and should be doing, and that is, asking the 

government questions so the government can answer the 

questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the point 

of order, I just want to point out that while the leader of the . . . 

the government leader, I mean the House Leader for the 

opposition is eloquent as usual, he’s not terribly accurate. In 

fact . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — As usual. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — As usual. In fact, Mr. Speaker, he 

knows that legislative secretaries do not answer for the 

government in this legislature. And in fact legislative secretaries 

never, never answer — never answer for government in this 

Chamber. And so the quote or the citation from Beauchesne’s 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The citation from Beauchesne’s, Mr. 

Speaker, is not particularly relevant in this case. 

 

Secondly, he made the suggestion, Mr. Speaker, that in all other 

jurisdictions, back-benchers from the government side of the 

House were not permitted to ask questions. That’s . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. The 

member from Saskatoon has made his point of order, and now 

we’re getting a response, and we’ll rule on it later. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I know that it bothers them to hear the 

facts as they really are, but I know that in the House of 

Commons, Mr. Speaker, back-benchers do ask questions. I 

know that in Alberta back-benchers on the government side of 

the House do, in fact, have an opportunity to ask questions, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would think that any reasonable person . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Fair-minded. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — . . . fair-minded person that’s had any 

experience in this House knows the past practice of this House 

has been that from time to time back-benchers  

on the government side have been allowed to answer questions. 

And I would not want to see that change. I think that relevant 

questions from any back-bencher should be in order when they 

in fact get the recognition of Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while I’m reluctant to inject any humour into this, because 

it’s a very serious order raised by the member, I would say that 

most relevant, important questions, do come from the 

back-benchers on the government side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the same point 

of order, the Deputy Premier has made reference to the 

precedents established in the House of Commons. And at least, 

in part, when those precedents were established in the House of 

Commons, I was there to watch it happen. And so I have a little 

experience with that particular situation. 

 

And as I recall the situation in the House of Commons, Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to questions being asked by government 

members of the government during question period, the 

precedent was as follows: 

 

First of all, the question had to be clearly legitimate and not a 

set-up. And I recall in this question period today, one of the 

members of the official opposition shouted, “set-up,” across the 

floor, and the Deputy Premier responded, “Of course it is.” 

That, I think, Mr. Speaker, undercuts the issue of legitimacy in 

terms of the particular incident that occurred today. 

 

The second matter that was emphasized in the precedent of the 

House of Commons, is that parliamentary secretaries or their 

counterparts here, legislative secretaries, would be specifically 

ineligible — not exclusively, because on occasion they would 

be called to answer for the government, but because of their 

obvious closeness to cabinet. And, Mr. Speaker, the simple fact 

that they are paid additional salaries because of their closeness 

to cabinet and their additional responsibilities because of that 

closeness to cabinet, I think makes the point that their questions 

in question period would not be at arm’s length and therefore 

legitimate in the understanding of that term in this place. 

 

And the final part of the precedent from the House of 

Commons, as I recall it, Mr. Speaker, is that in the case of 

government back-benchers as opposed to parliamentary 

secretaries. In the case of government back-benches asking 

legitimate arm’s length questions which would be proper and 

allowed, that they were allowed to ask the question, but as I 

recall it, Mr. Speaker, there was never an opportunity for 

supplementaries to follow upon the initial question being asked 

by a government member. 

 

In terms of a back-bencher, legitimately defined as such, at 

arm’s length from the cabinet, at arm’s length from the 

government, Mr. Speaker, I think those questions can be 

regarded as legitimate. But in the case of questions being asked 

by legislative secretaries, Mr. Speaker, I think the precedent 

from the House of Commons would indicate that those are 

traditionally not allowed. 

 

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1499 

 

And in any case where a government question is regarded as in 

order, no supplementary would be allowed. That is the 

precedent from the House of Commons, as I recall it. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to speak to 

this point of order briefly since I was one of the people who was 

mentioned by the House Leader on the opposition. I, first of all, 

make the point that my question was a supplementary, 

following questions by the agriculture critic on the opposition 

benches. And secondly, I was elected by a body of people 

largely agricultural, and I feel that I have a right to ask 

questions on behalf of my people. I would really feel very, very 

hurt if this Assembly would try to deny the right of any member 

to ask a question on behalf of the people who . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also participate and 

make a brief intervention. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Obviously this 

point of order is capturing a lot of interest, and I intend to allow 

hon. members who wish to make a statement, make a statement. 

But I’d like to ask you to allow them to be heard. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also make a very brief 

intervention. The hon. member from Saskatoon Riversdale of 

course referred to Beauchesne’s, and I think it’s very accurate 

and very clear in Beauchesne’s that legislative secretaries do 

not ask questions in this legislative forum. 

 

And since the House of Commons was used as a precedent, and 

that’s been mentioned by another member of this Assembly, I 

would like to say that in my experience there — in the four and 

one-half years I spent in the House of Commons — I never 

once saw the Speaker recognize a Legislative Secretary, or in 

that case a Parliamentary Secretary, to ask a question in 

question period. It’s non-existent and such an individual rising 

in their place in the House of Commons would not be 

recognized to ask a question. 

 

The only time that I, in my experience in the House of 

Commons, in the four and one-half or so years that I was there, 

the only time I ever saw the Speaker recognize a Parliamentary 

Secretary, which is the equivalent to a Legislative Secretary 

here, was to answer a question on behalf of the government 

because the minister, in fact, was not there. 

 

And I believe that it’s very, very clear that the precedents for 

this legislature is drawn from the British parliamentary system, 

originating across the water, and from there from the Parliament 

of Canada, and that’s how some of this tradition is built up for 

this Assembly as well. 

 

And I find it flying in the face of the democratic and 

parliamentary institutions across Canada that the government 

members opposite think that they can change hundreds of years 

of tradition that have been built up so that the people’s voice 

can have a place in a forum in the Legislative Assembly such as 

this, Mr. Speaker.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to rise in support of 

this point of order. For me, as a member on the opposition 

bench, it’s very important to have the full question period for us 

to have the opportunity to question the government. But 

obviously the members on the back benches, on the government 

side, are having as much trouble getting answers out of the 

Premier as we are on the opposition side. 

 

And so I would support you . . . to have a ruling in our favour, 

but I want to point out that obviously they’re having trouble on 

that side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I thank the hon. member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale for raising this issue, and it’s an issue which I will 

study carefully, and review, and bring back my decision to the 

House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order, 

and it deals with the supplementary by the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena. And I would like you to check the record 

to see, and see whether in your judgement a supplementary 

dealing with — was it strikes? — is an appropriate 

supplementary to the particular question we were dealing with, 

a narrow question with respect to Farm Credit Corporation 

interest rates. 

 

If supplementaries are going to expand the ambit to that extent, 

then it strikes me that the question period is going to become 

quite unstructured as supplementaries wander all over the map, 

as I suggest that one did, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I thank the Leader of the Opposition for 

bringing that matter to my attention, and I will review the 

record. 

 

(1100) 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, as we proceed into these 

education estimates, I want to advise the minister about the 

methods that he has been subjected to by his government that 

has led to a situation where, for the first time in my lifetime, at 

least, that education has been depriorized by a government. 

 

Several months ago and several years ago we had a statement 

by this government that said that education was going to 

become on of the pillars of this government. This whole 

approach has been abandoned, Mr. Chairman. We are finding 

that at this stage the government has abandoned their plan on 

education as a   



 

July 30, 1987 

1500 

 

priority, and they’ve made cutting the deficit as their priority. 

 

This has resulted of course, Mr. Chairman, not be a desire by 

the people of Saskatchewan or the educators of Saskatchewan; 

it has resulted because of the government’s mismanagement 

and the result of being a $3.4 billion debt. They have betrayed 

the education system, Mr. Chairman. Money has been diverted 

from education to pay for the shortfall in oil revenue, to make 

up for the shortfall in oil revenue of $1.5 billion; to pay the 

likes of Peter Pocklington, total of $20 million; to pay for the 

shortfall of the money that has not been received from 

Weyerhaeuser, a total of $248 million, where the mill was sold, 

nothing has come back. And where’s the money’s coming 

from? 

 

Instead of the Minister of Education standing up and speaking 

for — speaking for the children of the province, and speaking 

for improving programs in the province, we have had cut-backs. 

cut-backs to school board of 1 per cent; cut-backs to the 

educational development fund, which was originally announced 

as a five-year plan, extending the time, inconveniencing school 

boards. Many school boards have had to borrow additional 

money as a result of that. Cut-backs to the university, to the 

extent that university enrolment had to be limited in the College 

of Arts & Science for the first time. Cut-backs to the University 

of Regina to the extent that they are now forced to scrap some 

of their programs, in particular the School of Human Justice and 

the School of Social Work in Prince Albert and in Saskatoon. 

 

It’s a betrayal. It’s a betrayal of education. It’s based on the 

mismanaged fiscal affairs of this province. 

 

I didn’t hear, during the campaign, Mr. Chairman, anybody — 

let alone any cabinet minister — asking that school grants be 

cut. Asking . . . Or I didn’t hear any minister saying that school 

grants would be cut. I didn’t hear that educational development 

fund was one of the proposals, an extension of that from five 

years to ten years. I didn’t hear, in the campaign, that the 

community college system was going to be usurped, was going 

to be taken over. I didn’t hear, in the campaign, that university 

enrolment was going to be limited because as the result of the 

mismanagement of this government. 

 

No, the public was deceived. All we heard was, keep on 

building Saskatchewan. Well there are two projects in my very 

own constituency where the people did want to build. The 

schools — the Riverside School and the St. John’s School are 

still not started; the renovations are still not started. The 

understanding was that they should have been started. We 

started . . . This government started by mismanaging the 

financial affairs, and it turned then to deceit during the time of 

the election. 

 

Now I’m saying that those cuts did not have to be made, Mr. 

Chairman. Those cuts did not have to be made. The minister 

had, as a duty, to uphold the adequate and substantial financing 

to the Department of Education. There was no reason to ask the 

Department of Education, as there was no reason to ask the 

Department of Health, to take less money so that we could pay 

for the $1.5 billion  

shortfall from the oil companies; so that we could pay for the 

Peter Pocklingtons; so that we could end up paying for the likes 

of the Minister of Justice to fly to a wedding in Calgary. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What has that got to do with these 

estimates? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — The minister says, what has it got to do with 

these estimates? It has everything to do with these estimates, 

because if that hadn’t have happened, if this government wasn’t 

mismanaged, then Education wouldn’t be cut the way it’s been 

cut. Mismanagement of the Department of Education starts 

right at the top, Mr. Minister. Last day these estimates were 

being talked about, the minister indicated to us that three out of 

the four top aides in his department, after the firings, have 

limited experience in education in Saskatchewan. The 

continuity has been broken. Why? Because their priority is the 

deficit, not education. 

 

That move was not based on sound educational principles. The 

move to do that was based, and I repeat again, on a $3.4 billion 

deficit. It was made as a result of the $1.5 billion shortfall in oil. 

It was based on selling the Weyerhaeuser plant for . . . plant to 

Weyerhaeuser for 248 million and not getting a dollar in return. 

And because they would prefer to give money to the likes of the 

Minister of Justice to fly to Calgary, or Peter Pocklington — 20 

million, or former minister Dirks to do a study for 30,000 when 

there were a lot of people in the department that could have 

done it. 

 

The minister says he’s accelerating the development of the core 

curriculum. I say you’re mismanaging what’s happened in the 

core curriculum. The corporate memory belonging to all the 

people that were working on that in the department, that you got 

rid of, are gone. You are switching horses mid-stream. And I 

call that mismanagement, because if you really had a 

commitment to follow through on the goals established in the 

Directions guide, then you wouldn’t have gotten rid of the top 

people involved; you wouldn’t have gotten rid of the continuity 

in there. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question to you is: how could you let the 

children of Saskatchewan, how could you let the educators in 

Saskatchewan and the parents of the Saskatchewan, how could 

you stand there as Minister of Education and let the priorities be 

switched from education to paying for a deficit that was not 

created by education? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, in 

his opening remarks and question, the member from Prince 

Albert talked about these kinds of things. Talked about, in his 

mind at least, how I and our government have, to use his word 

again, depriorized education. And I thank the Clerk’s Table 

there for allowing me the use of their dictionary to check on the 

word “depriorize,” and I don’t find it in there. 

 

And even if I had, how does he really stack that kind of rhetoric 

up against the record . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 

member from Moose Jaw North talks about, let’s get serious. 

Well I ask any fair-minded person, any  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1501 

 

fair-minded person in this legislature, or watching these 

proceedings on television, what would a fair-minded person 

conclude if he was to pick up the Estimates document which we 

are studying today, and when it comes to Education, we’re 

going to vote approval for something over three-quarters of a 

billion dollars — the highest number ever in the province of 

Saskatchewan’s history when it comes to Education. 

 

Now certainly some will argue, some will argue, but yes, Mr. 

Minister, but the new Department of Education is larger that it’s 

ever been. It’s a combination of the traditional K to 12, plus 

now the post-secondary education, plus Saskatchewan libraries. 

So I’m prepared to submit to the test of comparing apples to 

apples and oranges to oranges. 

 

And when that fair-minded person takes a look at what was 

spent last year on the K to 12 side, and what was spent last year 

on post-secondary education and on libraries, and compares that 

total number, this year’s blue book, the last year’s book, you 

add it all up and you make the fair comparison, the number 

comes out larger, Mr. Chairman. 

 

So it seems to me when a fair-minded person stands back and 

say, well if the government is depriorizing, to use the member 

from . . . a word that may or may not exist, depriorizing 

education, how does that stack up with the fact that we’re 

spending more on education that we ever have in this province 

before? How does that stack up with the fact that we’re 

spending three-quarters of a billion dollars on education this 

year? 

 

And I’ll tell you why we’re spending it, Mr. Chairman. It’s 

because the people of this province view education as a priority. 

They view it as a priority. And that’s why we’re prepared to put 

the dollars behind it. That’s more than we collect in income tax. 

Because if that same fair-minded person was to look through 

that budget document, Mr. Chairman, they would find that that 

amount of money spent on education is more than we collect 

from the single largest source of revenue from the public purse 

in this province. 

 

So when the hon. member from Prince Albert . . . In fact, when 

you talk about depriorizing education in this province, that is 

the typical, inflamed, distorted rhetoric that has become a trade 

mark of the benches opposite. Every fair-minded person knows 

that that doesn’t make sense. In fact, they would argue that 

that’s a nonsensical statement. 

 

I mean, I’m prepared to stand here, Mr. Chairman, and debate 

common sense. I’m prepared to stand here and debate . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Minister, why didn’t you 

increase the budget by 10 per cent in this area if there’s a 10 per 

cent demand, or 2 per cent here. Or why didn’t you drop that if 

there was no more use for it, or why couldn’t you have had a 4 

per cent increase here, or a 6 per cent, or whatever? 

 

But to stand here and make a blanket statement that is 

absolutely nonsensical, that somehow education has been 

depriorized, a word that Webster is not familiar  

with, does simply not make sense. It absolutely is a silly 

argument. 

 

And he went on to further say that we aren’t somehow standing 

up or speaking for the children of this province. He went to say 

that we are somehow not standing up or speaking up for the 

children of this province. 

 

Well, I would ask all members of this legislature to check the 

something close to nine hours that we have had for Education 

estimates in this province and check the record, check Hansard, 

and let’s see who has talked about teachers in the classroom and 

the students and the children. Has it been the opposition critics 

on the occasions that they’ve been here? And the answer 

clearly, Mr. Chairman, is no. 

 

What have they been concerned about? What has the focus of 

their questioning been? Well, did this administrator lose his 

job? Well, did these six administrators lose their jobs? Mr. 

Chairman, I am in total agreement that we have to have 

administrators, and we have very good ones. But I am even 

more concerned about what’s happening at the front line. I’m 

more concerned about what’s happening in the classrooms. I’m 

more concerned about whether we have teachers in front of the 

chalkboards. I’m more concerned about what the students are 

having in terms of programming, what are they getting in terms 

of an education. 

 

(1115) 

 

And I’ll . . . you could check through Hansard for the last nine 

hours on the debate in the estimates in Education. You’ve got to 

look hard to find the words: student, education, excellence, 

accessibility, standards, quality — the kinds of things that I 

think the public out there are wanting to be reassured about, Mr. 

Chairman, and rightfully so. 

 

If I was the public out there today, a parent, and I stood before 

my television or sat before my television on a given night, or 

read the newspapers — certainly there is much talk of 

cut-backs, Mr. Chairman; not rightly, but there is a great deal of 

talks about cut-backs. And it doesn’t stack up when you look at 

the record, and I’ve put some of this into the record before: a 60 

per cent increase since our government took over; pupil-teacher 

ratios are lower than they’ve ever been. 

 

In fact, Mr. Chairman, let’s look at the K to 12 system — let’s 

look at the K to 12 system — and what have we done for the 

children of this province in the K to 12 system? Well first of all, 

when the NDP were in government, Mr. Speaker, when the 

NDP were in government, their last year there was something 

like 204,000 people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 

Chairman, if the hon. member from Moose Jaw North wants up, 

I’ll sit down and we can take his question. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’d 

like to change the focus of the Education estimates to look 

specifically at the community college system this morning and 

to debate what’s happening in the community college system in 

this province. 

 

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1502 

 

It’s our view, Mr. Chairman, that we are seeing a fundamental 

change in the approach to education in Saskatchewan that the 

government is choosing to take. And we are also seeing what is 

in effect the abandonment of the mandate that the community 

college system in this province had prior to the re-election of a 

PC government in this province in 1986. 

 

I think, Mr. Chairman, that we are seeing in this province a 

switch towards an education policy that is more focused on the 

job market and that is less focused on education as a life-long 

experience. A move away from things like education for 

personal enrichment. A move away from the colleges’ role to 

promoting community development. This government, Mr. 

Chairman, has essentially narrowed its approach to education in 

this province. It’s narrowed it to focus primarily on training and 

to move away from the view of education for citizenship and 

for community betterment. 

 

Now we on this side of the Assembly, Mr. Chairman, do not 

object to seeing more university and technical institute 

programs being offered through the community colleges 

throughout rural Saskatchewan. In fact if the government 

proceeds with this action, we commend the government for it. 

We haven’t seen much of that to date, Mr. Chairman. In fact 

what we have witnessed in this province has to date been a 

significant cut-back in university and technical institute 

extension courses. 

 

And one needs only to look at the role of the University of 

Saskatchewan and the University of Regina in this province to 

see that because of the underfunding of this government 

because of a two-year budget freeze to those two university 

institutions, the number of courses that they are able to offer 

through the community college system in many centres in this 

province has been significantly reduced. 

 

I say to the minister, the cuts that he and his government have 

forced upon the University of Regina has in effect forced the 

University of Regina in turn to very, very substantially cut back 

on the role of the School of Social Work and the School of 

Human Justice in Saskatchewan to the point where the 

community education centre which offers social work programs 

in Prince Albert faces the prospect of being phased out, as does 

the one in Saskatoon. 

 

And the School of Social Work in this province will almost 

certainly have to pare back the extension courses that it offers 

throughout Saskatchewan in centres like Swift Current, 

Uranium City, Yorkton, almost certainly, Mr. Minister, as the 

School of Human Justice and the School of Social Work have 

made very clear, extension courses will be cut back, not 

advanced, as you claim. 

 

And one of the things I ask the Minister of Education to address 

when he next rises to his feet, is how many new university and 

technical institute courses through the community college 

system are we going to see offered this fall? Because to date 

we’ve seen little evidence of this new extension program that 

you talk about. All we’ve seen are consistent examples of 

cut-backs in extension. 

 

And we saw another very good example when the  

University of Saskatchewan was forced to announce as a result 

of its budget restraints that 41 medical staff, most of whom 

were teaching staff in Regina, were going to have to be fired 

because of the funding cut-backs of your government, sir. So 

we’ve seen extension services in Regina cut back. We’ve seen 

the community education centres in Saskatoon and Prince 

Albert being forced to phase out. We’ve seen the School of 

Social Work indicate that it will have to cut back on its 

extension programming. 

 

One of the most . . . I think one of the most excellent examples 

of a good extension service in this province, sir, was the service 

offered by the School of Social Work at the University of 

Regina, in conjunction with the community colleges of this 

province. And as a result of your funding cut-backs, what we’re 

seeing is not an advance in extension programming, but a 

cut-back in extension programming in the area of social work. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, it’s also our view that your government in 

conjunction with the federal government is also taking a more 

narrow view to education. And this is largely as a result of the 

agreement that you have signed - the Canadian Jobs Strategy 

agreement - that you have signed with the Government of 

Canada. You are in effect taking a more narrow approach to 

adult basic education as well. It’s the view of members on this 

side of the House that we ought to be taking a broad approach 

to education, and that in grade 1 to 12 training, students ought 

to be encouraged not to pursue education with a view to a 

specific job until they finish grade 12, but rather that they ought 

to pursue education as a broad-based experience, and when they 

complete their grade 12, then they ought to train for a specific 

job. 

 

And what the Canadian Jobs Strategy agreement that you have 

signed with the federal government is all about, sir, is 

narrowing the focus of education and requiring students to 

specifically focus on training for a particular job before they 

complete their grade 12. And in fact, if they don’t have grade 

10, they’re not eligible for Canadian Jobs Strategy money at all. 

And we think that’s a very, very unfortunate aspect of the 

agreement. 

 

We believe, sir, that your government is moving away from the 

original principles established when community colleges were 

first set up, moving away from a decentralized 

community-based college system, particularly in the urban 

centres, towards a centralized system that’s going to be run out 

of Regina. And we say that that’s a very, very negative move. 

 

Now you, sir, as Minister of Education, have claimed that you 

are going to have a new emphasis in areas like battling literacy, 

for which we commend you. But we do not see how that 

squares with your decision to dramatically cut back funding to 

the provincial library system in this province, which was to be 

the key resource base for the community colleges. And your 

attack, particularly on the library systems in Saskatoon and 

Regina, does not square with your commitment to fighting 

illiteracy in this province, and it does not square with the fact 

that the library system was to be one of the basic resources for 

the community college system in Saskatchewan. 

 

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1503 

 

Now we say that you are fundamentally altering the mandate of 

community colleges in Saskatchewan. And I want to, in 

substantiating that point, provide a little bit of history with 

respect to the development of community colleges in this 

province. 

 

And I want to take the minister back to the time when we last 

had a right-wing government in this province, prior to the 

election of your government, sir, and point out that originally in 

1944, in fact, in Saskatchewan, an adult education division was 

established in this province. And I think that the role of that 

adult education division is very informative. 

 

It was the . . . Its aims were to fight illiteracy and, particularly, 

to . . . The department was charged with providing appropriate 

and acceptable study material on any topic of interest to a group 

of citizens who aim at constructive action in the community. In 

other words, it had a very strong community development 

focus. 

 

The adult education branch, that was set up in 1944, gained 

national and international recognition. From 1950 to 1955 there 

were expanded efforts in regional co-ordination, and extensive 

programs in the arts, public affairs, international affairs, and 

human relations were all set up, all the kinds of things, by the 

way, Mr. Minister, that you are no longer encouraging in the 

current college system. 

 

But something very interesting happened after the election of 

the Liberal government of the 1960s, because in 1966, Mr. 

Minister, that branch, which had gained international 

recognition, was phased out by the Liberal government. It was 

phased out of existence, and the emphasis in adult education 

shifted away from community programming and focused on 

technical training in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, when the New Democratic Party was 

re-elected in 1971, we were committed to establishing a 

community-based, decentralized education system, adult 

education system, again in this province. And we undertook, in 

contrast to the actions of your government, we undertook, at the 

time, a very, very extensive consultation process to put that 

system in place. There were over 1,900 people who came to 

specially organized meetings around the province to have input 

into the establishment of the community system in the period 19 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — When was this? 

 

Mr. Prebble: — The minister asked, when was this? And I say 

to the minister, in the period 1972-73. 

 

There were 1,900 people who attended community college 

meetings, and another 1,000 people who were involved in other 

public meetings that discussed the establishment of a 

community college system, a system, sir, that you have now 

chosen to dismantle after organizing a few consultation 

meetings around the province, none of which were open - none 

of which were open, that were organized by invitation only. 

Any of the feedback that I’ve had as a result of those 

consultation meetings demonstrates that you have no mandate 

from  

those meetings to essentially dismantle a large part of the 

community college system in this province. I suggest to you, 

sir, that you had already decided to do that before those 

consultation meetings ever took place. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I want to remind you for a minute what the 

purpose of the community college system in this province was 

to be. The purpose, Mr. Minister, of the community college 

system was largely in . . . was first of all, it was a system largely 

set up to meet the needs of rural Saskatchewan. It was to be a 

decentralized system. The community college was to act as a 

co-ordinator of learning resources in the community. It was to 

provide essentially a central base to ensure that community 

educational resources were not underutilized but rather were 

fully utilized. It was to be a system that was to emphasize 

non-credit courses and that was to emphasize personal 

enrichment courses. 

 

(1130) 

 

And I say to you, sir, that you are essentially dismantling a 

large part of that system, particularly in the urban centres today. 

And in rural Saskatchewan, you have basically done away with 

all personal enrichment courses. And in many rural community 

college systems, those courses constituted anywhere from 30 to 

50 per cent of the college’s activities. 

 

And therefore, sir, your actions, the actions of your government, 

are essentially setting about fundamentally changing that 

system. And we say, sir, that that system has been serving rural 

Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan well. We have not 

heard any requests from either the community college boards or 

from the public that the mandate of community colleges ought 

to have been fundamentally changed. 

 

On the contrary, there was strong public support for the 

mandate of community colleges. And we say that it was simply 

a desire of your government to change the system, and not a 

desire of the public, that has led to the current changes. 

 

We want to raise another concern that relates to community 

colleges and a fundamental shift in your approach to education, 

because one of the fears that we have on this side of the House 

is that the actions of your government are leading towards 

encouraging the privatizing of adult education in this province. 

And we on this side of the House, Mr. Minister, strongly 

oppose that approach to privatization. 

 

We say that education ought to be publicly funded, ought to be 

a publicly accessible service, and that your government and the 

federal government ought not to be in the business of 

encouraging private educational institutions, setting up 

educational programming for profit. We say that that’s not in 

the interests of the students of this province, and it’s not in the 

interests of the Saskatchewan public generally. 

 

And this, Mr. Minister, relates directly to the decision that you 

have made in conjunction with the federal government to sign 

an agreement for large pools of money through the Canadian 

Jobs Strategy program to be 

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1504 

 

 made available to private profit educational institutions in this 

province. 

 

And what we are getting into in Saskatchewan at this point, Mr. 

Minister, is a situation where your government and the federal 

government are in effect encouraging small private companies 

to get into educational programming. And that, if course, that 

move is directly connected with the decision of your 

government had made to cut back on technical institute 

programming that is offered both at the institutes and through 

the community college system in parts of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, we say that that move jeopardizes 

educational quality in this province. We on this side of the 

House, Mr. Minister, think that it’s absurd to set up a system in 

which community colleges are going to be bidding with private 

educational institutions for educational contracts through the 

Canadian Jobs Strategy funding offered by the federal 

government. We think its’ absurd that you signed a contract 

with the federal government that sets that system in place. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I want to point out to you what some of the 

obvious weaknesses of this system are going to be. 

 

First of all, Mr. Minister, there are inadequate provisions to 

ensure that quality education is going to be offered under these 

Canadian Jobs Strategy contracts. In fact, Mr. Minister, we on 

this side of the House say that in many cases it won’t be. There 

are no provisions, Mr. Minister, to ensure that fair salaries are 

paid to the employees of private companies under these 

contracts. In fact we say that many contracts will go to private 

companies only because they pay their staff far less than the 

staff of the community college system would be paid. And 

when you pay your staff significantly less, you can expect 

significantly reduced educational quality. 

 

We on this side of the House, Mr. Minister, say that there’s no 

assurance that the programs offered through the Canadian Jobs 

Strategy program, that those contracts run by private companies 

will necessarily ensure that qualified staff are hired. I’ve seen 

some of the ads that have been running lately in the 

Star-Phoenix and the Leader-Post for people in areas like 

life-skill training to be put on by private companies. And I note 

that those ads often don’t require very specific qualifications for 

the people who are doing the instructions, certainly no 

requirements for university degrees. 

 

We say, Mr. Minister, we say that the diplomas and certificates 

that are offered by these small, private, profit-oriented 

educational institutions that you are encouraging to be 

established in this province will have . . . the diplomas and the 

certificates that those companies offer will have no national 

recognition in Saskatchewan. 

 

What is it going to mean, Mr. Minister, if a hairdressing salon 

that puts on a cosmetology course, not that it’s been cancelled 

at Kelsey or Wascana, what’s a diploma by that hairdressing 

salon going to mean to a student who moves to Winnipeg or 

moves to Montreal? 

 

Or if . . . you’ve cancelled things like truck driver training  

and heavy equipment operation at Kelsey, so a private trucking 

company puts on a trucking course instead. What kind of 

recognition is the diploma that that trucking firm offers, what 

kind of recognition is that diploma going to have in Vancouver? 

 

We say, Mr. Minister, that you’re making a serious mistake in 

moving towards the privatizing of adult education in 

Saskatchewan. And we say it’s a move that pits the community 

college system of this province, and to some degree the 

technical institute system of this province, against a new set of 

profit-oriented educational institutions that you’re going to be 

encouraging to spring up around Saskatchewan. And we say 

that that is not in the interests of Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Minister, I want to turn specifically 

to the issue of your decision to merge the community college 

and technical institute systems of this province. And we on this 

side of the House, Mr. Minister, say first of all that the 

community college system of Saskatchewan was working very 

nicely. It was a cost effective system; in fact, you couldn’t have 

put on more courses for less money in this province. From my 

point of view, Mr. Minister, it was the most efficient and 

effective part of the adult education system that we had here in 

Saskatchewan. It put on tens of thousands of courses around 

this province for a total cost of about $8 million. It largely used 

rented facilities. The demand on facilities, as a result of the 

work of community colleges in this province, was highly 

efficient indeed. Each of the college boards set up small offices 

where they rented facilities around Saskatchewan, and apart 

from that, most of the courses were put on in existing facilities. 

You couldn’t have had a more efficient system. 

 

And your government, sir, has never explained to the people of 

Saskatchewan what you thought was wrong with the 

community college system. Now certainly there were areas for 

improvement, and certainly there was a need to ensure easy 

transferability of courses form one college to another, or from 

one institute to another, but those objectives could have been 

achieved without dismantling the community college system in 

the way that you’ve chosen to do. 

 

And I ask you, sir, to explain in this Assembly today what your 

rationale was for fundamentally changing the mandate of the 

community college system, and for feeling that the college 

system needed to be integrated with the institute system. Now 

we think, sir, that that may have some merit, that there may on a 

pilot basis, you may have wanted to try in one particular 

community an attempt to better integrate the services of the 

community college system and the technical institute system. 

But what you have done is made a decision to bring about this 

amalgamation, and to do it in a matter of weeks, with no 

consultation with the community college system involved at all 

prior to your decision to announce the amalgamation. 

 

One of the things that we wonder about on this side of the 

House is: what was the rush? Why did you need to announce an 

amalgamation after three or four weeks of  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1505 

 

consultation meetings, and then attempt to bring that 

amalgamation about in a matter of weeks over the summer, and 

in a manner that has thoroughly disrupted planning for the fall 

in university courses that are offered through the community 

college system, in technical institute courses that are offered 

through the community college system? You have thoroughly 

disrupted the process of student enrolment in both the college 

and the institute system as a result of your actions. 

 

But we say further, sir, that while you may have wanted to try 

on a pilot basis in one community to amalgamate the 

community college and the technical institute system to see how 

that integration and amalgamation worked on a pilot basis, to 

which we would have had no objection, that we believe on this 

side of the House that you are making a serious error by 

hurriedly running into an amalgamation of two adult education 

systems with fundamentally different purposes and with 

fundamentally different philosophies. 

 

The focus of the community college system was to be an 

emphasis on lifelong learning for all members of the 

community. The community college system is to focus on 

accessibility for all members of the public. No one should be 

denied access to the community college system in this province. 

 

In contrast, Mr. Minister, the technical institute system is 

fundamentally different. It’s intended to offer diplomas and 

certificates for successful completion of training that is highly 

job oriented — training that is supposed to be directly tied to 

attaining a job after graduation. And access, by nature, to the 

technical institute system is limited. Access, by nature, is 

limited. Only about one out of three or one out of four people 

who apply are going to be accepted. 

 

Now what you are trying to do is you are trying to hurriedly 

meld two fundamentally different systems with different 

philosophies and with different objectives. And one of the fears 

that we have on this side of the House have, sir, is that your 

attempt at amalgamating the community college system and the 

technical institute system is going to result in the community 

colleges being swamped by the technical institutes in the 

amalgamation. 

 

We fear, sir, that community colleges are simply going to end 

up being brokers for courses that technical institutes and the 

universities put on, and that the lifelong learning component of 

the community college system in Saskatchewan is going to be 

lost. 

 

And we’re not surprised at that move, frankly, because that was 

precisely the approach that was taken by the Liberal 

government, the last right wing government we had in this 

province prior to yours, in the 1960s when the department of 

adult education was at that point phased out in 1966, and the 

focus turned to training for job-related functions only, with all 

the other purposes and aspects of adult education being ignored. 

 

So in summary, let me say this. We ask you first of all, sir, to 

explain to this Assembly why you felt . . . why you 

fundamentally altered the mandate of the community college 

system. Why you’ve chosen to so hurriedly  

amalgamate community colleges and technical institutes. Why 

you undertook that amalgamation with no prior consultation 

with the colleges and the technical institutes involved, and with 

no provision for public hearings on whether or not it was a good 

idea to amalgamate the two systems. 

 

We ask you to explain why you had to do this in such a rush. 

What was the hurry? Why did you force this amalgamation 

through in a matter of weeks, instead of going through a process 

of extensive public consultation before you made a decision on 

whether or not the amalgamation was desirable or not? And 

finally, why you’ve chosen to fundamentally alter the mandate 

of community colleges in rural Saskatchewan and cancel the 

very low cost and very inexpensive personal enrichment 

courses that were offered in those rural areas, sir. 

 

(1145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. members, 

both critics have given us some fair statements this morning in 

so far as their views on why we ought not change. And in fact 

as I sat here and listened, the reality of what we’re talking 

about, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, is whether we ought to 

change or not. And the arguments that have been put forth are 

those arguments put forth by people who really, as evidenced 

by their rhetoric this morning, want to cling to the past. That the 

status quo is good enough. That we can simply rest on our 

laurels. That we can stick our head in the sand and pretend that 

the world is not changing around us. 

 

To do so would be to let the people of this province down, Mr. 

Chairman. That’s what it fundamentally comes down to. Every 

area the hon. members have raised, whether it be the K to 12 

system, the regional college system — as we refer to the 

community colleges — the institutes, the universities, whatever 

area, they are saying, do not change anything. Never mind that 

enrolments are going up. Never mind that the people are asking 

for more and expecting more in the way of sophistication. 

Never mind that our economy must diversify. Never mind the 

demographics. Never mind the fact that the 18 to 24 population 

is going down, the 24 to 65 is going up dramatically, and going 

to go up dramatically over the next few years. Never mind that 

the world economy is changing. Never mind that we’re moving 

from a resource-based economy to an information-based age. 

Let’s stick with what we’ve got. Let’s support the 

establishment. 

 

These are the arguments of people who want to cling to the 

past. These are the arguments, Mr. Chairman. Let’s pick the 

first one. He says the community college system was doing a 

good job and it should stay the way it is. Well what did the 

community college trustees association report to myself say? 

And the report was entitled A Better Tomorrow and was 

presented to myself shortly after I became Minister of 

Education this fall, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Now the hon. member from Saskatoon and the Education critic, 

Saskatoon University and the Education critic, says: no, do not 

tamper with the community college  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1506 

 

system. It is okay. It is running fine. Well why did this report to 

me recommend that we should look at 105 areas? On page 1 of 

the executive summary it says, and I quote: 

 

It goes beyond identifying and describing problems. It 

contains 105 recommendations designed to solve those 

problems. 

 

The community college trustees said: yes, we have had an 

illustrious 10-year history, but the world is changing and we 

must change. And here are 105 recommendations on how we 

can, yes, be different; yes, change; but yes, be better, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Now how can that hon. member stand here; how does he square 

that? I mean, if he pretends to speak with some authority for the 

community college system, who am I to believe? Him that says 

we should not change, or the community college trustees who 

commissioned this report and said, you know, what can the 

better tomorrow be, as their title suggests? 

 

Well it seems to me I would be irresponsible if I was to ignore 

this, Mr. Chairman. And I would not ignore it, and I have not 

ignored it, and I will not ignore it. And in fact many of the 

changes that we’ve made have already addressed some of these 

105 recommendations. 

 

And it’s typical in terms of their arguments that they’ve 

advanced about, let’s cling to the community college college 

system of the past. It’s typical that the world has passed the 

NDP by. The community college system knows the world has 

changed, and they want to change with it, to continue to be 

relevant as they have been. 

 

The hon. members says: why have you decimated the hobby 

courses in the community college system? Why have you 

thrown out the hobby courses? Why have you eliminated the 

aerobic dancing programs and the basket weaving? Why have 

you thrown those out? Because, Mr. Chairman, the community 

college system and the participants in those systems saw that 

kind of programming as less important to their well-being in 

1986 and ‘87 than they did in 1976 and ‘77. 

 

The people in rural Saskatchewan, the people in urban 

Saskatchewan, who used to come out and enter those hobby 

course type programs, as they’re called, or hobby arts and crafts 

programming, 10 years ago there were large enrolments there 

— 80 per cent, probably, of their hours at the community 

college programming were devoted to that area. Well what has 

it been most recently, Mr. Chairman — 4 per cent? 4.1 per cent, 

my most recent numbers, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Now I would say if the hon. member says somehow the 

community college trustees’ association is wrong, and now, 

based on these numbers, the NDP would try to be suggesting 

that the people are somehow wrong. The people who used to 

want to take those courses 10 years ago, back in the past, came 

out in droves — 80 per cent. Now in the last years it’s been 4 

per cent. And why has it been 4 per cent? Because what have 

the people been wanting and viewing as a higher priority? 

They’ve been wanting adult basic education to upgrade those 

 individuals that never had a chance to get that 10, 11, and 12. 

And they’ve been wanting more institute courses. And they’ve 

been wanting more university courses. 

 

And I’ll tell you, here’s one that the hon. member ought not be 

proud of, because they failed on every measure. And our 

government did not, because we put it in place. 

 

I ask the members of this Assembly, and of the public in 

Saskatchewan, in 1981 and ’80 and ’79 and ’75 — when these 

people pretended to be so relevant to society — I ask the 

members of society today in this province and in this 

legislature; if you had wanted to take an institute course by 

extension when the NDP were in government, could you take 

one? And the answer is a resounding no, no, no, no. 

 

And they talk about accessibility in rural Saskatchewan. Did 

you deliver one institute program into rural Saskatchewan when 

the NDP were in government? And the answer is no, again. And 

I’ll tell you why it’s no. Because when Premier Grant Devine 

came along and recognized the needs for education . . . adult 

education in this province throughout rural Saskatchewan, we 

put in place a program — an extension program, the 

Saskatchewan skills extension program — to deliver 

programming into rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And I’m proud to stand here today, Mr. Chairman, and advise 

you and other members of this Assembly that we expect 

enrolments in that this year — participants will number some 

2,600. And that budget, Mr. Chairman, is over $4 millions. 

Now that’s what I talk about when I’m talking about 

accessibility to rural Saskatchewan, and delivering programs to 

rural Saskatchewan, and delivering relevant programs to rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the 1,900 people that you referred to in the consultations of 

the community colleges 10 years ago, I have no doubt that what 

they told you is true. But this is not 10 years ago. This is 1987. 

And I want to tell you what the 550 groups and individuals and 

associations told me in their report, and what the universities 

told me in their report, and what the several other hundreds of 

people I met with told me in their report. 

 

Yes, what we have done in the past has not failed. It has not let 

us down. We can be proud it if. But the world is changing, and 

we must change. We want more accessibility to more programs. 

We want to get rid of this duplication. We want to get rid of out 

of date programs. 

 

They said to me: what is the sense of me putting my daughter or 

my son into a program when 70 per cent of them come out of it 

and don’t get jobs? It frustrates my daughter. It frustrates my 

son. It frustrates my pocket-book. That’s why you get people 

today talking about dropping out of society. They don’t feel 

useful. We’re programming them and pushing them into 

programs that weren’t relevant. Yes, they were relevant 15 

years ago, 10 years ago, six years ago. 

 

Or what is the sense of having 20 training spaces in an institute 

when the people themselves have figured out that society 

doesn’t need 20 of those particular kinds of  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1507 

 

employees. Only four were entering some courses where there 

were 20 spaces. Now what sense was that? Twenty spaces, and 

four were taking it. Or 20 spaces full, with a 200 people waiting 

to get in. And when they graduate, 70 per cent don’t get jobs. 

Now, what kind of a favour are you doing the young people of 

this province when you do that? 

 

And consistently the members opposite have clung to the past 

and they say, don’t cut this program and don’t cut back on that 

one. Have they look at where the jobs of the future are? As I 

said to the hon. member from Cumberland, the NDP member 

from Cumberland, the other night, more properly your 

questions, Education critic, should be these. Because I’ll tell 

you, if we don’t change, I could sense our children, your 

children — and I might congratulate the hon. member from 

Saskatoon University on the birth in his family. I hope mother 

and child are both doing well. Your children, if we don’t make 

these changes, may ask these questions. They may ask things 

like this. They may say, dad, 20 years ago when you were 

sitting in the legislature . . and we’re talking about the year 

2000. 

 

To put this in perspective, the young person today who enters 

kindergarten, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the young person who 

enters kindergarten this fall in our K to 12 system will graduate 

in the year 2000. And what do we know already about the year 

2000? Well we know some things like this. His child is going to 

be facing in the year 2000 some of these kinds of things. We 

know that between now and the year 1990, for example, the 

number of children in that age category of 18 to 24 is going to 

go down. We know that the baby boom that put tremendous 

pressure on the K to 12 system over the past decade, and now 

more recently on the university and technical institute system in 

terms of enrolments, is decreasing. 

 

And I suppose that’s what the Hon. Mr. Blakeney, then NDP 

premier, was so out of touch with when he sent that infamous 

memo to his minister of Education that day in 1980. He hadn’t 

read the numbers somehow. The reality was the enrolments 

were going up during that period. What we see in the future is 

enrolments going down. And certainly in the K to 12 system in 

the last five years our enrolments are down 2 per cent. We had 

something in the order of 204,000 in ’81-82, and this year I 

think will be around the 200,000, 199,000. Enrolments have 

gone down. Budgeting has gone up 60 per cent, and yet they 

continue to talk about cut-backs. But I’ll get into that another 

time. 

 

So what do we know, Mr. Chairman? We know that the baby 

boom that put pressure on the K to 12 system, and the baby 

boom that’s putting pressure on our universities and technical 

institutes in term of enrolments, is now going to start going into 

that greying area, what they call the . . . What do they call it? 

Not the over-the-hill crowd; over-the-thrill crowd. And what do 

we know about these 35 to 50 year-olds? Whereas our 18 to 24 

numbers are going this way, our 25 to 64 numbers are just 

going to go up dramatically over the next two decades, Mr. 

Deputy Chairman. 

 

Now you take that fact. You’ve got less people in the K to  

12 system; you’ve got less people probably going to be entering 

your institutes and universities, although in the latter half of this 

century those numbers should go up again. The baby boom will 

be in that 35 to 50 year-old mid-career bracket, and what do we 

know about this? Well one of the things that we know is we’re 

really a little bit uncertain about all what they are going to face 

because the future is difficult to predict. And that’s why I’m so 

happy that we’re going to have that conference here in 

Saskatchewan that talks about post-secondary education, and I 

hope will give us some guidance in terms of the signposts of the 

implication of the new economy. 

 

But here’s some things we can glean, I think, fairly and 

conclude fairly safely. The economy . . . as the economy 

restructures, their jobs are at risk. And without retraining, their 

employability may diminish. Jobs and job security will become 

the issue. Clearly then, upgrading and retraining becomes the 

new priority. 

 

And current estimates, Mr. Deputy Chairman — and they never 

addressed this point once in all their lengthy remarks — the 

point is this, Mr. Chairman, that there are now several studies 

around that would suggest that where you and I, or our fathers 

before us . . . Let’s pick it up right there. Whereas our fathers 

and grandfathers before us, if they probably got a great 

education or whatever, it probably served them well because 

there was the pressure to return to the farm and quickly take up 

farming as quickly as they could. I mean, the agrarian life-style 

in this province. Okay. 

 

Our generation came along, and if we got our high school, that 

was good; you were probably going to get a job. If you took on 

a post-secondary education — universities or a technical 

institute — that was good because it probably meant you were 

going to get a better job. Okay, but what of our children? What 

of our children? And the Education critic’s children? 

 

What studies tell us is that they can do all of those things, and it 

won’t be good enough because they’ll come out of college or 

come out of grade 12 or come out of the technical institute with 

their diploma or their degree or their certificate, and much as it 

served my father or you or me well, the reality for them is that 

they’re going to maybe within a year or two or six, find that the 

requirements to do their job have changed because the 

technology keeps changing. And they’ve got to retrain and 

upgrade and retool — not just, you know, go and take a 

two-week course and say that that’ll be it for the rest of their 

life. They might have to do that five or six or seven or eight 

times. 

 

So what are we going to do about it? Well the first thing we 

started doing, Mr. Chairman, some several - four years ago, was 

we started delivering institute program into rural Saskatchewan. 

And why is that important? Well I’ll give you an example. If 

I’m a welder and I want to weld on the new NewGrade 

upgrader out here, I might have a certain kind of certificate or a 

certain kind of knowledge, but it may not be good enough for 

that kind of welding. But I’ve got a job in Weyburn, 

Saskatchewan. I can’t be driving to Regina or Prince Albert or 

wherever they teach this welding technology because I’ve got a 

job. I’ve got a family to feed. Can I get that course in Weyburn? 

And  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1508 

 

there’s 10 more guys like me. 

 

(1200) 

 

Well that’s the kind of thing we’ve been talking about with 

taking institute programming right into the communities. And 

we’re going to do more of that, not only at the institute level but 

the university level, because you’ve got to acknowledge the 

realities of what’s facing us. The baby bulge is getting older. 

We’re going to need more upgrading and retraining. And we’ve 

got to be able to provide it across Saskatchewan. 

 

And that’s why, when it comes to the new institute changes, the 

single institute, the one-stop shopping centre, if you like. When 

they walk in that door at Moose Jaw campus or Saskatoon 

campus or P.A. or Regina, they’re going to have access into the 

entire range of programming at that new institute . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Now the hon. member from his seat . . . I didn’t 

say one word while he talked, and now he wants to interrupt 

me. But he says, cone on Lorne, you’ve cut the programming. 

Well what are the statistics on this so-called cut programming? 

 

First of all, Mr. Member from University — Saskatoon 

University, did you deliver any institute programming in rural 

Saskatchewan? No. Okay, so not only have we not cut that, Mr. 

Chairman, but we were delivering it when the NDP were not 

delivering it. 

 

Second question, Mr. Chairman, for the hon. members of this 

legislature: did the Devine government build the new institute, 

new campus in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, since they took 

office in 1982? The answer is yes. 

 

The third question, Mr. Chairman, is this. The hon. member 

says there were cut-backs. The third question is this, Mr. 

Chairman: are there today, in this province, 1.700 more training 

spaces in Saskatchewan at our institutes than there were in 

1982? And the answer again is yes. 

 

Now how does that translate into cut-backs, Mr. Chairman? 

How does that translate into cut-backs? Oh yes, the hon. 

member will get up here shortly, I’m sure, and say, oh my 

goodness, you’ve cut out the nursing assistants, or you’ve cut 

out the refrigerator guys, and the reality is, Mr. Chairman, there 

are very good reasons for those cut-backs. There were not 

full-time jobs at the end of the day, after they’d spent several 

weeks and months and years of training. And who are we doing 

a favour? In some of these cases the associations came to us and 

said, we’re just flooding the market. There just isn’t the jobs out 

there. 

 

And so, as I was getting to some time ago, Mr. Chairman, and 

as the hon. member from Cumberland and I talked of the other 

night, the questions that these people across the way should be 

asking is: are you going to have that system geared up to handle 

this greying adult population, as well as the young adult 

population; are you going to have the training program in 

place? 

 

The questions they should have been asking are these: are you 

going to have the training program in place for the 

wild rice industry in northern Saskatchewan, or for the uranium 

mining, or for the gold mining, the instrumentation people, the 

diamond drilling courses? 

 

I mean, the questions that they should have been asking in this 

House for the last four years, Mr. Chairman, are where are those 

courses for the Northerners? 

 

They should have been asking, why haven’t you changed . . . 

you know, we don’t need the hobby courses any more, or not to 

the degree we did. Those in the community can deliver them, as 

we expect they will, Mr. Chairman. But they should have been 

asking — gold drilling and gold mining is taking off in northern 

Saskatchewan — and I want to know, Mr. Chairman, or Mr. 

Minister, what are you doing about making sure Northerners get 

those jobs? That’s instrumentation . . . 

 

You know, what was their style? When the NDP were in 

government, Mr. Chairman, they would rather pay . . . they 

would rather pay Northerners $12,000 a year to build roads in 

the South. Well, what’s happening today? We’ve got diamond 

drillers engaged in $5,000 a month-$60,000 a year occupations 

in the North, Mr. Chairman, economic activity, economic 

diversification, and jobs for Northerners, training for 

Northerners. Mr. Chairman, they consistently gave them lip 

service. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, the reality of what we’re talking about 

today is, are we going to be change-resisters? Mr. Chairman, 

are we going to stick our heads in the sand? Are we going to 

fail to acknowledge what the numbers tell us about ageing in 

this population; about what the requirements are going to be of 

that population? 

 

And as I said before in this House . . . I mean, there are a dozen 

futurists out there who can give you some view of the future, 

but there are some hard, cold facts about what we know. And 

we know that we’re moving from a resource-based economy 

into a knowledge-based economy, Mr. Chairman. And we know 

that adult education must respond to two emerging challenges 

in the next two decades: it must meet and master the needs of 

the information age, first and foremost, and it must adapt to a 

ageing population in need of frequent retraining. And it also 

must achieve a higher success rate with the 18-to 24-year age 

group, Mr. Chairman. 

 

There is no question, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to community 

colleges . . . when it comes to community colleges - although 

the emphasis in the past has been on hobby and arts and craft 

courses, 4 per cent of the hours now were in the hobby 

area - and what the people were telling me, what the community 

college trustees were telling me is, yes, we have been happy 

with what we’ve done in the past, and now we want to change 

and go forward and continue to have that better tomorrow. We 

want more adult basic education, we want more institute-related 

programming, which was up 13.9 per cent for the year - up to 

13.9 per cent of the hours in the year ’85-86, which is that last 

one I have numbers for - and we want more university 

programming. 

 

And that gets me into the discussion of the community colleges, 

or more properly . . . And I would advise the hon. member that 

really what we’re going to be talking  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1509 

 

about here is not community colleges; what we’re talking about 

is the regional college network now. And what is this regional 

college going to do, Mr. Chairman? Well, it’s going to do that 

— it’s going to do that adult basic education. It’s going to 

deliver institute programming into rural Saskatchewan, and it’s 

going to deliver more and more university programming into 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And what are we talking about in university programming, Mr. 

Chairman? Well as the hon. member and I discussed in question 

period some time ago, enrolments have risen dramatically over 

the last four or five years at universities. And it’s no good to sit 

back and say a problem doesn’t exist, or to try to tackle it. And 

that’s what, Mr. Chairman, we’re looking at delivering more 

and more programming at the university level into rural 

Saskatchewan. And for a couple of reasons. 

 

Number one is it makes . . . the people want it — the people 

want more. Just as 20 . . . 15 years ago they wanted hobby 

courses . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member for 

Saskatoon South wants to cling to the past. He says that they 

want hobby courses in rural Saskatchewan. I’m tell you, they 

want institute programming and they want university 

programming. And I’m telling you that the communities in rural 

Saskatchewan, whether it be aerobic dancing, photography, or 

cooking, that the community will deliver it. I have a lot of faith 

in the people of this province. And I’m telling you, in my own 

community of Weyburn I’ve already seen it. 

 

The young . . . the people in the recreation boards there are 

delivering programming. They are taking up the challenge. It’s 

going to be delivered. But if you want to cling to the past, that’s 

fine by me. Because what I clearly heard out there . . . And you 

can tell me that 20 meetings with 550 people is garbage, and I’ll 

tell you it’s not. I’ll tell you this is what they wanted. 

 

But let’s pick up the hon. member from Saskatoon South’s 

arguments a little further. He says, as does the member from 

Saskatoon University, that I’ve got no mandate, that when I had 

these meetings with 550 people, that this is not what I heard. So 

let’s read into the record, Mr. Chairman, let’s read into the 

record some of what I did hear. And this is a brief I received 

from the Coteau Range Community College board. 

 

Did the hon. member catch that? The hon. member from 

Saskatoon University and Saskatoon South, as well as Prince 

Albert and Regina Centre the only four members from the NDP 

in the legislature, Mr. Chairman, have suggested . . . they have 

suggested that . . . the hon. member has asked about the 

chairman who resigned, and I am advised the chairman did 

resign, Mr. Chairman, but for quite different reasons. 

 

Well, I’ll put it another way. Let’s hear . . . Mr. Chairman, let’s 

read into the record what the board’s submission was to me, the 

Coteau Range Community College board, what was their 

submission to me in February of this year? The hon. members 

say we ought to cling to the past, that there’s no need to change 

community colleges and their focus. But what did they say to 

me? Well they said things like this, Mr. Chairman: 

 

At this juncture, recommending a tough, even courageous, 

course of action that will result in significant change 

within the entire post-secondary system may meet with 

considerable internal resistance. 

 

What they’re saying there is, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is yes, 

change is always difficult. The status quo, you know, you’re 

bathed in, I suppose, the warm reality of knowing one day to 

the next that the next day will, in fact, be the same, until that 

time comes when all of a sudden people find they aren’t trained 

and retrained and don’t have the skills for the future. So what 

they’re saying is that any time you undertake change it’s 

difficult. 

 

They acknowledge that. But even acknowledging that, they 

recommended that we build a new mandate with key themes 

being these. And they called them the three R’s. They called it 

rationalization, redirection, and revitalization. And they went on 

to suggest to me that when it comes to rationalization, that a 

duplication, a duplication should be eliminated. Duplication 

should be eliminated. 

 

And they talked about extension courses in the arts and 

sciences, education and administration, need to be offered in 

smaller cities and rural areas on a cost-recovery or greater 

user-pay basis. Now that’s a contentious recommendation, Mr. 

Deputy Chairman, but one that deserves some examination, and 

in terms of consultation, that’s the kinds of things we’re going 

to have to examine in the future. 

 

They recommended to me, Mr. Deputy Chairman, when it came 

to the University of Saskatchewan, for example, that it allowed 

to build on its strengths. And what eminent good sense that 

makes, and I would suggest that that’s exactly what they’re 

doing. And, as well, the same recommendation there was for the 

University of Regina. 

 

As well, Mr. Chairman, they recommended a consolidation of 

technical institutes. Now in their mind the consolidation might 

have been to have four separate institutes in the four separate 

areas as opposed to one new institute. And that’s a point we can 

debate, certainly. 

 

But nevertheless everyone recognized the sense of 

consolidating the community colleges and technical institutes. 

And why, Mr. Chairman? Well this is what they said to me: “It 

is expected that the above action,” which I referred to, and I 

quote — I quote again. I’ll start again: 

 

It is expected that the above action should address the 

issues of greater responsiveness, less bureaucracy, and 

faster program turnaround by combining under one 

management the flexible, responsive delivery system of 

the colleges with the programs of the institutes. 

 

Now could I stick my head in the sand? Here are the trustees of 

that area — intelligent, reasonable, reasoned people; been 

working in the system; know its strengths; know its 

weaknesses, and said there ought to be change. There ought to 

be some rationalization. There ought to be some consolidation. 

 

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1510 

 

It went on to further talk about eliminating some of the 

duplication and facilitating delivery to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And when it came to the question of redirection, what did they 

have to say? You remember there are three R’s, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman? Their three R’s were rationalization, redirection, and 

revitalization. 

 

When it came to redirection, what did they have to say? Talked 

about redirecting our programming to concentrate upon a major 

thrust in illiteracy. A major thrust in illiteracy. And, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, just some several weeks ago, when I announced the 

post-secondary education restructuring, I announced that we 

would be launching not only a provincial campaign, but 

pushing for a national campaign to fight illiteracy. It’s a silent 

enemy. 

 

And I’ll tell the hon. members across the way, the one thing that 

I heard that really — I suppose the best word is — shocked. But 

one thing that shocked me when I held those 20 meetings across 

the province this winter was when I heard the tales, the sorry 

tales, quite frankly, of illiteracy and the impact of illiteracy and 

the depth and the breadth of illiteracy in our province, it 

shocked me. And I suppose it shocked me . . . and I think when 

all members of society — and many have called me over the 

last few days wanting further information as it relates to our 

drive against illiteracy. 

 

And using one definition of illiteracy, we come up with 

numbers like this, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

 

In this province, we’re the worst in Canada when it comes to 

illiterate . . . In western Canada . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — That has nothing to do with the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member said that it had 

nothing with the question, Mr. Chairman. I’ll tell you what. It 

has everything to do with adult education and providing 

opportunities for people in this province. And I will not be 

muzzled when it comes to the question of illiteracy. You cannot 

muzzle us. 

 

I know that your government and your party when they were in 

power, failed to recognize it. You paid lip-service to it. You 

paid lip-service to Northerners; you paid lip-service to the 

province. But I won’t be muzzled on it and I will talk about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Because the stark numbers are these; 

the stark numbers are these. And I’m not proud of these. I am 

not proud of them, but I’m not going to somehow sweep it 

under the table. 

 

The stark numbers are these: 24.9 per cent of those aged 15, 

over 15 in this province are what they call functionally illiterate. 

And you can use different definitions. And another definition 

might have 15 per  

cent or 16 or 14 or 19. But I don’t care what definition you use 

for illiteracy, we have a big problem in our midst. 

 

And why it’s so shocking is I, like probably everyone in this 

House, couldn’t believe those numbers when you see them. 

Because we’ve always thought of ourselves as a well-educated 

society, as a society that has provided opportunities. How can 

those numbers be? Well there are a number of reasons. And we 

can get into them at some later time, as I expect a literacy 

council will do for me, to help me, give me some advice and 

guidance on this. 

 

But the reality is, we’ve got a lot of human wastage there and a 

lot of people that don’t have opportunities to take retraining and 

to upgrade themselves and to get jobs because of it. And we 

have got to tackle it. 

 

Our record is the worst in western Canada, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman. And I’ll tell you what. The rest of Canada is not off 

the hook on this one either. And I intend to raise it with my 

ministerial colleagues across this country. 

 

And I say it shocked me because I too was a member of the 

public who didn’t think we had that big a problem when it came 

to illiteracy. I didn’t think we had that big a problem, Mr. 

Deputy Chairman. But when I was at this meeting — never 

mind these cold, clinical statistics like 24.9 per cent — the 

kinds of things that I heard that shocked me were those kinds of 

stories, stories from members of the banking community who 

suggested to me that on a regular basis their tellers would deal 

with three to four people on a daily basis who weren’t totally 

conversant in the English language. 

 

And now these people . . . and I’m not picking on these people; 

I want to make that clear. But this is a silent enemy in our 

midst. In many instances they never had an opportunity or a 

chance, or they dropped out of school. We want to help them, 

Mr. Chairman. We want to help them because we know . . . 

because we see that as an investment in their future and in our 

province’s future. 

 

I know some, including the occasional testy editorial, would 

suggest ah, yes, this is nothing more than politicians’ rhetoric. 

Well I’m tell you, Mr. Chairman, and I make this commitment 

to the people of Saskatchewan, this is going to be something 

more than mere lip-service. And I would suggest to you that the 

initiatives and the recommendations that will come forth, and 

the advice and the guidance that I will receive from the literacy 

council that will be put in place very shortly, in fact, will have 

my support and my back-up. 

 

And I’m not so naive as to suggest, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that 

is something that you solve overnight, because it is not. And I 

know already in Saskatchewan we’ve had a number of groups 

— volunteers and professionals — . . . (inaudible) . . . 

Saskatoon, our community college system, volunteers, many 

levels in our education system have been putting effort into this. 

What I’m saying, Mr. Chairman, is the problem is much deeper 

than I had been led to believe or had thought, for that matter, 

and we’re going to tackle it. 

 

And I’m not suggesting that we’ll solve it overnight, but we’re 

going to give it a good shot. Because we can talk  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1511 

 

about rights and privileges all we want in this province and this 

country, but it seems that there is nothing more basic than the 

right to read and write. And we’re committed to that objective, 

Mr. Speaker, because we want to see those people have 

opportunities that you and I and those members opposite enjoy. 

So that will . . . as was recommended. And I don’t apologize for 

getting off track, but one of the recommendations from the 

Coteau Range Community College board to me was a major 

thrust in illiteracy. We’re acting on that, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

 

They also said we redirect in adult basic education to ensure 

that each adult has a generic set of skills to enable them to 

participate fully in the world of work. They talked about 

university transfer credit programs, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and 

on and on and on. 

 

I’ll pick revitalization. And what did they have to say under 

revitalization? Well they said this, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and I 

quote: 

 

The third “R” in the new mandate will be a by-product of 

the excitement and enthusiasm generated by the positive 

changes outlined in the first two areas. 

 

The narrowing of mandates, the clearer definition of 

purpose, the need for cost-effectiveness in every area of 

activity can, and does, have a revitalizing effect . . . 

 

You see, Mr. Deputy Chairman, or Mr. Chairman, this board 

that has worked in the system, the people that almost on a daily 

basis have been dealing with adult basic education and people’s 

desire to have institute training and university courses, are 

making these recommendations to me and to my colleagues, 

and I will not turn a blind eye to them. 

 

And although the NDP opposition will cast the narrowing of 

mandates, a clear definition of purpose, the need for cost 

effectiveness in every area, they will cast that in some kind of 

scenario and paint it as devastation — and the hon. member 

from Regina Centre, I think he used the word “decimation” of 

the education system. They will paint it in this scenario of 

cut-backs and doom and that by doing things different is worse. 

 

Well what are these people saying to me? By redirecting and 

rationalizing and revitalizing, by doing things different, it can 

be better and it will be better. And that includes cost 

effectiveness, attention to cost effectiveness, and narrowing of 

mandates, of not trying to be all things to all people. 

 

And not that that trend that developed in the ’70s — the NDP 

were in government — was a bad trend necessarily. It was 

natural. It’s natural, it’s a natural human phenomenon that you 

try to deliver as much as you can for your constituency — in 

this case, the province. 

 

Kelsey wanted to deliver as much programming as they could 

for all of Saskatoon and area. I mean, that was a natural 

phenomenon. But what happens at the end of the day is you get 

every centre wanting to do everything, and  

at the end of the day you just can’t do everything as well. 

 

Now if you set up some centres of excellence and say, you shall 

concentrate and be the best on this, by having a single centre do 

it, you can have the best equipment, the most up-to-date 

equipment, the best teachers. And rather than trying to spread it 

all over and be all things to all people, you know, instead of 

trying to have a peanut butter sandwich, we want to have 

caviare. We want to have it in every spot. We’ll have their best 

in each spot, have those centres of excellence. And that’s what 

we’re doing with the new institute campus arrangement. 

 

And I think that’s what these people are saying here: narrow the 

focus, do what you do and do it well. If you happen to discard 

some of the past because it’s out of date, or you have to discard 

some because of duplication, or if you have to discard some 

because the opportunities that were there a decade ago just 

aren’t there now, but there are opportunities in different areas 

and you have to refocus, then do it. And that is, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, exactly what we’re doing. 

 

And they ended this brief by saying this, Mr. Chairman. They 

ended this brief by saying this — and it’s in part and it’s what 

they said in their opening statement — that it’s going to take 

some courage, and it’s going to take some action to prepare the 

system for the 21st century. 

 

And although members opposite will catcall from their seats 

and criticize me and my colleagues for talking about the 21st 

century and the decades ahead and the tomorrows and the better 

tomorrows that our community college system talked about in 

their report — and they will criticize the University of 

Saskatchewan for looking at the future and their Issues and 

Options, and the University of Regina for doing some studies, 

and our department for preparing the blueprint for the future 

called Preparing for the Year 2000 — I tell you that we are not 

going to be deterred in our goals. We are going to stick to our 

guns because it’s right. 

 

And I have no difficulty in arguing about whether in terms of 

institute governance, for example, whether we should have a 

board at each site or one overall board, or you know, this versus 

that. But the reality is we’ve got to change, Mr. Chairman. We 

cannot be merely change resisters, we must continue to go 

ahead. 

 

We must continue to go ahead because to not go ahead would 

be to let down the people of this province, and that includes our 

K to 12 system as well, Mr. Chairman. 

 

If one steps back and looks at our K to 12 system, as I’ve said 

in this House before, it has set us apart. I think I can safely say 

without engaging in rhetoric that can’t be substantiated, Mr. 

Chairman, I think I can safely say that our K to 12 system has 

been as good as you’ll find across North America — not just 

across Canada but across North America. 

 

But some three or four or five years ago, they too recommended 

that the winds of change were blowing, that we had to make 

some changes, that we needed to raise standards, that we needed 

to put in place a minimum expectation, a standard of 

expectation — a  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1512 

 

core curriculum if you like — that would include . . . certainly 

ensuring that our young people were literate not only in the 

language arts side, not only that they had the basic mastered, the 

reading and the writing and arithmetic, basic literacy and 

numeracy skills, but as well, that in the world of the future, 

computer literacy might be a reality. 

 

And so because they recognized there were some changes 

taking place and winds of change were blowing, they undertook 

the process called Directions. And the hon. member from 

Prince Albert, the other night here, tried to suggest that 

somehow we were changing direction in the K to 12 system 

because a half a dozen administrators have lost their job. There 

was no mention of children, teachers in the class-room, or those 

kinds of things. But somehow because six administrators which 

he referred to at some length had been laid off — not fired, but 

laid off — because of duplication in our system, that somehow 

we had changed direction. 

 

And when I challenged the hon. member from Prince Albert to 

give me one concrete example of a change of direction in the K 

to 12 system, he couldn’t come up with one. He couldn’t come 

up with one example, Mr. Chairman — not one example of a 

change of direction. And I’ll tell you what. Before this 

estimates is over, before this estimates is over, I’m sure that he 

will try to suggest there’s been a change in direction again. 

 

Well what has changed, Mr. Chairman? Nothing, other than 

we’re going to continue to go forward with that Directions 

process. We’re going to continue to go forward with 

implementing that core curriculum. It’s going to take lots of 

work; it’s going to take consultation and co-operation with the 

teachers of this province; it’s going to take curriculum writers 

and it’s going to take a tremendous effort; but we are going to 

go forward with it. And if anything, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 

Chairman, the only change that we will make is we’re going to 

pick up the tempo there a little bit. 

 

As it relates to the education development fund, or that fund 

that we set up . . . we set up under Premier Devine, because he 

recognizes that education’s important. It wasn’t set up under the 

NDP. The fund that was set up — an excellence fund, you 

really might call it, Mr. Chairman — certainly the numbers of 

dollars that we’ve had in there are the same. It’s intact, but 

we’re going to stretch it out, instead of over five years, I think 

something closer to 10 years, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And I would like to have been able to continue to deliver at the 

pace we were, Mr. Chairman, but the important thing is that 

teachers and the students of those class-rooms are going to have 

those benefits. That fund, those dollars, are intact and it will 

come. Perhaps we’re not going to be able to do it as quickly as 

we would have liked, but we ought not to forget about what we 

have been able to accomplish with that new fund, that 

excellence fund, Mr. Chairman. 

 

There was no fund when the NDP were in government. There 

was no fund to . . . available to school boards to buy computers, 

to set up and revitalize resource centres, to stock those resource 

centres with books and other kinds 

 of library materials. There wasn’t a special fund that school 

boards could come to to look at getting funding for career 

counselling. There wasn’t these kinds of things, Mr. Chairman. 

I’ve picked a few examples of what’s happened across the 

province with that excellence fund, to make sure that our 

students have the best available to them in terms of quality 

education. 

 

And you pick an example here from the Kindersley School 

Division — basic skill enhancement through computer-assisted 

instruction. And it’s intended to improve basic literacy and 

numeracy skills. Now what an excellent example of maintaining 

all that is of the best of the past, and acknowledging the future. 

Everyone in this province probably recognizes that we must 

maintain excellence in our three R’s, and yet we also know that 

there’s the new realities of the computer age. And so here is the 

Kindersley School Division — and I applaud them for it — 

they’re taking the technology of the computer of today and 

using that to improve, if you like, the three R’s: reading, 

writing, and arithmetic. Basic literacy . . . one-tenth of a million 

dollars, over a tenth of a million dollars for that project. 

 

Here’s one at Martensville primary school in the Saskatchewan 

Valley School District division. What did they do with the 

funds that were made available through the Premier Devine’s 

excellence fund, Mr. Chairman? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’d caution the minister not to use 

members names in the House. Refer to the members by their 

constituency or by their position. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Your point is well taken, and I 

apologize for straying from House protocol, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Well, what did Martensville primary school get from our 

Premier’s excellence fund, Mr. Chairman? Well, they got a 

learning lab; they got an addition of a learning lab, and that 

consists of written material, computer, computer software, 

enhanced students word skills, develop reading and writing 

skills. And that to me, Mr. Chairman, is going to very much 

enhance the education of those young people in that 

Martensville primary school. 

 

(1230) 

 

In another area, Mr. Chairman, career counselling and 

education. And this one, I might add, is very typical of what a 

number of school districts across the province did. They took 

this money from the special fund that was established by the 

Progressive Conservative government, of this Premier, of this 

province. They took that money, and it was very typical of 

many across the province, and put in place career counselling 

and education, the objectives of which are these, Mr. Chairman: 

to assist students to improve job searchability, resumé writing, 

interview behaviour, identify suitable career paths in relation to 

their own skills and interest, and assist students to see the 

correlation between schools and vocations. 

 

Career counsellors to help keep track and provide this 

information and counsel them. That’s been one that been very 

widespread across the province. And it’s consistent with the 

results of a survey that the SSTA (Saskatchewan  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1513 

 

School Trustees Association) did three years ago where people 

. . . parents felt that there ought to be a better connection 

between the education process and the jobs down the road, Mr. 

Chairman. And so many have responded — many school 

boards have responded of those parents wishes and views by 

undertaking that career and counselling program. 

 

Here’s one, the Saskatoon public school division — Indian and 

Métis Friendship Centre home and school liaison program, a 

tenth of a million dollars — provides for native home visitors 

and program co-ordinators to act as liaison between parents of 

native children and school-based personnel. And I could go on, 

Mr. Chairman, about that one. 

 

Here’s another one from Saskatoon public school division. 

Computer Braille equipment to help those who are handicapped 

and disabled — to me, a very wise and sound purchase, Mr. 

Chairman. Another one that was widely received across the 

province, and as I referred to earlier. Many, many, many 

schools use these dollars and this education development or 

excellence fund to acquire resource material — books and 

film-strips and videos and library technician services; or even to 

provide for teacher-librarians and to establish computer library 

services, computer searches. 

 

I think these examples show, Mr. Chairman, how well our 

school boards, our parents, our teachers have responded out 

there, that when there was a fund made available to improve the 

quality of education in their schools, they responded, not only 

in terms of making sure that basic literacy and numeracy 

continued to get covered off, but to acknowledge that libraries 

could be updated with books, and that computers, which are so 

much a fact of life today for our young people, were available, 

and the software and the teaching. 

 

And more than that, they took it one step, to make sure that 

those young people have some sense of the world ahead after 

they leave grade 12. And so I applaud them for what they’ve 

been able to do in the K to 12 system with that fund. 

 

And I want to assure them here, although we have not had this 

question from the opposition, and I’ve been quite frankly 

surprised, because, yes, we are stretching that fund over 10 

years. But I want to assure the school boards, the parents, and 

the teachers, that although that fund is going to be stretched 

over 10 years, Mr. Chairman, the important thing is the money 

is still there, and it will be spent, and you’ll have more projects 

like the Martensvilles and the Saskatoon school board and the 

Kindersleys of the world, Mr. Chairman. Because, as our 

Premier has said time and time again, when it comes to quality 

of education, there’s always money. And that’s the way it will 

continue to be, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I will pick up . . . I will finish briefly with . . . The hon. member 

from Prince Albert, in his first remarks, referred to depriorizing, 

and I suggested that, you know, how do you . . . First of all, Mr. 

Webster doesn’t acknowledge that word in his dictionary. But 

how do you stack it up against a three-quarters of billion dollar 

expenditure in education this year? And that’s only by the 

government. That doesn’t  

include the several hundreds of millions of dollars that 

universities will raise independently and that school boards will 

raise through property taxation. 

 

And he said: you know, we aren’t spending enough money in 

education, and the reason we’re not spending enough money in 

education is because . . . And here’s the old bogy man NDP 

arguments. What was his first one? Well, education doesn’t 

have enough money because you gave it to Peter Pocklington; 

and you gave it to the Weyerhaeusers of the world, okay; and 

you gave it to the oil companies, okay. 

 

And their arguments to this point in time have been . . . The 

other NDP tired old favourite is, you know, you down-size 

government. Oh my goodness, you shouldn’t have done that. 

We need more government; bigger government is better 

government. 

 

And then the hon. member from Saskatoon University added 

one other of the favourite NDP bogy man, and that is, now all 

of a sudden, Mr. Deputy Chairman, or Mr. Chairman, we’re 

privatizing the post-secondary education system — privatizing. 

I mean, that’s the other favourite bogy man. I mean, they want 

to nationalize everything — from banks on down to the . . . I 

mean, I think in education, Mr. Chairman, I think if the hon. 

member from Saskatoon University had his way, the piano 

teachers of this province would be turned into a Crown 

corporation. They’d be turned into an arm of the Department of 

Education. That you can’t teach piano lessons after school to 

the young people because you’re not an arm of the government. 

I mean, that’s what they want. They want everything run by the 

government. 

 

Well what about this privatization? Now where did this bogy 

man argument come from? Well, yes, Mr. Chairman, it’s true. 

We’re going to take the institute structure, which is now an arm 

of the Department of Education, run by department officials, 

and we’re going to take it out and put it away from government 

and give them autonomy, give them their own form of 

governance. 

 

Many good arguments that were made for this as I listened in 

my consultation this past winter. Even the NDP have 

recognized that the institutes wanted it. As I’ve said in this 

House earlier, the NDP youth want it. And we’re going to do 

that. Now, how does that — what the NDP youth want, what 

the institute students want, what the institute faculties want, and 

what people across Saskatchewan want — how does that 

somehow turn into a privatization exercise? 

 

They, this new institute, will be run by a board, like a board of 

governors — not unlike the board of governors at the 

University of Regina, not unlike the board of governors at the 

University of Saskatchewan, not unlike the board of trustees 

that run our regional colleges. But somehow when we take the 

institutes out of government, when we take it out of government 

and give them self-governance, the hon. member from 

Saskatoon University tries to suggest that we’re privatizing. It 

defies logic. 

 

Well maybe I’ve got a wrong argument. Maybe he’s saying that 

he’s not talking about that, Mr. Chairman.  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1514 

 

Maybe what he’s talking about is, well, you’re taking these 

hobby courses or you’re taking aerobic dancing, expecting the 

local rec board to put them on, or a local interest group to put it 

on. And that’s privatizing. Well I would argue that that’s been 

going on for the last 10 years. We went from 80 per cent to 4 

per cent of the hours. 

 

The local photography club is quite prepared in Weyburn, 

Saskatchewan to put on photography courses for the hobbyist if 

you like. So I don’t know how that would stack up to 

privatization. But then he talked about haircutting. And we’ve 

had a number of beauty colleges in the province that have 

served the public well for 20 years or more — 30, 40 years, I’m 

not sure. They have a long, illustrious history. Is he suggesting 

that somehow they haven’t done the job? I doubt it. So where 

. . . I don’t know where this privatization bogy man argument 

comes from. But really, Mr. Chairman, the point I’m trying to 

make — it doesn’t matter whether you’re standing in this House 

discussing whatever issue, the NDP have not come up with one 

alternative suggestion to restructuring adult education. 

 

No, they try to create the smoke and mirrors. Instead of saying, 

Mr. Minister, you’re wrong, you should look at this, what do 

they say? Well you’re wrong because we think big government 

is better. You’re wrong because you shouldn’t be doing it for 

Weyerhaeuser; you shouldn’t be doing it for Peter Pocklington; 

you shouldn’t be doing it for all these reasons. But they never 

address the question of education. They never say, well, instead 

of doing this, you should do that. They have never addressed 

the issue of restructuring once. 

 

They have never said well, Mr. Minister, we see what the 

numbers are saying about the ageing population; we see the 

studies that say you’re going to have to be retrained three and 

four and even eight times in your lifetime, and this is what you 

should do about it. But not one word has come from them. Not 

one word, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Well the final point that I would make is why not one word 

from them in terms of how to make change? Well as I said the 

other night in this legislature, Mr. Chairman, they have become 

pro-establishment. They are no longer the reform party in this 

province and, in fact, the only characterization that I can really 

put on them in one single word is, Mr. Chairman, they have 

become change resisters. 

 

They want to bury their head in the sand. They want to pretend 

that the world is not changing. They want to pretend that we’re 

not moving from a resource-based economy to a 

knowledge-based economy that’s going to require 

diversification, create new opportunities and new challenges. 

They want to pretend that the baby boom is not becoming the 

. . . is not greying. They want to pretend that we’re not going 

. . . that the world economy is not changing. They want to 

pretend that the information-aged economy is not coming upon 

us. They want to pretend there’s no technological era 

happening. They want to pretend that we’re still in the industrial 

economy. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, we cannot do that. We cannot do that 

because of the fact that he’s got a new baby in his  

house; I have young children, as do others, and we must 

position ourselves for this next two decades. Not because what 

we’ve done in the past is wrong, but because there’s going to be 

changed circumstances in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, I am undeterred in our goal. We’re 

on the right track. I’m quite prepared to debate the fine points. 

There’s no question that there’s always one or two ways you 

can do things. But the reality is, Mr. Chairman, change must be 

made. We can debate how. We can debate why. We can debate 

the “what.” But the reality, Mr. Chairman, is change must be 

made, and changes will be made. Changes will be made. 

 

Every advice I get, whether it be the universities, the technical 

institutes, or the community colleges, there have to be change. 

Change is different, and we’re going to do it, and we’re going 

to do it better for the people of this province, Mr. Chairman. 

That’s my commitment to the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to a fairly specific 

question, the minister has taken 60 minutes. He reminds me of 

watching a monkey walk around from place to place, not 

knowing exactly where he’s going, but interested in everything 

at the same time and not making any sense about anything. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, what it does is it reveals the lack 

of discipline he has with his own speech pattern, and I’m afraid 

it’s reflected also on the Department of Education. 

 

The minister has clearly shown that he is not prepared to listen 

to any of the questions that have been asked. He’s using an 

approach very similar that he used to the requests in my 

constituency when the Prince Albert Community College board 

was forced to resign. In the amalgamation that the department 

has set up and organized — the take-over of the community 

college in favour of a super board, including the Northern 

Institute of Technology and the community colleges and the 

institutes of technology in the other centres of Saskatoon, 

Regina and Moose Jaw — the question of self-governance was 

put to the minister, and he stonewalled it. 

 

And he stonewalled it and he stonewalled it till eventually the 

enrolments in the community college in Prince Albert, which 

ordinarily would be for approximately 50 university classes per 

year . . . and they were expecting 50 this year as they had last 

year and the enrolments had been climbing year after year after 

year, except for this particular year because of the uncertainty 

created by the minister and his department. 

 

We find that even at this stage, community college . . . the 

enrolment in the university classes in Prince Albert is down to 

under 50 per cent. Why? Because the minister spent all his time 

talking instead of listening. And he could have well listened 

because there was a well-founded institution in the community 

college system in Prince Albert. 

 

The system there had been in place for 20 years. It had a  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1515 

 

component in it which was unique to Saskatchewan. That was a 

component of local government, and a component of local 

government consisting of partially an elected board and 

partially an appointed board — a board which was very 

sensitive to the needs of the community, and was providing 

service that not one person that I knew of in our district ever, 

ever complained about. And they were prepared to carry on 

with the suggestions from the department, and prepared to 

integrate the knowledge and the experience that they had to 

carry on the adult education section in the district of Prince 

Albert. But the minister refused to listen. 

 

And today I was given a sample, we were given a sample, of the 

kind of attitude that the board must have been facing. Complete 

arrogance — complete arrogance. The problem is this, Mr. 

Chairman: in education, never before, never before in my 

lifetime have there been cut-backs. Never before has a minister 

of Education yielded to a minister of Finance who said, the 

problem is going . . . our objective is going to be in one year, or 

in two years, to cover up the mess and the mismanagement of a 

government that I have made. Never before. 

 

(1245) 

 

And as a result, he’s caved in, so that the money is being taken 

from education, from community colleges, from school boards 

— 1 per cent cut in grants from the educational development 

fund has been taken — so that they can pay their friends $3.4 

billion of debt. Accumulated how? It should have gone to 

education; it should have gone to health; but it was accumulated 

by paying the likes of Peter Pocklington $20 million. It was 

accumulated by not collecting any money from Weyerhaeuser 

in the sale, not collecting one cent. We’re waiting for that 

report; we’re waiting for that report — $248 billion. 

 

The member — the critic for Energy — has pointed out to the 

Energy Minister a loss of 1.8 million in revenue . . . 1.5 billion 

in revenue, in oil, oil revenue. No, they are not as interested in 

putting all the money and continuing the priority for education. 

They would instead support, and the Minister of Education 

would instead support, the transporting of the Minister of 

Justice to a wedding in Calgary. 

 

Let me talk about, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman, let me talk 

about the Prince Albert (Regional) Community College, and 

how this all happened — how the people of Prince Albert were 

betrayed by this minister. 

 

There were 300 people that attended a meeting that the college 

called when they found out that the minister was going to take 

over the college. And this meeting included students, teachers, 

board members, past board members, interested members of the 

public. What did the chairman of the board have to say at this 

meeting? The chairman of the board said: 

 

We feel, as a community, betrayed. We feel we were not 

consulted, that the decision came as a surprise to us. That 

although we knew amalgamation was one of the things 

being considered, we were told as late as two weeks ago  

that it was just one of the things being considered. 

 

That is recorded in the May 5 edition of the Prince Albert Daily 

Herald. Those were the words of the chairman of the board. 

The minister went around and set up these consultations, these 

questions — these consultations around the province, Mr. 

Chairman, consultations by invitation. He talked to who he 

wanted to talk to. I maintain that the plan was set up ahead of 

time, Mr. Chairman. I maintain it was set up ahead of time and 

this was mere camouflage — those consultations were mere 

camouflage. 

 

The amalgamation plan was already under way. They wanted to 

destroy . . . The minister wanted to destroy local programming, 

and he wanted to destroy local boards because he doesn’t 

believe in local boards. 

 

I wonder why, in proceeding in this direction . . . and we’re 

trying to find out, Mr. Minister. What did the college staff have 

to say about the proposed merger to the technical school? They 

wrote a letter to our Premier, and it says here, in the May 20 

edition of the Prince Albert Daily Herald: 

 

“One of the objections in the letter which has not been 

elaborated (long) enough, is the economic losses,” said 

(the) association chairman . . . 

 

“Our contracts we’ve had with local suppliers now may be 

handled (only) through provincial control.” 

 

Loss of local control — very important to the people of 

Saskatchewan. A tradition in Saskatchewan to have local 

control. School boards across Saskatchewan have enjoyed that 

tradition. The community college in Prince Albert was 

developing that tradition; it could have been built upon. No, it 

was taken away. He wants the power. It was taken away. 

 

The article goes on to say: 

 

When tenders and job applications are handled out of 

Regina, the association fears the local suppliers and 

contractors will be hurt. Another factor which could affect 

the economy of Prince Albert, says Karoly, is the potential 

loss of job security of individual in this city . . . 

 

The association has stated the Prince Albert community, 

through various councils, committees, boards and liaison 

with business and community contracts has had a 20 year 

history of successful participation in adult education. 

 

Successful participation. It wasn’t a case of something needed 

to be fixed, and it wasn’t the case of not being flexible. It was a 

case of not being listened to. It was a case of the minister 

talking and the minister not listening. 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, what it was that 

the community colleges did and what they were doing and what 

their mandate was, not only in Prince Albert — particularly, in 

this case, because it’s worth noting. 

 

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1516 

 

I have a list here of 23-some categories of work that the 

community college did and the programs that they provided, not 

only to Prince Albert but to the rural areas as well: counselling 

and information centre; full-time basic literacy program; 

full-time, adult, 5 to 10 upgrading in both rural areas and in 

Prince Albert; full-time, adult, 11 to 12 upgrading in both rural 

areas and in Prince Albert; basic job readiness; French learning 

centre. 

 

Now these are but nine of the programs: agricultural short 

courses; power engineering; computer short courses; university 

off-campus program, from the University of Saskatchewan, 

University of Regina, Athabasca University, University of 

Oregon; general interest classes in rural and urban areas — 

that’s cancelled. The university off-campus program, as I 

mentioned earlier, Mr. Chairman, and you should know this; 

this is close to your riding — only half the enrolment this year. 

 

People feel very uncertain. They don’t know if the programs are 

going to be continued or not continued. So they’re trying . . . 

Instead of coming to the college, they are now looking to go to 

the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. University of 

Saskatchewan in Regina. Tremendous costs to the parents. 

Why? Due to the uncertainty by this take-over. No other reason, 

Mr. Chairman, no other reason. 

 

The college provided general interest classes in rural and urban 

areas. They provided institute credit modules, home care, 

special care aid, waiter/waitress training, building maintenance. 

Do you think for a moment that this was developed overnight? 

It took 20 years to develop a program that was accepted by the 

community, a growing program. It took 20 years to develop 

personnel and to have a board with a commitment to serve 

1,200 people - 1,200 people per year in the community. All of a 

sudden it’s taken over. 

 

It’s interesting to look at the procedure that was used to take 

over. Here is a memorandum dated April 28 from the deputy 

minister of Education to institute principals. It talks about 

process for the amalgamation of technical institutes and 

community colleges. And in the memorandum it talks about 

college amalgamation teams. It says: 

 

Four urban teams will be responsible for providing advice 

and helping guide the amalgamation. These teams will be 

comprised of current college board members. 

 

They didn’t ask the board. This is a board which was elected 

and was responsible to the community. This is a take-over. 

Nobody asked. It was a take-over. Now what would you, Mr. 

Chairman, do if you were faced with the situation where you 

had been elected by the people but you’ve got a Minister of 

Education that’s got a completely different agenda and issues a 

take-over? 

 

So I’m saying, Mr. Minister, that what has happened is the 

minister, instead of listening to the residents and to the college 

board, the representative of the residents, and the college board, 

the representative of the students of the college — instead of 

listening and providing an option as  

did the Minister of Education when the community college 

system was set up . . . Because the Prince Albert regional 

community college was set up prior to the setting up of the 

community college system in the province. And they had the 

unique position of having an elected board and of having a 

partially appointed board. And the minister at that time agreed 

that what was working should not be tampered with at that time. 

 

But this Minister wouldn’t, wouldn’t listen. He offered . . . what 

did he offer? Well he offered a consultative a process. He 

wanted them to do their dirty work for him. He wanted them to 

first of all fire those people that were no longer needed under 

the amalgamated system, and then he would take over in the 

hole. 

 

I have here an article from the P.A. Herald, May 1. The 

headline is: 

 

Merging community college with Northern Institute of 

Technology ends a community adult learning link. Two 

decades of community involvement in education have 

been ended. 

 

This has been a . . . this is by a statement, a statement issued by 

the Prince Albert Regional Community College. It states: 

 

The statement issued Thursday says the government, by 

dissolving the college’s board, is wiping out a lengthy 

tradition of community-based decisions and local 

autonomy. 

 

No respect for democracy, Mr. Chairman. No respect for 

democracy. That college had a staff . . . has a staff of 300 

part-time and 88 permanent employees. What guarantee did 

they have? They had no guarantee that these people would 

remain employed. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to move we 

rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I can’t accept the motion. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will try to 

conclude my remarks just in a minute. 

 

One of the biggest losses to the entire community, besides the 

loss of local control, Mr. Chairman, is the loss of personal 

development courses in the college. I’ve had people tell me that 

in rural Saskatchewan those personal development courses were 

one of the best forms of therapy — best form of therapy. Not 

only therapy, but the personal development courses led to an 

enrichment of their livelihoods. 

 

Now these courses are no longer under the mandate of the 

community college. In fact, they’re no longer under the 

mandate of anybody in this province. That’s a result of this 

take-over, and that is the reason that the people are objecting to 

the take-over, Mr. Chairman. 

 

It goes against the grain of the most accepted principles in 

education. Indeed, it goes against the grain of the  

  



 

July 30, 1987 

1517 

 

principle stated in this particular document, Directions — the 

objectives, the goals for Saskatchewan. The second, the third, 

and the fourth objectives after the first one of basic skills — the 

second one talking about lifelong learning, the third one talking 

about understanding and relating to others, and the fourth one 

about self-concept development. 

 

The cancellation of these courses ignores the very document 

published by this department. That’s why this minister has no 

confidence . . . has lost the confidence of the people of Prince 

Albert and the people that are in the community college system. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have a question for the minister. Will you, Mr. 

Minister, will you reconsider, in view of the continued 

opposition of the amalgamation of the community college with 

the Northern Institute of Technology? Will you reconsider? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, relative to the 

Prince Albert Regional Community College board, the hon. 

member said quite pointedly, point-blank in fact, that I had 

forced him to resign. That is absolutely wrong. They resigned 

voluntarily, in fact caught me quite me by surprise when they 

did, Mr. Chairman. I had nothing to do with their resignation. 

They voluntarily resigned. 

 

And I want to add one other point, and I want to make it again 

because I’ve made it in this House before. That board can hold 

its head high in terms of what it has accomplished in Prince 

Albert area over the past several years. Because as I told them 

in my . . .and I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, as well, that I 

myself and officials have had many meetings with that board 

over this past summer and late spring. 

 

As I told them when I met with them, that the changes that we 

are contemplating, they ought not take it personal, they ought 

not interpret that somehow we’re doing these changes because 

what they’ve done in the past has been wrong, or somehow 

failed us, and all those reasons I presented before. What we 

were talking about is making sure we were positioned for the 

future, and I talked about that at some length earlier today. 

 

Now, the hon. member, if you cut through his comments, Mr. 

Chairman, and he went through, I think it was, 26 program 

areas and tried to suggest that somehow these programs that 

have gone on in the past are not going to go on in the future. 

Well I’m going to tell you that with the exception of the hobby 

courses, virtually every one of those courses will continue and 

we expect to have the same kind of programming this year as 

we had last year. 

 

Now I know, as was said over here when he was talking about 

and decrying the fact that some of these general interest courses 

may not go on, the question was raised, you know: how many 

cakes will go undecorated? And that really is a substantive part 

of his argument. Certainly those hobby courses have played a 

useful role but the time is here to move forward. 

 

I’ve got one more comment to make on this. The programming 

that those people want in that area will go on. And I’ll tell you 

what, Mr. Chairman, they continually  

avoid the issue. They get into talking about the hobby courses. 

They get into talking about Weyerhaeuser. They get into talking 

about oil companies. But that, Mr. Chairman, has been a feature 

of this session of the legislature. The issues that Saskatchewan 

society today are facing is, are we going to have an education 

system that we need for the 21st century? 

 

What about what’s happening in agriculture? Well what have 

we seen? They’ve avoided the issues there. They’re on a 

143-day cycle when it comes to raising issues of agriculture in 

this legislature. The issues of today are the things like . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. The member is somewhat 

straying from the educational reference. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:06 p.m. 


