


















































June 30, 1987 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 30, 1987 
 

849 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — I hereby present and lay on the Table the following 
petition by Mr. Rolfes, of Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation 
of Saskatoon. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Gerich: — I give notice that I shall, on Friday next, move 
that this Assembly hereby commemorate the 25th anniversary 
of medicare in Saskatchewan and acknowledge the desire and 
the right of Saskatchewan people to have a high quality 
medicare system based on the principles of universality and 
accessibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

25th Anniversary of Medicare in Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a 
question to the Premier. And, as he has been apprised, 
tomorrow marks the 25th anniversary of the institution of 
medicare in Saskatchewan, the first publicly funded universal 
health care plan in North America. And can the Premier advise 
the House what public events his government has planned to 
commemorate this important anniversary in the history of our 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health will 
be making a ministerial statement after question period with 
respect to the designation of a unique day in our province, and 
he will be elaborating to some extent on the past history of 
medicare and on the future of health care. 
 
And if I could just say, Mr. Speaker, in this province we have 
enjoyed – enjoyed – not only the history, but in the last few 
years, a significant increase in the determination and the 
allocation of resources to health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan, which has been significant. And as well, Mr. 
Speaker, as the hon. member knows, a great protection for the 
public, including the removal of extra billing, consistent with 
the whole principles of medicare, accessibility, and universality 
across the piece. And we’re very proud to celebrate the 25th 
anniversary at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it the 
intention of the Premier in commemoration of this anniversary 
to announce that the previously announced cuts in the 
prescription drug program and the children’s dental program 
will no longer go forward, and that the medicare plan will be 
continued intact, and not in a truncated form? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if we had to continue it 
intact as it was when we took office, it would mean that we’d 
have to take back a whole bunch of money with respect to the 
allocation of resources we put into health care. I mean, let me 
say, Mr. Speaker, that the CCF, I believe, deserve some credit. 
The former premier, Mr. T. C. Douglas, deserves some credit 
with respect to health care. That does not carry consistently, Mr. 
Speaker, onto the NDP. 
 
We had to take over at a time when there was a freeze on 
nursing home construction in this province, and we built them. 
And we were glad to do that. We had to increase the funding, 
Mr. Speaker, by 63 per cent, from 700 million to 1.2 billion. We 
were happy to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve looked at making modifications to the chiropody 
program. We’ve removed extra billing, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
didn’t do any of those. So I am happy to say that health care in 
the province of Saskatchewan is in better hands today, and will 
be for the next 25 years as a result of the change we’ve recently 
made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will you, 
Mr. Premier, again confirm that your government will not 
proceed with the proposed changes in the prescription drug 
program and the children’s dentistry program? Or is your 
government going to persist in the erosion of medicare by the 
virtual elimination of those two programs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 
when we send children to the dentist and pay for it, it’s not an 
erosion of the dental program. Mr. Speaker, that is an 
improvement in the program, and the people in public health 
will tell you that, that the professional people are looking after 
the children, and we’re paying for it all, Mr. Speaker. Our 
expenditures in health care are up 63 per cent from when we 
took office. The hon. member knows that this isn’t destroying 
the dental program; this is a better dental program, a better 
dental program for those young people because they’re going to 
the best professionals any place that you can find in Canada to 
have their teeth fixed, and we pay for it all. We pay for the 
whole thing. 
 
Now he’ll say, Mr. Speaker, ah, but what about the teenagers in 
health? And I will challenge him any place with respect to the 
priorities in health. When they started the idea in ’44, when it 
was initiated in the ‘60s, you didn’t have the drug problems you 
have today; you didn’t have the alcohol problems. They want to 
go back to the past and say, cavities are the problem of the ‘60s. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re not the problems of today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. We have 
heard the Premier say that to ask someone to go from Nokomis 
to Regina or Watrous to seek dental care is an improvement of 
the program. Are we now to expect that those same people will 
be told that the Nokomis hospital 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

850 
 

is going to be closed, and they can go to the Regina or Watrous 
hospitals, and that will improve the program? Is that your 
proposal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 
the NDP record on the closure of hospitals and the demise of 
rural Saskatchewan was under his administration, not this 
administration. You will see more dentists and more doctors in 
rural Saskatchewan than you’ve ever seen before, Mr. Speaker. 
We are dedicated to rural Saskatchewan. We wouldn’t take $1.5 
billion in rural programs, gas distribution programs, power line 
burial, individual line service – all those commitments. You 
wouldn’t stand up for rural Saskatchewan. You forgot it in the 
‘60s; you forgot it in the ‘70s; and you won’t have a chance in 
the ‘80s, Mr. Speaker, because we’re going to look after it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary, Mr. Premier. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It may not be the final supplementary 
on that account. 
 
Will the Premier concede that the greatest closing of rural 
hospitals that this province has ever seen was in the days when 
the now Minister of Finance was advising the Liberal 
government? That was the days when he was a Liberal and we 
had – yes indeed – and we had eight rural hospitals closed in 
one week. Will the Premier concede that the same man who is 
giving him advice on improper budget figures is the man who 
advised on closing eight rural hospitals? Will he concede that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, he can’t . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! Would you please allow 
the Premier to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the hon. 
member can’t defend his record so he has to go back to the old 
Liberal record. I’ll say our record, the Progressive conservative 
government, when it comes to rural nursing homes, when it 
comes to integrated units, when it comes to the provision of 
health care and the amenities of life in rural Saskatchewan, this 
government’s record will stand against any government in the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan, and he knows it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 

Hospital Waiting Lists in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Premier, on this 25th anniversary of 
medicare, we have more than 10,000 people on the waiting list 
in Saskatoon, and we have more than several thousand on 
waiting lists across the province. Yet your government has cut 
funds available to Saskatchewan hospitals while it spends more 
than $17 million per year on expensive political advertising. 
How can you justify 

those kind of spending priorities when we have more than 
10,000 people on the waiting list in Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of 
sympathy for people who are on waiting lists. And I want to say 
to the hon. member that we are in the process of examining 
health care administration very, very carefully in the province 
of Saskatchewan for the following reasons. Mr. Speaker, I want 
the member . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Would you please 
allow the Premier to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The member from Quill Lakes is 
resorting to his old habits, and the people of the province, Mr. 
Speaker, know that there is a loud voice in this legislature that 
booms all the time, and it’s the member from Quill Lakes, and 
he won’t . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. We can’t have an orderly conduct of question period if 
we have constant interruptions of the individual attempting to 
answer the question, so let’s try it again, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will answer the hon. 
member from Saskatoon. As the hon. member knows, waiting 
line-ups are a problem, and we’re looking at it from a historical 
point of view as well as into the future. Let me give you an 
example. 
 
We spend more money per capita on health care, on health care, 
Mr. Speaker, than anybody else in the world. We spend ...We 
have more beds per capita, Mr. Speaker, than anybody else in 
Canada. We are 31 per cent above the national average. We 
have over 7,000 beds and, at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we 
see that we only use 5,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you start to look at some of the 
characteristics and the reasons for that particular problem, 
spending more money than any body else in Canada, more beds 
than anybody else in Canada, and you still have a line-up, and 
you see the line-ups growing, with a 63 per cent increase in 
health care expenditures . . . 
 
Now we start to look at the number of physicians in Saskatoon, 
compared to other jurisdictions – 100 to 150 more physicians in 
Saskatoon. You see, as the number of physicians are growing, 
you see the line-ups in the hospitals growing. Is there some 
correlation, Mr. Speaker? You look at the line-ups in other 
jurisdictions across Saskatchewan. Is the line-up as high in 
Regina? No. Is the line-up as high in Moose Jaw? Are the 
waiting lists as large in Estevan, Prince Albert, Melfort? No, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What’s it saying? We’re spending more and more money per 
capita than anybody else, increasing at a very rapid rate, more 
beds than anybody else, more doctors going into one centre. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what do we see? We see the line-ups 
increasing. We’re going to examine it, Mr. Speaker, because we 
believe we can address the problem. 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

851 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Premier, there’s no question that you 
spend more per capita on advertising, political advertising, than 
any other jurisdiction in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And, Mr. Speaker, there may be some 
questions to the number of beds in Saskatchewan, but we also 
have the largest number of bed closures in this country this 
summer. 
 
My question to you is this: will you not realize that these 
reductions, these cuts, will mean longer waiting lists and . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. We’re having difficulty 
hearing your question, so would you please repeat it? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Will you not admit, Mr. Premier, that these 
cuts in hospital spending will mean longer waiting lists and, 
more importantly, longer waiting times for access to hospitals? 
Will you now admit that? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, no, we will not admit 
because, first of all, there have not been cuts in hospital 
spending, Mr. Speaker – a very important point to make. 
Despite the rhetoric, very heated rhetoric, from the member 
opposite, that’s the fact. 
 
Last Friday, Mr. Speaker, in the city of Saskatoon, I was there – 
as was her colleague and one of the members from the opposite 
benches – at the opening of a day surgery unit at City Hospital, 
a significant event in the life of the hospitals in Saskatoon as it 
relates to reducing the waiting lists in Saskatoon. That day 
surgery unit is from this government, $1.3 million over and 
above any other hospital grants that are going in there based on 
the regular formula : — $1.3 million into that particular unit to 
address waiting lists and $750,000 from the patient care fund, 
as well, over and above. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is addressing the waiting list 
problem. This government acknowledges the waiting list 
problem in the city of Saskatoon. And we will continue to 
address it, and we must address it in a step-by-step and in a 
logical way, which is what we are doing. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary to the Minister of Health. Mr. 
Minister, was not that day surgery unit ready to open on April 
1, but because City Hospital couldn’t get any commitment out 
of you for additional funding, they weren’t opening it until the 
government would come up with additional money? 
 
And, in fact, that hospital day surgery was there waiting for 
over two months, but you people weren’t prepared to make . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the circumstances as 
outlined by the member from Saskatoon Nutana are 

simply not so. 
 

Funding of Hong Kong Trading Office 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Finance. The minister should understand that when 
the government is pleading poverty, as he has been doing and as 
the government has been doing, and preaching restraint to 
everyone else. Taxpayers have a right to know exactly who you 
are spending their money. 
 
A few weeks ago, the government cut $34,000 from its grants to 
the Voice of the Handicapped, with the argument that every 
dollar counts. Yet the Provincial Auditor’s report, tabled in this 
legislature, shows clearly that your government spent $31,000 
buying furniture for its Hong Kong trade office : — $31,000 for 
its Hong Kong trade office furniture. 
 
Mr. Minister, if the deficit is your chief concern, why didn’t 
those dollars count? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to clarify one part of 
the member’s argument that the deficit was the chief concern. I 
think we have indicated today, with hospital expenditures up 2 
per cent, significant increases in other areas of government 
expenditure, that the deficit is a major concern, but to say it is 
the chief concern and the only concern is not accurate. The 
specific details of the expenditure, I’ll ask the member, or the 
minister responsible for Economic Development and Trade, to 
answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Minister, you preach restraint on one 
hand, yet your government practises unrestrained spending on 
the other. How can you justify spending $31,000 to buy 
furniture for a government office in Hong Kong, and $504,000 
to lease that office space in the first place, when you are 
preaching restraint at home and raising everybody’s taxes? How 
do you explain that double standard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, all provinces in Canada 
are looking to the Asia Pacific region as a very important 
trading region of the world, an area of the world that we rely on 
for significant sales of potash, of canola, of wheat, of uranium, 
of a variety of other things that we produce in this province. It’s 
imperative and important, Mr. Speaker, that we have a presence 
in the Asia Pacific, just as Manitoba, Alberta, B.C., Ontario, 
Quebec, and some of the maritime provinces have a presence in 
the Asia Pacific. 
 
I can advise the member that the dollars being spent over there, 
while high, because that’s ...It costs a lot of money, whether 
you’re in Japan or whether you’re in China, or whether you’re 
in Hong Kong or wherever. But the dollars being spent by the 
province of Saskatchewan are lower than the dollars being spent 
by their friends in Manitoba, far lower than what is being spent 
by Alberta, 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

852 
 

British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec. 
 
That they are to argue, Mr. Speaker, somehow, that we should 
not bother going to Asia Pacific, that we should not somehow 
bother with trying to increase our trading markets for our 
businesses, for our farmers, I think that is misguided, I think it 
is short-sighted, and I think it is backward looking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Employment of Former MLA as Consultant 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Deputy Premier. On Friday, June 19, you took notice, Mr. 
Deputy Premier, of a question concerning the employment of a 
former PC MLA for Moosomin, Mr. Birkbeck. I ask the Deputy 
Premier: is the former PC MLA, or any company he is involved 
with, employed by or under contract to any government 
department head, agency, or Crown corporation? And further, 
has Mr. Birkbeck at any time been involved or any company 
that he’s been involved with, has he been employed by any 
government agency, Crown corporation, since last October? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The question was rather long and 
convoluted. Let me understand the question. The question is: is 
the former MLA for Moosomin working for any government, 
Crown, or agency, or department, or whatever? The answer is 
no. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, has any company that the 
former PC MLA been involved with, or is involved with, been 
employed by the government or contracted by the government, 
of any Crown corporation, or agency, or department of the 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I obviously, Mr. Speaker, don’t know 
what multitude of companies this individual may be involved 
in. But I can say, not to my knowledge, no company that this 
person is involved in is working for any government 
department, agency, or Crown. 
 
Rumoured Sale of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today is to 
the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company. On June 24, on page 696 of Hansard, you told this 
Assembly, and I quote: 
 

We are not in the process of negotiations for the sale of 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company at this point in time. 
 

Can the minister tell us how that statement jibes with what the 
Premier said the very next day in Saskatoon when he told 
reports, and I quote: 
 

Will we bring in new management? Go into joint venture 
with somebody else? Has somebody offered to buy it? I 
won’t say anything. 

Mr. Minister, if there’s no sale and no negotiations for a sale, 
why wouldn’t the Premier make the same straightforward 
statement you made? Did you mislead this House last week, or 
is the Premier’s office in total charge of transportation and 
handling this sale, leaving you and your officials out in the 
cold? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I take a fair bit of 
exception to the member’s allegation from the opposite side of 
the House that I or the Premier in any way misled this 
Assembly or the public of Saskatchewan. I stated a number of 
days ago, and I will state again: we are not in the process at this 
point in time of negotiating the sale of the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. I think the words that the Premier 
spoke in Saskatoon were along the same lines. I see absolutely 
no discrepancy between what the Premier said and what I stated 
a few days ago. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Again, to the minister responsible for 
transportation: can the minister make it clear what options the 
government has in mind to “improve the operations” of the 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order, please. The 
member ...several days ago we ruled that we would not use 
quotes in our supplementaries, so I would ask the member to 
please adhere to that rule. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Fair enough, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister tell 
us what, indeed, what are the improvements in operations that 
you’re speaking about? What is it that is going to happen, and 
do these options include the sale of the bus company or do they 
not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, for the hon. member’s 
information, I would like to stress to you, and I would like to 
stress to the public of Saskatchewan, the direction that this 
government is taking and will be taking in the future with 
respect to the Saskatchewan Transportation company. 
 
I can assure you, Mr. Member, that this government is 
committed to providing a comprehensive, affordable, 
convenient, reliable, safe transportation system to the people of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Summer Bed Closures and Critical Surgery 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, a question for the Premier. One 
of the examples of erosion, in fact, in our medicare system in 
Saskatchewan is the long line-ups at our hospitals everywhere, 
most particularly in the city of Saskatoon. The policy of 
summer bed closures this particular year, Mr. Speaker, is the 
largest and the longest ever, including, I am told, 18 out of 42 
beds closed on pediatric wards in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Saskatoon neurosurgeons have advised me that they have at 
least five young children with skull deformities, where the 
surgery needs to be done at a very critical time – it’s not 
something that can wait a week or two; timing is critically 
important – and the pediatric bed closures are, 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

853 
 

in fact, preventing or threatening . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The member’s question 
is becoming overly long, or the preamble to the question. 
Would you please place your question. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Yes, I certainly will come immediately to the 
question, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that those pediatric 
bed closures are threatening timely surgery, will the Premier 
give us his commitment that those bed closures in relation to the 
pediatric wards in Saskatoon will, in fact, not proceed this 
summer and cause that difficulty in the city of Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would just ask the hon. 
member if he would provide me with the names of the patients, 
and the name of the hospital with the specific procedure. The 
Minister of Health will be glad to look at it. Let me say at the 
same time, the hon. member knows that closures in the summer 
time are nothing that is particularly new in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, when we’re looking at addressing the problem, the 
hon. member is not quite accurate when he says that we have 
line-ups all over the province of Saskatchewan. We have a 
concentration of the line-ups in the city of Saskatoon at the 
hospitals, not all over the province of Saskatchewan. And, in 
fact, if you could have more and more people getting their 
tonsils out and some other minor operations around the 
province, there would be more beds in Saskatoon. That’s 
precisely what we’re trying to d, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary dealing with 
the suggestion the Premier has made about enhancing regional 
hospitals to take the pressure off of the larger urban hospitals. I 
have received information that in respect of the Union Hospital 
in Moose Jaw that one particular orthopaedic surgeon in that 
city is perfectly prepared, equipped, ready to go, to do a large 
number of hip surgery operations in that city this summer and 
through the year, and he has been specifically limited to no 
more than 12 of those operations annually. 
 
If there are that sort of limitations, Mr. Premier, on regional 
hospitals like the one in Moose Jaw, how in the world can 
pressure be taken off the larger urban centres when there is that 
kind of a restriction at the regional level? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
outlines a specific circumstance of which I, you know, am not 
aware of the detail of, but I’ll certainly take notice of it and 
check into it if the facts are as he outlines, and we’ll report back 
to him within a few days, Mr. Speaker. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

25th Anniversary of Medicare 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, 1987 marks the 25th 
anniversary of the introduction of medicare in our province. In 
recognition of this milestone in the history of health care 
services in Saskatchewan, I’ve been pleased to proclaim July 2 
as Medicare Day in Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, our province has a long and proud heritage in the 
health care field. It’s a heritage characterized by people working 
together to build facilities and programs to meet the needs of 
their communities. The introduction of medicare in 1962 was in 
many ways the culmination of decades of hard work by 
Saskatchewan people, the next logical step in the development 
of a provincial health care system. 
 
Over the past 25 years we have seen the health care system 
grow steadily, mostly in terms of the services provided and the 
costs associated with them. Today in Saskatchewan we have a 
health care system of which we can all be proud, one which is 
second to none in Canada in the range and quality of services it 
provides to the people of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, medicare has become an integral and essential part 
of the fabric of Canadian society and its preservation is 
something which all Canadians support. There’s no denying 
that fiscal pressures are presenting governments right across our 
country with major challenges in the health care field. 
 
However, our government has taken the initiative to meet these 
challenges in a fair and sensitive way, in a way that will ensure 
the preservation and enhancement of medicare in Saskatchewan 
for many years to come. 
 
As we mark the 25th anniversary of medicare in our province, 
it’s appropriate that we recognize the contributions of Tommy 
Douglas, and other Saskatchewan people like him, in making 
Saskatchewan a leader in the health care field. At the same 
time, it is appropriate that we reaffirm our commitment to 
maintaining an effective health care system into the 1990s and 
beyond, so that future generations of Saskatchewan residents 
will continue to enjoy the finest health care in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on July 2 I urge all members of this Assembly, 
and indeed all residents of this province of Saskatchewan, to 
make a point of recognizing Medicare Day in Saskatchewan . 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the 
announcement made by the government. I deplore the fact that 
they would announce on June 30 that we’re going to have 
celebrations on July 2 with respect to medicare. If they had the 
slightest, if they had the slightest intent ...(inaudible 
interjection) ...Mr. Speaker, do I have the floor, or does the 
member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden have the floor? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — You have the floor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — He has the floor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now I deplore the fact that this 
government did not move a muscle to commemorate medicare 
until I sent to the Premier this morning the text of a resolution 
which I intended to introduce today. The resolution now being 
introduced by the member for 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

854 
 

Redberry – in exact same words – indicating that until . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I believe both sides of 
the House are getting into the debate. Will you allow the Leader 
of the Opposition to make his statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — ...indicating that until 9 o’clock this 
morning this government had neither indicated any desire to 
commemorate medicare, nor put anything on the order paper to 
commemorate medicare. 
 
Now at 9 o’clock on June 30, they decide that they must do 
something because July 1 is coming, and people are wanting to 
acknowledge the triumph that was achieved in July 1, 1962 over 
the opposition of ...some of the most bitter opposition that this 
province has ever seen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I expect, Mr. Speaker, that they will 
put in charge of these celebrations the Hon. Senator Barootes, 
because he led the opposition to medicare. He and other PCs 
resolutely opposed medicare, and to this day oppose medicare, 
and are attempting to wrap themselves in the cloak of Tommy 
Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd and others who were the genuine 
pioneers of medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — But, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the 
fact that the words come dripping with hypocrisy from 
members opposite; notwithstanding the fact that these same 
people who opposed medicare vehemently in 1962 and eroded 
it – and I speak now for the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden 
– particularly during the period from ’64 to ’71 in imposing 
deterrent fees and all the rest; notwithstanding the fact that they 
have set out to erode the additions made in the 1970s – and I 
instance the chiropractic care in 1972-73, and the children’s 
dentistry program in 1974, and the drug program in 1975, and 
we all know their commitment to those programs. 
 
Notwithstanding the fact that members opposite have no status 
to commemorate medicare in this province, we will join, not 
with them, but with the people of Saskatchewan in 
acknowledging the victory won on July 1, 1962, and the fact 
that everyone in Saskatchewan and indeed everyone in Canada 
is the beneficiary of the work of those pioneers on July 1, 1962, 
who instituted for Saskatchewan, and ultimately for all Canada, 
universal comprehensive medicare over the opposition of 
members of the Conservative Party at that time. And that 
opposition is carried on to this day by the members of the 
Progressive Conservative Party at this time. 
 
We acknowledge the pioneers. We believe that this is 
something which ought to have been part of the government 
celebrations – 48 hours before the event they decide they’re 
going to do something. We welcome the fact that Saskatchewan 
people, whether or not the government agrees, are 
complimenting those pioneers and are saying that we in 
Saskatchewan are the better for their work, they deserve to be 
acknowledged and commemorated, and we propose so to do. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Celebration of Canada Day 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to join with 
members of the Assembly and people in Saskatchewan and 
across Canada in the celebration of Canada Day tomorrow 
which marks the 120th anniversary of the country of Canada. 
 
Now I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that not only are people 
extremely proud of this country – proud of what has developed 
over the past 120 year. But we look forward to the next 100 
years and clearly into the next century, Mr. Speaker, making 
some major and significant changes in a new era for Canada. 
 
And let me refer to a couple. Let me refer most recently to the 
Meech Lake Accord which would knit together the entire 
country under one constitution. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
will mark a new era for this country. The amendments to the 
constitution and the resolution will be introduced in this 
session, in this legislature, and in legislatures across the 
country, and I believe it will pass, Mr. Speaker. And it will say 
a great deal for this country in that we will be knit together for 
the first time in history under our own constitution and have all 
jurisdictions part and parcel of this great nation; a new era, 
particularly so that we know that the province of Quebec and 
the province of Saskatchewan and provinces from coast to coast 
will be on equal footing for the first time in our history. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we will now have the opportunity for 
some major reform in this country that will make us stronger. 
Reform to the senate; reform to the way that we operate in this 
country; changes with respect to new provinces perhaps, and we 
can look forward to that; changes with respect to native issues; 
changes with respect to trade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re looking at a new era around the world with respect to the 
global village. And we are proud that Canada now takes a 
leadership role, not only in agricultural trade, not only on the 
multilateral negotiations, but in fact we see increasingly the 
provinces having more and more influence on the world, not 
only on the federal government, but in part on the world, and 
the way that it looks at trading with people right across the 
globe. 
 
We look forward to the advancement of new technology and the 
use of it we have here. We look forward to new world 
leadership opportunities. We look forward to the diversification, 
the processing and the manufacturing and the new jobs and the 
new excitement in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just say we are so proud to be part and parcel of 
this great country as it celebrates its 120th anniversary. This 
country was put together in 1867, and here we are in 1987 with 
a bright future, with many changes that we are going to make – 
many that are on the drawing-board right now that will be 
historic. And I just join with all other people in Saskatchewan 
and all those across Canada in saying, Happy Birthday Canada, 
your future looks tremendous. 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

855 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would want to join with 
the Premier in commemorating Canada Day. One hundred and 
twenty years since confederation and this country has grown 
and prospered and, I think, provided a fitting home for people 
from many lands and many origins, some who were here for 
many tens or hundreds of thousands of years, and some who 
have been here only a short number of months, a fitting home 
for them to develop their lives and develop their potential. 
 
We in this country believe that we are something unique and 
different, that we have a sense of being Canadian, a sense of 
having some concern for our neighbour, a sense of having a 
somewhat more compassionate society than exists in some parts 
of the world. I think this is what makes us distinctly Canadian, 
and I hope that this will be nourished in the years ahead. I hope 
that we can be internationalist in our outlook, not narrow. The 
Premier has referred to Meech Lake. I hope that that accord can 
be explained to the people of Saskatchewan. I hope that there 
will be widespread hearings so that the significance of this 
accord, which the Premier has referred to, can be understood by 
all Canadians, and particularly all those who are in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I hope that there will be opportunities for the people of 
Saskatchewan to put their views on the perception that the 
people who live in the Territories and aboriginal peoples have 
been left out of this accord. I hope that that happens. 
 
I look at trade, and I hope that Canada continues to be 
internationalist and multinationalist in its approach, and that we 
do not withdraw into any narrow North American trading block, 
shutting out the rest of the world; but that we take that act of 
faith, that we decide that we can compete with people all over 
the world, ant that we can trade with Japan and with Europe and 
Africa, and that, therefore, we don’t withdraw into any trading 
block which will inevitably have tariffs shutting out the rest of 
the world. 
 
Those, I think, indicate direction. Canada has always been – or 
at least in recent years since World War : — internationalist, 
very, very supportive of the General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade, and really quite opposed to little trading blocks around 
which tariff barriers are built. 
 
But I leave aside the questions of the constitution and trade, and 
come back to the sprit that has made us Canada. And I think it 
is important, Mr. Speaker, that this July 1 coincides with the 
25th anniversary of medicare, because in a very real way the 
health care programs, the social support programs which have 
been instituted on a nation-wide basis here in this country, are a 
distinctive feature of being Canadian. 
 
They are what distinguish us as Canadians from people in other 
lands. And I hope that we have the wisdom to recognize that 
what is distinctly Canadian is a sense of caring for our 
neighbours from coast to coast, and a sense of belief that we can 
act through things like medicare and 

the hospital plan and the Canada Assistance Plan and many 
others, to see that every Canadian is protected from the worst 
rigours of poverty and deprivation, and that every Canadian has 
the opportunity to develop his potential, to which I earlier 
referred, his potential physically, mentally, and spiritually. 
That, I think, is the essence of being Canadian, and I’m happy 
to join with the Premier in celebrating it today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1045) 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 10:46 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 13 – An Act for Granting to Her Majesty certain sums 
of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year Ending on 
March 31, 1988. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:47 a.m. 
 

STATEMENT 
 

Resignation of Member 
 

Mr. Martineau: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 
regret to inform you that as of this day I am resigning my seat 
as a member of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan for 
the constituency of Saskatoon Eastview. My business 
commitments are such that I cannot fully serve the needs of my 
constituents. I regret my inability serve full term, on their 
behalf, as they deserve and expect from their representative. 
The constituents of Saskatoon Eastview have honoured me with 
their trust, and I in turn must afford them the opportunity to 
have a representative in this legislature that is able to fully 
commit his time to their service. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to thank the constituents of 
Saskatoon Eastview and my executive for the support they have 
given me in this endeavour, and at this time, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to wish my best to all members of the House. I thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would wish to rise to 
commend the member, that has just been on his feet, for his 
courage and his integrity in making a very difficult personal 
decision. Those of us who serve in the Chamber know of the 
many pressures of the legislature and how they bear on family, 
and business, and opportunities in our professional careers. 
 
Mr. Martineau has decided to break cleanly, and with honour, to 
return to the private sector. I personally wish him the very best, 
and as the leader of the Progressive Conservative Party, I gladly 
accept his commitment to continue to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan and our party for the years to come. 
 
I know, Mr. Speakers, that all members join me now in 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

856 
 

wishing Mr. Martineau the very best in his future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 
I rise pursuant to rule 39 . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Excuse me. Excuse me, sir. If I may just have 
a couple of words before we get there. 
 
At this time, members of the Assembly, I would like to 
acknowledge the resignation of the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview, and I declare the seat for Saskatoon Eastview vacant. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Rule 39 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
pursuant to rule 39 to seek leave of the Assembly to move a 
motion on an issue of urgent and pressing necessity. I will take 
a moment to identify the issue and indicate the motion I see to 
move. 
 
I advised the government opposite this morning by way of a 
letter to the Premier that I would be seeking leave, and advised 
him of the content of the motion. We have already heard the 
content this time under the name of the member for Redberry, 
but I will move forward from that. 
 
It’s 25 years ago that universal comprehensive medical care 
insurance was launched. It is a matter of great pride for the 
people of Saskatchewan, and I know that all of us share that 
pride. Tomorrow is the day, and it seems appropriate that today 
we act to pass the motion and commemorate the pioneers. 
 
Across the province a number of health care institutions and 
associations have taken steps to have special commemorative 
events over the last month, and I have attended some, and I 
suspect others have. I think it would be fitting and appropriate 
for the Legislative Assembly to undertake such a 
commemoration today. 
 
I, therefore, seek leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to move 
a motion along the lines that I ...the exact words that I gave to 
the Premier earlier this morning. I will read them into the 
record: 
 

That this Assembly hereby commemorates the 25th 
anniversary of medicare in Saskatchewan, and 
acknowledges the desire and the right of 
Saskatchewan people to have a high quality medicare 
system based on the principles of universality and 
accessibility. 
 

Those, Mr. Speaker, were the words of the motion that I 
forwarded to the Premier earlier this morning. I think they are 
still very fitting. I don’t know who objects to them. I take it 
members opposite do not. I believe that today is the day when 
we can appropriately commemorate them, and I sincerely hope 
that all members will agree that this motion should be passed 
today. I invite all to join in supporting it. I rise, Mr. Speaker, 
pursuant to rule 39 

seeking leave to so proceed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Saskatchewan Economic Diversification 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege to again rise in 
this House, and it particularly a privilege to move the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its vision and foresight 
demonstrated in the economic diversification thrust 
initiated by it; and further commends the government 
for having the courage to make the changes necessary 
to have our young people prepared to participate in 
and to capture the opportunity presented by this 
diversification. 
 

As you can see, Mr. Speaker, there are really two elements to 
the motion. 
 
The first deals with the general need to broaden the base of our 
economy to bring it in step with the rest of the world and to 
work diligently and creatively to establish new economic 
activity throughout the province. The government’s record on 
economic diversification is indeed impressive. I’m sure you 
know the list fairly well, Mr. Speaker, but I would like to point 
out a few examples to get across the importance of 
diversification. 
 
If any member were asked, Mr. Speaker, what is the basis of the 
Saskatchewan economy, regardless of political stripe, he or she 
would surely answer that it is agriculture and natural resources. 
Saskatchewan was in fact built almost entirely upon agriculture, 
upon resources, and upon the resilience and skills of its people. 
 
The fur trade was the first natural resource that brought 
development to our province, and it was followed some time 
later by wheat. You may find it interesting to know, Mr. 
Speaker, that before Saskatchewan was settled, the CPR sent 
out a fellow named Palliser to study the potential for settlement 
in our province. Palliser came and drew a large triangle that 
took up a good deal of southern Saskatchewan, an area that has 
since become known to geography students as the Palliser 
triangle. This land, he said, was not fit for human habitation –
not fit, Mr. Speaker, for human habitation. 
 
Now you would have to agree that this is quite the challenge to 
deal with and, in a sense, quite the diversification challenge. 
Our forefathers went into the Palliser triangle anyway, Mr. 
Speaker. They did not listen to those who said it can’t be done. 
They disregarded the pessimists, the people who counselled 
staying at home and avoiding the challenge. Instead they went 
forward and built something with hard work and ingenuity. 
They learned new skills, new techniques, and new approaches 
to problems. 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

857 
 

Mr. Speaker, not only did they diversify their economy, they 
diversified themselves. They did this because one was not 
possible without the other. And they came up with one of the 
most productive agricultural areas in the world, Mr. Speaker. I 
talk about this bit of history because it is very much the kind of 
process and the kind of attitude that is needed today and that 
this government has embodied with its vision for our province. 
 
Just as there were before our province was settled, there are 
people today, Mr. Speaker, who say: do not go forward, do not 
change, and do not diversify. And that kind of person won out 
in the ...had that kind of person, Mr. Speaker, won out in the 
beginning, there would be no Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members across the way are like that. They do 
look backwards, but they only look so far. They look back to 
’71 or ’81. But, Mr. Speaker, just as their vision is so limited 
when looking forward, I suggest it is limited when looking into 
history. And I ask them, Mr. Speaker, just for a minute to get 
beyond themselves and their own personal remembrances to try 
to find out the great lessons of history for a while and to avoid 
the trivial pursuit of ego satisfaction. 
 
If they do that, Mr. Speaker, they will see that this government 
is indeed right. The lesson is simple: we must diversify our 
economy; we must diversify ourselves. So how do we go about 
that, Mr. Speaker? We can all agree that the basis of our 
economy is agriculture and resources. And included in those 
resources, if we are wise, we will count the talent and the 
ingenuity of our people. So, Mr. Speaker, it seems pretty 
straightforward that we must build on that base. 
 
I want to use a few examples. Because we are an agricultural 
economy, Mr. Speaker, we are obviously dependant on a great 
deal of agricultural equipment. Now we need to buy parts for 
that equipment. So would it not be a good idea, Mr. Speaker, if 
we could somehow create the necessary conditions that would 
see those parts manufactured right here in our own province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one new business that recently opened without too 
much ado is an example of such progress. I’m referring to the 
agricultural belts manufacturer who started production right 
here in Regina, Mr. Speaker. Now instead of obtaining them 
from Ontario or the U.S. or wherever, the great variety of belts 
needed for combines and bailers and the like will be made right 
here, providing employment opportunities and generating 
investment dollars. 
 
(1100) 
 
Another much larger example, Mr. Speaker, is the heavy oil 
upgrader. For 11 years the people across the way promised 
upgraders to almost everyone. But they didn’t know how to go 
about it, Mr. Speaker. They found the job of grappling with new 
technologies and massive scales just beyond them. This is too 
big a job for a little province like ours, they thought. And so 
although they continued to promise upgraders to all industry, 
they never delivered. But it was not beyond the ability of our 
people, Mr. 

Speaker. This government went and joined with that huge 
integrated corporation with all its subsidies and interlocking 
directorships. No, Mr. Speaker, I’m not talking about Imperial 
Esso; I’m talking about the other big corporation, the Co-op. So 
we joined with the Co-op, and we built the upgrader. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, the NDP were right about one thing. 
We did not have all the technology needed to make a go of it. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are not isolated in this world. No one has 
told us that we have to stay home and be content with what we 
have; rather, no one except those people across the way. We 
needed to acquire new technologies, new skills, and the ability 
to deal with a project of massive scale. So a moderate-sized 
engineering firm from Saskatoon entered a joint venture with a 
larger firm from the United States, and by working with that 
firm they obtained the needed technologies and the needed 
skills. They didn’t say, not us; we’ve never done it before. No, 
Mr. Speaker, instead they said, what an opportunity to diversify 
our firm. And they did. But there’s more, Mr. Speaker, because 
the U.S. firm did not have all the technology needed either. 
That’s right. The largest economy in the world – the U.S.A. – 
was short when it came to the things required to build an 
upgrader in Regina. 
 
So did we sit down and throw in the towel? You know we 
didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. We went to Japan and we 
negotiated a deal. And part of that deal resulted in more 
Saskatchewan employment. And parts of the upgrader 
technology were transferred here, and parts were manufactured 
here by yet another Saskatchewan company. Now that is a very 
instructive example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a resource in this province: heavy oil. By itself, it 
fetches a price, but not the best price, and the price that is 
deserved by the people of Saskatchewan. The government could 
have approached it in one of two ways. It could have said: 
we’re not happy with the price we’re getting, so we’ll 
nationalize it – as happened with the NDP and the potash 
industry. And we could have ended up with not one more job, 
not one more bit of technical know-how, and not one more bit 
of economic development. 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, we could have proceeded as we did. We got 
together with people who wanted to develop – people in the 
Co-op, people in firms in Regina and Saskatoon, people in the 
United States, and even people in Japan. We got together with 
all these people, and we said: if we work as a team, we’ll 
succeed. And you will note, Mr. Speaker, that we did succeed, 
and Saskatchewan has its upgrader. 
 
As a result, we will get a better price; we will get new 
technologies; we will get more employment; and we will get an 
expanded tax base; and we will get several Saskatchewan firms 
in a new position to compete and deal in the world market. 
 
But we have a new government ...I’m sorry. With those choices, 
Mr. Speaker, I find it hard to believe that the NDP always opt to 
take things over. But we have a new government and a new 
attitude, Mr. Speaker. So we are 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

858 
 

diversifying. 
 
And the second part of this motion, the part about preparing our 
young people to capture the opportunities, is a vital part of that 
diversification. Just as our forefathers had to learn new ways of 
farming dry land, and just as they passed on these skills to their 
children, today we must pass on new skills to our children. And 
that does take courage, Mr. Speaker, because change is 
generally uncomfortable. 
 
Instead of an oil upgrader, Mr. Speaker, we needed an 
education system upgrader. And in that, Saskatchewan had to 
look no farther than the city of Weyburn. But it can cause some 
concern, especially when jobs are lost and the oil familiar 
courses are changed. Yet, Mr. Speaker, I ask you whether you 
believe that the people of Saskatchewan are so timid and so 
unwilling to change that they would rather be comfortable in 
the old system than assure their children’s future with the new. 
 
There are no more Model T’s to repair, Mr. Speaker. And if we 
had the attitude of those people opposite, we would still be 
teaching our young people how to repair those Model T’s. The 
Thunderbirds, the Datsuns, and the Chevrolets would all break 
down, with today’s mechanics waiting for someone to bring in a 
Model T. 
 
Mechanics, I think, is a good example, Mr. Speaker, because 
that field is changing rapidly, even today. Not too long ago, if 
you knew the mechanical side, you could work on the entire 
car. It was all levers and nuts and bolts. But today, Mr. Speaker, 
there are computers that regulate the flow of gas, maintain 
checks on oil pressure and engine temperature and all manner of 
other things. Instead of a straightforward carburettor, they’re 
fuel injected. Instead of a radio, they have high fidelity 
Dolby-adjusted equalized stereos. And soon, Mr. Speaker, they 
will have onboard computers with maps and voice interactions, 
and only the imagination can tell what else. 
 
So a mechanic from the schools of 10 years ago would have a 
great deal of difficulty dealing with the entire car of today. 
Without exposure to computers, Mr. Speaker, that same 
mechanic will be totally lost with the car of tomorrow. 
 
I don’t want my children to be lost in an economy that has been 
penetrated by computers and information exchange and 
newness everywhere. I want my children to be comfortable 
around these new things, and well educated in some of them, so 
that they will be able to see the opportunity rather than 
confusion, so that they can get a hold of these new things and 
make them work for them, rather than be intimidated by them. 
That’s what I want for my children, Mr. Speaker, and I think the 
parents of Saskatchewan want the same for theirs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — This government has shown a determination 
and courage to ensure that our children are well prepared. 
Education is taking on an importance that perhaps no single 
human activity has ever held. And it is taking on new forms as 
well, Mr. Speaker. The institutes 

the government is establishing in tourism and entrepreneurship 
are an example of those new forms. 
 
Now the members opposite do not approve of the institute for 
entrepreneurs, Mr. Speaker. But I have to say that I was amazed 
to hear that the member from Regina North West, in his budget 
remarks, ranting and raving against private enterprise – 
rapacious capitalism, I think he called it. 
 
That member, Mr. Speaker, has run, or has tried to run, private 
business himself. And I can understand how he might feel that 
capitalism is rapacious, considering his unpleasant experience 
with Dairy Queen. But, Mr. Speaker, I ask him to keep 
perspective. 
 
Perhaps, if there had been an institute of entrepreneurism, this 
would have not happened to him. Perhaps someone more 
experienced in the ways of the market, and with a bit more 
developed business judgement, could have given him some 
guidance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, he should not let one failure sour 
him on allowing the rest of our young people a chance to 
acquire the skills needed to succeed in business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what he’s 
doing when he opposes the entrepreneurial institute. 
 
The tourism institute, Mr. Speaker, will also be a source of 
education diversification. We will use that institute to prepare 
the employers and employees in that industry to keep them up 
to date with new developments in the field, and to provide them 
with the basic knowledge to ensure Saskatchewan’s tourism 
industry grows and contributes greatly to this economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other changes that are being introduced 
by the Minister of Education that affect the whole range of 
activities that we usually talk about when we speak of the 
education system. One of the most fundamental of these 
improvements is the consolidation and renewal of our technical 
education systems. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I am excited about the 
prospects that this renewal holds for our province. While it is 
true that, in comparison to others, we are a relatively small 
province, the Minister of Education has devised a method to 
bring the economies and the power of scale to technical 
education in Saskatchewan by consolidating the various 
separated and smaller institutes into a renewed Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology. The allocation of 
resources, and the ability to maintain the highest standards will 
be greatly enhanced. 
 
By directing the innovation of new course . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member’s 
time has elapsed, so now I would like to ask him . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

859 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member’s 
time has elapsed, but he has not moved his motion, so I’d like to 
ask him now to move the motion. 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to move 
the aforementioned motion, seconded by the member from 
Redberry, and I ask that all members of the Assembly support 
the motion: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its vision and foresight demonstrated in the 
economic diversification thrust initiated by it, and further 
commends the government for having the courage to make 
the changes necessary to have our young people prepared to 
participate in, and to capture the opportunity presented by, 
this diversification. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to rise today and second the motion. As my 
hon. colleague from Pelly has so ably pointed out, we in 
Saskatchewan have a history of overcoming obstacles and 
doing things people said could not be done. The people of 
Saskatchewan have never backed away from a challenge, Mr. 
Speaker. They have never said, it’s too tough, and it can’t be 
done. No sir, they persevered time and time again. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we face a new challenge. Our traditional 
economic base has been badly shaken. Our agricultural and 
natural resource industries are victims of a depressed market 
and international trade wards. Mr. Speaker, some may say that 
this has happened before, and it has to some extent. The boom 
and bust cycle is familiar to the people of this province. 
Sometimes governments even plan their economic strategy with 
the idea that after every boom ...or every bust comes a boom. 
The more spectacular the boom the greater the bust. 
 
I mention this, Mr. Speaker, because back in the late 1970’s, 
and early 1980, Saskatchewan was experiencing quite a boom. 
And the NDP government of the day acted as if it would go on 
for ever. They didn’t diversify the economy because they didn’t 
see the need. Instead they bought more potash mines and 
uranium mines, mines that were already there. They didn’t build 
and they didn’t put anything away for a rainy day. They spent 
their time and money on projects that were already established. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when the Conservative government took 
power in 1982, the lack of planning on the part of the previous 
NDP administration was very obvious. Their Heritage Fund was 
a myth, a paper tiger, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They had left the 
adult education system in a run-down state. And worst of all, 
Mr. Speaker, they had left us without the economic 
diversification to survive in a downturn in our economy. 
 
I don’t need to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that our province suffered 
through high interest rates, droughts, and low resource 
revenues. The members opposite, though, seem to have 
forgotten what our province went through 

because they hadn’t been prepared. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Conservative government went to work 
immediately, broadening our province’s economic base. We 
brought in programs that encouraged manufacturing and 
processing. We worked to bring in outside investment, and 
worked to increase the competitiveness of our province’s 
exports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s efforts to diversify have paid 
off. We have a new heavy oil upgrader being built in Regina. 
We have a new paper mill being built in Prince Albert. And we 
have three new manufacturers and processing plants in North 
Battleford: the bacon plant, the RV plant, and a door 
manufacturing plant, Mr. Speaker, we’re proud of these jobs 
that have been created by these new and other diversified 
projects. The hundreds of new jobs are critical to our province’s 
economic health. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, projects like these, which create 
hundreds of jobs each, are going to be the exception and not the 
rule of the future. The rapid rise of high technology has caused 
a great shake-up in the world’s market-place, plus cutting job 
positions. Natural resources have become less important, while 
information, knowledge and high technology have become 
more important. Small- and medium-sized companies that deal 
in these areas are springing up all over the world. And they, Mr. 
Speaker, are the driving force behind the world economy. And 
they’re creating the jobs of tomorrow. 
 
(1115) 
 
It’s interesting to note that this is happening in countries like 
Japan, West Germany. And in these countries they have very 
powerful economies. And if we want to participate in this new 
market-place, we must try to encourage high technology 
companies. 
 
I am pleased to say that we have already started doing just that. 
In Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, almost 100 high technology 
companies have been set up since 1982, creating some 3,000 
new jobs. People across the world are discovering 
Saskatchewan’s high technology companies, companies that are 
already making their contribution to our province’s future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has created closely with 
these companies and with other groups active in high 
technology research, through the university research councils in 
particular. They told us that we were headed in the right 
direction, and our efforts are to diversify the economy. They 
also told us that we need to train more people and work in the 
new technologies of today. They said we need people that can 
work with computers, we need people that are familiar with 
biotechnology and, I should say, more people, Mr. Speaker. Our 
province’s education system has trained many young men and 
women in the technologies of the future, but we still need more. 
 
Our government saw the need to re-focus the province’s 
education system. Government revenues being what they are, 
we must deliver the most effective, efficient, and 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

860 
 

relative adult education system that we can possibly do. That 
means concentrating our resources so that excellence can be 
delivered from each and every educational institution in our 
province. That means changing our educational priorities so that 
programs being offered reflect the needs of our province today 
and in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government worked hard to ensure that our 
post-secondary education system reflects the province’s needs. 
We have built new technical institutes and expanded others. We 
have added on to our universities and we have begun the 
process of getting them ready for the 21st century through 
initiatives like university renewal and the development fund. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the Finance minister’s recent budget 
presentation, our government’s efforts to continue this process 
of building our education system for the future, we’ve outlined 
once again. We will continue to make our universities and our 
technical institutes more effective and more efficient. We are 
restructuring our community colleges into nine regional 
colleges which will have a new mandate, concentrating on skill 
training and a university extension program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are combining our four technical institutes and 
four urban community colleges into a super institute with 
increased specialization on each campus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are taking action now so that our province will 
have the trained young men and women it needs to build and 
diversify in the future. Mr. Speaker, I believe that the education 
system will adapt and rise to the challenge of training these 
young people, just as Saskatchewan’s people have proven equal 
to the challenges of years gone by. That is why, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I am proud to second this motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
am very pleased to be able to rise and to enter the debate on this 
motion. And I can only say that here is a government 
completely out of touch with reality, self-enamoured with 
themselves and, I say, with a lot of gall to come to this House 
with the state of the economy and what they’re doing to young 
people and to working people in this province, and to start to 
pat themselves on the back for a wonderful job. 
 
I want to take a look at the reality of the situation in 
Saskatchewan today. And I want to say that if you take a look at 
the fiscal management of the government opposite, we have 
seen that over a five-year period a decimation of this province’s 
fiscal management. We have seen a government over five years 
increase the gross debt of this province to $10 billion. They 
have increased the consolidated debt to $3.4 billion. They have 
heaped upon the people of this province accumulated interest 
payments, every year, of $294 million. And they come into this 
legislature and they say they’re patting themselves on the back 
for the wonderful job they did. 
 
Well I’ll say, if that was real, today we wouldn’t have seen 
what we saw in the House here today, one of the 

members walking away from the mess and the sinking ship that 
exists across the way. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, they have put this province into fiscal 
collapse. We have become now a slave to the bond dealers, the 
banks, and the multinational corporations. 
 
At one time, when they took office, this province was in one of 
the best financial shapes of any province in Canada. We had the 
lowest per capita debt in Canada. We had the lowest taxation on 
our citizens across Canada. I want to say that the economic 
growth outstripped any other province in Canada. That is what 
they took, and with a surplus of $139 million. And they’re 
patting themselves on the back and they’ve said, we’ve done a 
wonderful job for the people of Saskatchewan by placing this 
burden of fiscal mismanagement on the backs of the taxpayers 
of ordinary citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say, there’s another aspect to this government. 
Not only fiscal mismanagement, but there’s a philosophy about 
the birds across the way. I’ll tell you that they are not prepared 
to use every economic tool for the development of this 
province. They are in a strait-jacket; they worship at the altar of 
so-called free enterprise; they are guided, as I said before, by 
the Fraser Institute centred in Vancouver. That is who’s 
drawing the blueprints for the people across the way. 
 
I can say to you, Mr. Speaker, that in order to have an economic 
development here in Saskatchewan, what we have to do is use 
all the tools available to us. And that’s what we did in the past. 
 
I’ll tell you, what we need is public investment, we need private 
investment, we need co-operative investment, we need joint 
ventures. We cannot go into a strait-jacketed tunnel vision of 
handing over our assets to multinational corporations. 
 
And let’s take a look at the evidence of some of their great 
diversification, as they call it. What diversification resulted 
from handing over a coal-mine to Manalta Coal? What 
diversification and what benefit to the people of Saskatchewan? 
None at all. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, wasn’t that a great transaction of 
diversification when they handed over a pulp mill, worth $248 
million, without even a cent paid to the people of this province? 
That’s what they did with Weyerhaeuser. And they call it 
diversification. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that one of their friends came in 
from Edmonton, Peter Pocklington – Gainers. And they set up a 
plant over in North Battleford. But I’ll tell you, if the facts were 
know, Peter Pocklington didn’t put up a cent. The taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan financed that operation for him, and in fact paid 
him for creating jobs at the rate of some $11,000 is what was 
paid for every job created. Great diversification if you’re a Tory 
and you want hand-outs. They’re doing fine; business is good, 
as usual. 
 
And I want to also indicate that there is other diversification, 
not helping the small business men 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

861 
 

throughout Saskatchewan who are the heavy employers of 
young people in this province. But no, the multinational 
corporations, they set up a design of handing out to Peter 
Pocklington and sending out to Weyerhaeuser. And other 
multinational corporations have said to them, we want a 
hand-out too, or we’re going to leave the province. 
 
Well let’s take a look at some of the evidence. And I have a 
letter here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this is their diversification 
method. It really benefits because it’s the taxpayers’ money 
again. 
 
And here’s a letter to the vice-president and general manager of 
Canada Packers Incorporated: “I am pleased,” – and this is a 
letter from the Minister of Economic Development and Trade 
and I’ll read it in part – “I am pleased to enclose a cheque for $1 
million.” 
 
A grant to Canada Packers, $1 million. And they call that 
diversification. A million dollar grant, but they cut the school 
facilities, they cut the courses, they fired teachers. But they got 
a million dollars for their corporate friends. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and one of the gems of their great 
diversification is when they came to this legislature and they 
said, what we got to do is give the people of Saskatchewan an 
opportunity to participate, and we had Saskoil. And two years 
ago we came into this legislature and Saskoil had made for the 
people of this province $4 million : — $44 million in profit that 
could go into providing programs. And in their blind dedication 
to right-wing philosophy they said, we’re going to let the people 
of Saskatchewan who already own it – it’s their Crown 
corporation – we’re going to let them participate. 
 
And so what they did is sold off shares. Well the people of 
Saskatchewan didn’t participate, my friends across the way. Out 
of the shares that were sold in Saskoil, the amount, 75 per cent 
of all the shares in Saskoil, both common and preferred, are 
owned out of Saskatchewan. That’s diversification all right. 
 
And you know, as soon as they privatized Saskoil, do you know 
what happened? Saskoil packed up, laid off people in 
Saskatchewan and said, we’re heading for Alberta to develop 
oil. Great strategists, there. Really diversified. You should be 
proud of yourself. 
 
And then I want to relate, prior to the last election, boy did they 
want Quill Lakes. And they came out to Quill Lakes, and they 
announced that they were going to have a potassium sulphate 
plant. And they had great big headlines. There were going to be 
a lot of people working there – 150 people in construction. And 
they set it out . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you against that? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — No, I’m not against it. But I’m against your 
hypocrisy and the way in which you try to bluff the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And what they announced just prior to the 
election, that it was going to employ 75 permanent 

people, there was going to be 150 people in the construction. 
They had researched the markets. This was diversification. Well 
they hadn’t. It was one of these promises that they made before 
the election. Headlines, but no substance, because when we 
look at what they did in respect to it ...Here is a recent 
indication of where this is going. As I said, it was to employ 75 
people, it was to produce 300,000 tonnes a year of potassium 
sulphate. Well the recent announcement is that it’s going to 
scale down a little, but the plant will only employ now 9 people 
– a loss of 4 from what they initially had at the pilot project, of 
13. And they’re going to be producing something like 10 tonnes 
a day. And this is their great diversification that they indicated 
prior to the election . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I must interrupt the member from 
Quill Lakes now. The 10 minutes have expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to speak to 
this motion. It is a motion which, I believe, deserves the full 
support of this legislature. Essentially, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
motion recognizes the need for our province to move forward, 
and it recognizes the government’s success in helping the 
province move forward. 
 
In my constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a small but 
very beautiful village called Endeavour. That community was 
named as a symbol of the people’s willingness and 
determination to move forward, to expand their opportunities 
and to provide opportunity for their children. 
 
(1130) 
 
And the people of that community, and indeed of all of that 
Canora constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, continue to 
endeavour. They want this government to endeavour as well. 
They want to feel confidence for the future even, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when some of them have their backs to the wall, with 
low prices for their grain, and poor income because farm sales 
are down. 
 
They do not say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, oh, times are tough, so 
let’s forget about he future. The people in my riding are wiser 
and more visionary than that. What they do say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is how can we try to make sure that our children grow 
old? They won’t be tied to the same ...so that they won’t be tied 
to the same forces that we are. How can we try to build a future 
that is more secure from the cycles of international prices? How 
can we prepare ourselves and our children for the new 
opportunities that must be created. 
 
And they know the answers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They know 
that it is vital that this province diversify its economy, upgrade 
its skills, and get in tune with the 1990s and beyond. That is 
why the people of the Canora constituency support this 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it is renewing and 
diversifying and upgrading. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the past five years more economic 
diversification has occurred in this province than perhaps in any 
five-year period before in our history, certainly 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

862 
 

more than has ever happened under 11 years of the government 
of the NDP. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve heard some of the members 
opposite question the diversification that has taken place. In 
fact, I believe it was the member for Riversdale who asked, 
where’s the benefit? The implication was that the development 
was benefiting friends of the government, and if the NDP had 
their way, either these things would be owned by the 
government, or they would not happen. 
 
Well first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a strange idea that the 
only way that this province can benefit is if the government 
owns the thing. Now I am not claiming that that is exactly what 
was said, but there was certainly the implication – where’s the 
benefit. 
 
Or, as the member from Regina North West asked in this 
Assembly, who really benefits? Then he launched into an attack 
upon the oil companies and Weyerhaeuser and the North 
Battleford bacon plant and so on. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I really 
think these people don’t know. They really don’t know where 
the benefit is. 
 
Why don’t they visit Wolseley and ask the people working at 
the Canapharm facility, where’s the benefit? Why don’t they 
ask the union workers building the Co-op upgrader, and maybe 
also ask the Co-op members, where’s the benefit? Why don’t 
they, Mr. Deputy Speaker, ask pork producers and the people of 
North Battleford about the bacon plant, where’s the benefit? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is really amazing. The NDP demand we 
create jobs. They demand that we do something to turn the 
economy around. The jobs are being created, and the process of 
building the economy is going full steam ahead. And what do 
they do? They ask, where’s the benefit? 
 
That tells you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, exactly where their minds 
are at. Well, we have to diversify. The people of Canora surely 
support those efforts. They do not expect it to happen like 
magic. They do not live in a dream world where government is 
expected to replace God in performing miracles. But they 
expect government to endeavour, Mr. Deputy Speaker – to 
endeavour to do more with less, to endeavour to bring new 
industry and new technology and new knowledge to our 
province and to our people. And a political party that will not 
endeavour to build the future of this province will be relegated 
to this province’s past by the people of Canora. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do face some difficult decisions in 
preparing for the future. I can tell you that it does not make me 
particularly happy that some people who are teaching outdated 
courses, or who have positions that have become redundant in 
the new Saskatchewan, are asked to find new jobs. It is never 
pleasant to leave the security of your old job and have to seek a 
new one. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has to be done. 
 
We must renew our educational system. That includes bringing 
together all the resources of all our separate technical institutes. 
It means forging them together into one strong, province-wide 
educational facility that can 

deliver the needed skills and knowledge to our people. It means 
taking resources that have been going toward duplicating 
programs here and there, and using those resources to provide 
excellence instead of duplication. It means, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, having the courage to say yes, change is necessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
This government has had the courage. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is 
like a man who has walked down the same path every day to a 
stream. On the way to the stream he passes by another path, but 
he never goes down that path. He isn’t sure what lies along that 
way, and besides there’s no real reason to go down that path 
until, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the stream goes dry. 
 
Now that man has two choices. He can, Mr. Deputy Speaker, go 
down that other path in search of water. It would take him some 
courage, and it might even require that he be a bit adventurous, 
but he will either take that path, or he will lay down and die. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province are not ready 
to lay down. Times have changed, and they will even change 
more. Our stream of revenues from resources has dried up. The 
output from our educational institutions is not up to par, but we 
are not going to give up easily. We are going to take another 
path, the path of diversification, the path of new knowledge, the 
path that leads us forward into the next century, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that I invite the members across the way to join us on that 
journey. Because if they hang back they will find that they have 
also passed up their only opportunity. It is not inevitable, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They can join with us and join with the people 
of Saskatchewan in coming forward with new solutions and 
new approaches. They can give up that attitude that was 
displayed so sadly during the budget debate, that attitude of no 
change, no new ideas. 
 
I know they can do it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they really try, 
because they are still Saskatchewan people. But I am not 
hopeful that they will even try, and because of that this province 
will be forced to leave them behind as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, while we face difficult times, this motion 
and the substance of this debate, at least as far as you’ve heard 
from this side, proves that there’s still much more to be excited 
about, much to be proud of, and much yet to be done. I am 
proud, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to be part of that, and I assure you 
that I will be supporting this motion. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to take part in this debate. At a time this debate 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

863 
 

comes, and the motion that the government members opposite 
are moving to praise the government for its initiatives in 
creating jobs for young people, comes at a time when we have 
record youth unemployment in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This resolution comes at a time when we have 14 per cent 
unemployment among Saskatchewan young people. It comes 
during a year when in the first five months of this year, Mr. 
Speaker, 5,000 young people left Saskatchewan, looking for 
work outside the province because the employment 
opportunities in Saskatchewan were so dismal. 
 
This resolution, Mr. Speaker, comes at a time when, in 
comparison with June of last year, 6,000 fewer people, fewer 
young people, are working in June of this year than were 
working in June of last year, Mr. Sapper. Now I say to the 
members opposite, and to the people of Saskatchewan, how can 
we have a government come forward with a resolution praising 
their efforts for creating employment for youth with those kind 
of statistics before us, Mr. Speaker? I say that this resolution 
smacks of hypocrisy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to specifically focus on some of the 
comments that were made by members opposite with respect to 
creating new training opportunities for young people. The 
members opposite claim that young people are going to be able 
to capture new opportunities from the consolidation that they’re 
undertaking of our technical institute courses. And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that that’s simply not the case. 
 
What they’ve done, in fact, is they have eliminated 1,150 spaces 
from our technical institutes – 1,150 fewer opportunities for 
education this year than there were last year, and hundreds of 
young people having to leave Saskatchewan, because not only 
can they not find a job, but they can’t even find an educational 
opportunity in one of our institutions. Not only have you closed 
the technical institutes to hundreds of young Saskatchewan 
people, but you’re also now saying, as a result of your funding 
cuts to the two universities, that there’s going to be fewer 
spaces on the university campuses for young people as well. 
 
For the first time in the history of Saskatchewan, we’re seeing 
an enrolment quota on the College of Arts and Science at the 
University of Saskatchewan, for instance, Mr. Speaker. Those 
are the kinds of cuts in opportunities that we’re seeing, and they 
fly in the face of the resolution that the members opposite are 
advocating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are claiming that there is 
going to be new opportunities for young people to take part in 
economic diversification. If that’s the case, why are they cutting 
things like truck driver training and heavy equipment operation 
courses from STI in Moose Jaw? Why are they cutting 
accounting, business programming, and dental therapy at 
Wascana? Why are they cutting office education, eliminating 
the certified nursing assistants’ course, eliminating the dental 
assistants’ course from Kelsey? Why are they virtually 
eliminating the agricultural machinery technology course at 
Kelsey? Don’t these courses fit into the plans 

that members opposite have for diversification? I say they ought 
to. Why are they being eliminated? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we’re seeing as a result of the overall 
economic strategy of this government is not more opportunities 
for manufacturing and business in this province, but less. And I 
want to give a couple of examples. 
 
In 1982, for instance, members opposite claimed, under the 
slogan, Saskatchewan open for business, that they were going to 
create hundreds of new manufacturing plants in this province. 
There were 1,500 manufacturers operating in Saskatchewan in 
1982, Mr. Speaker. Today, in 1987, there is just over 1,000. 
We’ve lost over 450 manufacturers in Saskatchewan between 
1982 and now ...and you call that economic diversification. I 
say it’s not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They claim, Mr. Speaker, that they wanted to increase the 
number of manufacturing opportunities in this province, and 
they set up a number of programs in 1985 that they claimed 
would do that. They created the employment development fund; 
they created the industrial incentives program; they used that 
industrial incentives program to facilitate new jobs being 
established by their friends like Peter Pocklington in North 
Battleford. And they claim, Mr. Speaker, that there would be 
new manufacturing opportunities created through these funds. 
 
Well in 1987 we see the elimination of the industrial incentives 
fund. We don’t hear anything about the employment 
development fund any more. Those programs that you set up in 
1985 are now gone in 1987. The very pillars of your program 
for economic diversification have just been dismantled in the 
1987 budget. 
 
That’s the facts, Mr. Speaker. And I want to close, Mr. Speaker, 
by pointing to the forest industry in northern Saskatchewan as 
an example of what could be done in terms of economic 
diversification. What have members opposite chosen to do with 
respect to PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company). They’ve 
chosen to give away a public asset that had been virtually fully 
paid for by the people of this province : — worth $350 million. 
They chose, Mr. Speaker, to give that way. They chose to give 
that way for not a penny in the form of a down payment; for no 
provisions for annual interest payments; for no provisions for 
annual principle payment s: —except for half a million dollars 
each year. No provisions at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1145) 
 
Instead, Mr. Speaker, what could they have done? What they 
could have done, Mr. Speaker, is undertaken a program of 
intensive forest management in northern Saskatchewan. They 
could have opened up the opportunity for small contractors 
throughout the North and the area around Prince Albert to bid 
on opportunities for logging and forest contracting in our 
northern communities, Mr. Speaker. They could have made 
available opportunities for small contractors in communities 
like Pinehouse to become more involved in harvesting the forest 
around their community, Mr. 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

864 
 

Speaker. 
 
They could have undertaken a number of small-scale economic 
development initiatives in the forest industry that, added 
together, could have created several hundred new jobs in this 
province. They could have moved towards the kind of model 
that we see in Sweden, where the forest ...where we have an 
excellent example of reforestation, intensive forest 
management. What do they do instead of increasing 
reforestation? They cut the reforestation budget by at least 50 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what they’ve done then is instead of harvesting a resource, 
preserving a resource, initiating reforestation, pursuing 
conservation, decentralizing the forest industry, and creating 
new opportunities for small contractors, they’ve centralized 
their activities. They’ve essentially handed the forest industry 
over to Weyerhaeuser corporation of Tacoma, Washington, to 
run as they see fit. And in addition to giving away the resource, 
they’ve promised Weyerhaeuser that they’ll get $9 million a 
year from the province of Saskatchewan to build roads in the 
North, at public expense. 
 
Now that’s the kind of economic diversification that we can’t 
afford in this province. That’s not an example of diversification; 
that’s an example, Mr. Speaker, of the centralization of power 
in the hands of one multinational, instead of the forest industry 
belonging to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And I say, Mr. Speaker, I say that that’s a 
prime example of the kind of policy that this government has 
pursued. 
 
So what do we see in closing, Mr. Speaker? We see an example 
of a government that has only diversified and expanded in one 
area, and that is diversification and expansion of our public 
debt, Mr. Speaker – our public debt. We now have a situation 
where every family of four is having to pay $1,200 a year in 
interest just to finance the debt. And every family of four is now 
$13,600 in debt, just as a result of the last five years of this 
government’s operation. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s the only example of diversification 
and expansion that we’ve seen in the economic history of this 
province over the last five years, and therefore I’ll be voting 
against the resolution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Than you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I, 
too, want to join with my colleagues from Pelly and Canora and 
join in this debate on diversification in the past four or five 
years. 
 
The policy of this government with regard to diversification, 
especially during these difficult times, is one that should make 
every member of this Assembly proud. That policy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, talks to all about what is best about our province and 
our people. It marks a genuine departure from the past and a 
bold step into the 

future. 
 
Past governments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have always looked 
inward, and especially the NDP and their socialist attitude. 
They have avoided bringing in new ideas or new ways of doing 
things. Even today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see that old 
head-in-the-sand attitude reflected in the politicians of the NDP 
opposite. We look back to what happened to the dinosaur. The 
dinosaur didn’t change, and he disappeared from this earth. And 
the farmers, back many years ago, hooked up a plough and 
some horses and did their farming. We can’t do that in today’s 
society. Things have changed. Farming practices have changed. 
 
They say, please do not change anything. They believe that 
Saskatchewan could or should try to remain isolated in this 
world, and the only ideas they want to bring in from outside is 
from Sweden. This government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will not 
allow the world full of opportunity and with its fair share of 
risks – we will not allow the world to pass Saskatchewan by. 
 
We look for co-operation and team-work among all people to 
help us build the future. And we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that the goals of a more diversified economy and a modern 
education system are not easy goals. They are especially not 
easy goals for a government that is facing the most difficult 
economic situation since the Dirty Thirties. We all are acutely 
aware of the dramatic decline in the prices of our grains and our 
oil and our uranium and our lumber, and so on. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I am aware of the 
hardship that farm families are facing in this province. I was 
born and raised on the farm, and my younger brother is still 
farming the family farm. I am aware of the distress in the minds 
of this province as falling prices threaten jobs and futures. And 
my own company that I worked with for 31 years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is today shut down – 400 people without jobs in the 
community of Yorkton. But do I hear any snivelling or tears 
being expressed from the members’ opposite? No it’s because 
it’s in the private sector, that’s why. 
 
Leon’s manufacturing, same thing. They’ve got people laid off. 
You can talk to Degelman’s, you can talk to all the farm 
machinery manufacturers. They’re having difficult times 
because we are having to depend on agriculture. And it’s time 
that we broadened our blinders and our blinkers and saw what 
diversification can do for us in this province. 
 
And I am aware, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the expectation that 
government gets its house in order and conducts itself in a 
responsible and fair fashion. But with that awareness, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, comes a certainty that diversification is an 
absolute necessity. Diversification is the opportunity to be free 
of wildly fluctuating prices for basic resources. Diversification 
is the opportunity to provide our children with the best skills 
and the most current knowledge available. Diversification, Mr. 
Speaker, is our insurance policy to ensure that all of our 
programs or protection, from health care to interest rate 
protection – can be maintained and developed far into the 
future. 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

865 
 

Some people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talk about diversification as 
if all it meant was finding someone to invest money in a 
business. But I suggest to you that it means a great deal more 
than that. It means creating the infrastructure and educational 
facilities to make new enterprises possible and probable. It 
means initiatives like the new Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology. It means creative vehicles for 
improving access to knowledge. It means innovating systems to 
bring our rural communities in closer touch with the rest of the 
world. It means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, adjusting the whole range 
of policies and institutions that impact upon our economy, to 
get them working together and efficiently. And this government 
has created a plan and a policy that accomplishes just those 
things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that is why I’m proud to 
speak in favour of this motion. 
 
I mentioned the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Technology 
and Science. It is another example of this government’s 
commitment to protecting the future of its people. The entire 
program this government is developing in education is an 
ambitious and thoughtful one. The new province-wide institute 
will provide a new capability for teachers all over the province 
to be aware of developments elsewhere. It will allow a 
co-ordination of effort in our technical educational system that 
was not even conceived before now. It will create the critical 
mass to generate exciting new ideas and ambitious new 
projects. 
 
It will, in short, Mr. Deputy Speaker, mean Saskatchewan will 
have a technical education system that is as good as anywhere 
in the world. It has meant that some redundant or out-of-date 
courses have been dropped. And I am not confident, for 
example, that government will continue to fund the teaching of 
basket weavers through the technical institute. I question 
whether or not you will find courses for quilting or 
needle-point. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the ladies 
in my riding could teach some of the teachers how to do those 
things better than they know it themselves. 
 
The point is that classes like that are from another time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They have their place in the recreational life of 
our province. But they are not the be-all of our rural people, and 
they do not make a major contribution toward the economic 
opportunities of the students learning. It may be that there is a 
nostalgic sense when we think about such things. But the truth 
remains that, if we wish to train our people to be successful in 
the 1990s and beyond, we will be training them in new skills. 
 
I know the people in Yorkton want to have access to higher 
education, and they want their children to be able to learn new 
skills, like the use of computers, just as much as city people 
want these things for their children. And it is a positive step, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see that the government has established 
an education outreach fund to provide the delivery of university 
classes to our smaller centres. 
 
Now members opposite will say that the people of Yorkton had 
access to university courses before this program. And it is true, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they could travel to Regina or 
Saskatoon to enter university. 

But what if, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you held a job, and you just 
wanted to take one class each school term toward enhancing 
your knowledge? Well then you did not have access to the 
higher educational facilities unless you lived in one of those 
two major cities, and that is where your job was located. 
Otherwise, you just had to go on without the benefit of 
university training. 
 
That will now change. I also am especially pleased at the steps 
being taken toward the development of an educational 
television network that will have the capability to deliver 
educational courses right into the homes of my constituents, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Perhaps more than any other program 
televised, education may revolutionize our educational system. 
 
I would just like to talk a little bit about the diversification that 
has happened in our province. And it appals me to hear the 
members talking about Peter Pocklington. Peter Pocklington, 
that’s all I’ve heard for the last year. Let me tell the members 
opposite, when they are ready to do and build the cut-and-kill 
plant, the member from Yorkton and his council will be doing 
everything possible to get that plant to Yorkton, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — You make it sound like a great big 
give-away. He got a loan, just the same as any member opposite 
could have got a loan to start up an enterprising project. But 
they wouldn’t do that, no. They don’t believe in that kind of 
thing. He borrowed the money. He’s going to have to pay it 
back to Sedco. To get the balance of his money he had to 
perform, he had to create jobs before he got another penny. 
He’s no different than anybody else in this province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, please. The member’s time 
has run out. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m pleased to join in this debate. Let me begin by saying that 
from my perspective, the objective of diversification for 
Saskatchewan is something which all governments of all 
political ideology and strife have adhered to in the past. 
Obviously we want to get away from the dependency on 
resources, on agriculture, to move beyond that straight primary 
processing, primary industrial base, into a secondary and 
secondary manufacturing mode. 
 
We’ve seen over the history of Saskatchewan and western 
Canada, the attempt by political parties, as I say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, regardless of political ideology, to achieve the 
question of diversification, to achieve that objective. 
 
But it’s not easy, sir, to get diversification accomplished in 
Saskatchewan or indeed in western Canada. The obstacles are 
formidable. The obstacles of geography, which obviously 
immediately raises the question of transportation and 
transportation costs. The question of population and market 
size. We are only 1 million people or less in Saskatchewan and 
we therefore don’t have the 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

866 
 

kind of markets which other Canadians in other areas, notably 
central Canadians, eastern Canadians, have. Climate. A 
domination of the resource mentality. The idea of agriculture, 
and oil mining, potash, and the like have dominated much of 
what we’ve attempted to do from an economic diversification 
standpoint. 
 
(1200) 
 
So the thrust of all political parties has been diversification, but 
it’s not been a very easy task to achieve. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
why I oppose this resolution is because this government is 
approaching this formidable and worthwhile objective from the 
wrong point of view totally. In order to achieve this objective, 
there is a requirement, and indeed a demand I would argue, for 
a concerted game plan on the part of provincial and federal 
governments to make sure that the diversification thrust in fact 
does achieve success. 
 
And in that regard the objective has to be an objective to build 
up Saskatchewan business, and Saskatchewan business in areas 
which are indigenous to the Saskatchewan economic 
circumstances; how we can get secondary manufacturing and 
secondary processing off agriculture, off the main resource 
areas, and to a number of areas which are indigenous to this 
region, to this province. In effect, if you will, Mr. Speaker, this 
is perhaps a narrow and somewhat chauvinistic point of view, 
but I would argue a Saskatchewan-first basis. 
 
The provincial government and the federal government have 
failed in this objective because there has not been this concerted 
game plan. Federally, we’ve had very little bit of an assist from 
them with respect to diversification. The most notable example 
of in effect, no help, but perhaps even a direct slap to western 
Canadians, was the CF-18 fiasco. Here was an attempt where 
the federal government could have helped us to diversify, not 
directly Saskatchewan but the western Canadian prairie basin, 
by a CF-18 decision to which all the economic and political 
indicators pointed to Manitoba. But indeed, as we all know, it 
went elsewhere. 
 
In effect, federally the PC policies of the Prime Minister I think 
have been an abject failure of stimulating regional economic 
development generally. I think this is reflected now by the 
discontent in the polls. In fact I would even go so far as to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that there has been an abject failure because there 
has been no policy or no concerted game plan. 
 
Provincially the same results are available for all of us to see. In 
Saskatchewan, provincially, in order to overcome these 
formidable obstacles of geography and climate and markets and 
distance and all the things I identified at the beginning of my 
brief remarks this morning, sir, in order to overcome them, we 
require an economic thrust which has a proper mix of private 
enterprise, a support for small business and private enterprise in 
Saskatchewan – something that I encourage; with public 
enterprise in limited and carefully selected areas – something 
which I also encourage; and of course the other component 
which is important in Saskatchewan terms, the 

co-operative sector. 
 
It is a proper mix of those three which permit the province of 
Saskatchewan to strike out on its own on a diversification 
policy. It’s when we, sir, throw these three components into 
disjunction, when we allow one of them to predominate the 
other two, or a combination thereof, that the very difficult 
business of overcoming these obstacles is in effect made all the 
more difficult and more impossible to achieve. 
 
And what we’ve seen by the Devine administration – or I take 
that back, Mr. Speaker – by the Premier and his administration, 
mindful of your ruling, is an imbalance predicated on an 
emphasis on free enterprise which is not indigenous to 
Saskatchewan. This is a mix or a diversification thrust which in 
effect is based on hauling into Saskatchewan the large free 
enterprisers outside of this province. Thus the emphasis on the 
Pocklington plant at North Battleford. We know all about that, 
by the way, funded by government money. Thus the emphasis 
on the Weyerhaeuser and the paper plant expansion. 
 
This is a megaproject policy which is based on ignoring in 
effect the small Saskatchewan entrepreneur. In fact those 
diversification thrusts which have succeeded, essentially have 
succeeded because this government has pumped in millions of 
dollars into the limited projects which we have seen. 
 
I can go down the list: the Pocklington proposal, Weyerhaeuser, 
proposed Estevan power development, and so it goes. There has 
been virtually no success whatsoever in the absence of a large 
amount of public taxpayers’ funds going into the pockets 
directly of the large entrepreneurs. 
 
And the result I think, Mr. Speaker, is plain for everybody to 
see. Saskatchewan small business has been ignored. 
Everywhere that I go in my law practice, everywhere that I go 
in my political contacts. Saskatchewan business men say that 
they are disillusioned with the administration that is currently in 
power, both provincially and federally. In effect it’s 
summarized, Mr. Speaker, in these terms: everything for the big 
fellows; nothing for us as the small Saskatchewan business 
men. And in effect that’s the result. The result is that they are 
facing economic hardships and the inevitable bankruptcies. 
 
I have here in front of me, Mr. Speaker – time does not permit – 
a documentation of four pages, four pages, sir, of Saskatchewan 
business, a lot of it indigenous, local to this province, a lot of it 
built up through the hard sweat and work and risk taking of 
business men in our province. Bankruptcies, gone up because of 
the inattention of this government, the preoccupation with the 
administration to larger megaprojects or, if you will, to large 
private enterprises from outside the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We see it statistically in another way. The number of new 
businesses as a percentage of total businesses in Saskatchewan 
has decreased sharply since 1982. In 1982 it was approximately 
11 per cent, the new businesses of the total small businesses. In 
the last year it is virtually in a minus position. 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

867 
 

Take a look at all of the indicators tabled by the Minister of 
Finance in his own budget a few days ago. Those show a sharp 
decrease in GDP, in housing starts, in private starts, business 
starts, and on it goes – private investment. These are all on a 
very precipitous slide downwards. 
 
And so the record, I would argue, sir, of this administration has 
been bluntly abysmal because it’s pumped all of its money into 
the large corporations and has ignored the Saskatchewan 
small-business men. The facts speak for themselves in that 
regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this policy is in effect a 
harkening back to an old bygone era. Back in the 1930s, back in 
the 1940s, this large megaproject approach was what 
dominated. It was only after co-operatives in the public sector 
and Saskatchewan private small business got together that the 
ability to diversify took real meaning. And what this 
administration is doing, sir, is throwing us back to another Dark 
Ages period – throwing us back to that point where in fact the 
entrepreneur of Saskatchewan is shrinking, and this province is 
shrinking in terms of population, in terms of economic clout 
and, accordingly, political clout. 
 
And there is one other very ominous cloud on the horizon, 
which I think is part of this negative approach, and that is free 
trade. The members opposite talked about diversification in the 
sense of being outreach to the international community. With 
that I agree. But what this Premier and what this government 
federally has done, is that it’s hitched their star, our star, 
inevitably to one country only – the United States. 
Diversification has meant, for them, unification with the United 
States. And all that that means, sir, is even a further unalterable 
locking it to the pattern of very large business taking over 
Canadian business. And I find that to be unacceptable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure 
today to enter into this, and speak in favour of this motion. I 
won’t devote any lengthy time to this subject because I’m sure 
we’ll have other motions in this Assembly devoted precisely to 
this subject, and many other positive subjects. 
 
But I do want to ask the members to seriously think about the 
implications of our province if we succumb to the 
hide-from-the-world mentality. All our best efforts at 
diversification and at education will be wasted if we do not 
enhance the trade relationships we now enjoy. We will be 
passing our skills to our children to prepare them for a 
non-existent market, so I just wanted to ask members to think 
about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I think that the level of rhetoric directed at 
our business community, at our economic system of small 
business, big business, co-operatives, the market system, Mr. 
Speaker, and the rhetoric directed at the members of this 
Assembly, is not only personally offensive, it is in fact 
economically harmful. 

It says to people who are considering opening a business in 
Saskatchewan, don’t do it or the member from The Battlefords 
will threaten you. And don’t do it because the member from 
Regina North West will compare you with the Nazis and Hitler. 
Or don’t do it because if you make a profit, the NDP will 
accuse you of exploitations and oppression. And if you don’t 
make a profit, they’ll accuse you of intentionally avoiding 
taxes. 
 
That is the kind of thing we have been hearing every day in the 
Chamber, Mr. Speaker, That is reprehensible on a personal 
level, and it is obvious. I think the fact that it is detrimental to 
the future of the economic development of our province bore 
stating in this debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to indicate to you that I can 
personally speak on behalf of my constituency, a constituency 
that has refused to take part in the hard economic times that this 
administration has had to face over the past four and five years. 
We have not ...This government has not had an easy year. We 
have had to meet many, many disasters head on, and to carry 
and help the people come through this hard economic past. We 
are, indeed, Mr. Speaker, showing and developing the path . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Time has elapsed for the 
debate. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 1 – Changes in Canadian Patient Legislation 
Affecting the Price of Drugs 

 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to join 
in the debate on this motion. The federal Conservative 
government changes to the Patent Act provisions regarding 
medical drugs are extremely important, and at the end of my 
remarks I will be moving the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of Canada for 
proposed changes to Canadian patient legislation which will 
limit the development of low-cost, generic prescription drugs 
for low-income families, the sick and the elderly. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this decision of the federal government will 
significantly affect the quality and accessibility of health care 
available to millions of Canadians. 
 
Saskatchewan New Democrats have a proud tradition when it 
comes to medicare, for it was our CCF government, under the 
leadership of Tommy Douglas, that implemented Canada’s first 
public hospitalization insurance plan in 1946, and Mr. Speaker, 
this first implementation happened in Saskatchewan. It was also 
a New Democrat government, under Woodrow Lloyd, that 
implemented the first public medicare insurance plan in 1962, 
and tomorrow we will celebrate the 25th anniversary of that 
plan. 
 
And it was interesting, Mr. Speaker, I sent over some pins 
recognizing the 25th anniversary of medicare, and very 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

868 
 

few people, very few members across the way chose to put 
them on. And I think that indicates to the people of this 
province where the commitment lies when it comes to 
medicare. 
 
And it was also, Mr. Speaker, a New Democrat government, 
under the leadership of Allan Blakeney, that implemented 
Canada’s first comprehensive public drug plan in 1974. And 
tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, that comprehensive drug plan will be a 
historical fact, because it will no longer be in existence. 
 
It was through the pioneering efforts of CCF and New 
Democrat governments in Saskatchewan that Canadians have 
developed a high-quality health care system built on the 
principles of universality, accessibility, and affordability. But, 
Mr. Speaker, these principles, these very important fundamental 
principles are now under attack. Instead of going beyond 
medicare, the members opposite are going backwards. They’re 
not Progressive Conservatives, they’re regressive 
Conservatives. 
 
(1215) 
 
A distinct feature of our medicare system that is consistent with 
the principles of accessibility and affordability and universality 
has been the widespread availability of low-cost, generic drugs. 
Their widespread availability and their benefits have been 
possible by the provisions of the Patent Act. 
 
And so, therefore, it’s a great disappointment to the people of 
this province that the federal Conservatives changed the Patent 
Act provisions, and it was even a more important 
disappointment, a more devastating disappointment, that the 
members opposite chose to endorse those changes to the Patent 
Act. 
 
I’d contend, Mr. Speaker, that universality, accessibility, and 
affordability are an essential component of medicare, 
particularly when it comes to drugs. Undermining that 
component, Mr. Speaker, is a direct assault on medicare. But 
that doesn’t seem to be anything new for the provincial 
Conservatives these days. Here we are, we have a party that in 
1982 said that they would never do anything to undermine 
medicare. In 1986 they said the same thing. They said medicare 
was sacrosanct. 
 
But what are they doing? Let me talk about what they’re doing. 
On July 1, tomorrow, when most citizens in this province will 
be celebrating the 25th anniversary of medicare, we will no 
longer have the drug plan that we had – a drug plan that we’ve 
had since 1974. That drug plan, Mr. Speaker, allowed 
Saskatchewan people, regardless of economic circumstance, 
regardless of health problems to have access to drugs. They 
didn’t have to worry about affording 20 or 30 or 50 or $300 a 
month. All they had to do was come up with $3.95 in a 
dispensing fee and they had access to those drugs. 
 
But what will happen tomorrow? Tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, we 
will have to come up with the money up front, and that has 
serious implications for people who are sick, for people who are 
poor, for people on fixed incomes, and for senior citizens. But 
do these people care? They don’t. 

It was interesting, Mr. Speaker, about two weeks ago in 
question period I asked the Premier of the province whether he 
realized that people – many on fixed incomes, particularly 
senior citizens – would have to come up with more than $300 a 
month to pay for their drugs, money that they’d have to take out 
of their old age pension and supplement, and perhaps go 
without some of the necessary things of life, like eating. 
 
He said, tell me the name of the doctor; give me the name of the 
pharmacy, and I’ll talk to them. Well, Mr. Speaker, that did not 
ease the fear of that particular senior citizen couple. Because, 
Mr. Speaker, they have to have those drugs. The Premier of the 
province, talking to the doctor or talking to the pharmacist, is 
not going to change the fact, the reality, that those people must 
have their drugs in order to survive. They have heart conditions, 
they have arthritis, they have high blood pressure, and 
numerous other ailments. 
 
And I thought, Mr. Speaker, that as a result of the debate on the 
budget and some of the comments that were coming from this 
bench and some of the letters that were sent to the Premier and 
the Minister of Health, that there might be a faint hope, a faint 
hope that these people would rescind their decision to introduce 
the drug plan changes and introduce a deductible system. But 
we haven’t seen that forthcoming. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, last Friday, a week ago, we introduced 
a petition bearing more than 15,000 signatures – petition that 
was put together in less than nine days. And I thought, Mr. 
Speaker, based on the dental workers coming to the legislature 
and the outpouring of letters from people around this province 
and the signatures of thousands of people, and even the Regina 
Public School board indicating to the government that they 
want that dental plan in Saskatchewan schools and in Regina 
schools, I thought they might change their mind. But they 
haven’t. 
 
And I think it’s fairly indicative of a government that it doesn’t 
matter what the people of Saskatchewan say to them, it doesn’t 
matter how loud the voices are, or how loud the concern is, this 
government simply does not listen, and it simply does not care. 
 
And we’ve had other attacks on medicare in recent days. Mr. 
Speaker, I represent a constituency where there are a large 
number of senior citizens and a large number of disabled 
people, a large number of sick people. And those people have 
come to rely on home care, not as the only source of their care, 
because their families are intimately involved in their care, but 
families need relief, and home care has provided a valuable 
support system to families of disabled and elderly people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, senior citizens and disabled people were shocked, 
absolutely shocked, when the government of Saskatchewan 
decided to increase home care fees by 66 per cent. It’s a big fee 
increase. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the interesting thing is that in the past, home 
care boards, in consultation with the government and their 
association, they have been the ones that have 



 
June 30, 1987 

 

869 
 

decided what fee increases there would be. 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, the government of Saskatchewan 
chose not to consult with the people who are delivering this 
service, and arbitrarily increased the fees by 66 per cent to the 
disabled and elderly population in this province. Mr. Speaker, 
my fear is that people will not be able to maintain themselves in 
their own home because they won’t have the support, and they 
will end up in nursing homes. 
 
I want to talk about nursing home fee increases because it’s 
another example of how this government has chosen to 
undermine medicare. Mr. Speaker, once again, the Government 
of Saskatchewan, in an arbitrary fashion, decided to increase 
nursing home fees by 15 per cent or $73 per month. And the 
government said senior citizens and disabled people don’t need 
more than $100 a month for personal necessities, that we’ve 
given them enough; that’s enough. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had a number of senior citizens and a 
number of people in nursing homes contact me saying that they 
will no longer be able to afford Christmas presents and birthday 
presents for their grandchildren; that they’ll no longer be able to 
afford the odd new dress or the odd new shirt; and that they will 
be relegated to staying in the nursing home and not being able 
to get out, because they won’t have any new clothes, and they 
won’t be able to provide Christmas presents and birthday 
presents to the grandchildren. And I think that’s an absolute 
hypocrisy, and it attacks the fundamentals of medicare in this 
province. 
 
And then we have the chiropractors, Mr. Speaker, we have on 
numerous occasions . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’d like to draw the attention of the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana to the motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of Canada for 
proposed changes to Canadian patent legislation, etc., etc. 
 

I’m afraid what she is discussing now is off the topic, and I 
would like her to come back to the motion. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My apologies, Mr. Speaker. I’m trying to 
relate how the changes to the Patent Act have undermined 
medicare, but there’s been other instances in the past couple of 
weeks where medicare has been undermined in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the many benefits of the present Patent 
Act provisions, the federal government is proposing to amend 
them; in fact, they already have. What they’re proposing to do 
is to reduce the availability of generic drugs by providing an 
extended period of exclusive patent protection for the benefit of 
large pharmaceutical companies. And while the rationale for 
these proposed changes and any possible benefits to Canadians 
that May be produced are unclear, the likely costs seem clear 
and quite alarming. 
 
The commission of inquiry concluded that the present Patent 
Act provisions encouraging the wide-spread 

availability of generic drugs saved Canadians, in 1981, $211 
million. Its chief commissioner, Dr. Harry Eastman, has stated 
unequivocally that the government’s proposed Patent Act 
changes would delay generic competitions for some of the new 
drugs and, in consequence, delay reduction in their prices which 
such competition causes. 
 
The Canadian Drug Manufacturing Association has estimated 
that Canadians will pay an extra $650 million per year by 1995, 
including an extra $26 million per year for Saskatchewan alone, 
if the proposed changes are implemented – which I understand 
they will be. 
 
The point here, Mr. Speaker, is this. We have a government that 
did away with the drug plan. People will have to come up with 
those costs up front, as a deductible. They’ll be reimbursed 80 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But had this government agreed to oppose the Patent Act 
changes, that alone would be bad enough. However, Mr. 
Speaker, because they chose not to agree, they’ve done away 
with the drug plan here in Saskatchewan; people in this 
province will have to pay for their drugs up front, and with 
changes to the Patent Act they’ll have to pay even more. 
 
So instead of families looking at 3 or $400 a month, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s quite conceivable that they’ll have to come up with 
5 or $600 a month because of these changes to the drug patent 
legislation. And does this government change ...does this 
government care? Obviously not. Obviously not. 
 
The Progressive Conservative government, over a year ago in 
Saskatchewan, cautiously estimated that the changes to the 
Patent Act would cost the prescription drug plan about $15 
million a year – if these changes were passed. And they were 
very concerned about it. 
 
And it was interesting that last December they came out in 
favour of those changes, Mr. Speaker. And no wonder. It’s not 
going to cost the provincial treasury any more money. It’s going 
to cost the people of this province more money by increased 
drug costs. It’s going to cost the elderly, the sick, the disabled, 
people with small children, more money. 
 
And all they’re doing is simply removing those added costs 
from the provincial treasury, where it’s all of our collective 
responsibility to make sure that people don’t go without drugs 
because they don’t have the money, to the individual: —onto 
the backs of the individual. And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, 
that there are individuals in this province that do not have the 
money up front to pay for increased costs to drugs. They do not 
have the money to pay for changes to the government’s drug 
plan. And if people go without drugs, we will see more people 
in hospitals; we’ll see more people in nursing homes because 
their health is deteriorating. And this government simply does 
not care. 
 
It’s also interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the proposed changes to 
the Patent Act, which will restrict the availability of generic 
drugs, would serve as a dangerous precedent in a different area 
of fundamental importance 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

870 
 

to Saskatchewan, and that’s agriculture. 
 
Whereas we now have the availability of generic prescription 
drugs, there is an extended period of patent exclusivity for farm 
chemicals. For several years, farmers, farm organizations, and 
others, have sought to reduce this period of farm chemical 
patent exclusivity, and therefore permit the availability of 
low-cost generic farm chemicals. 
 
Such changes, Mr. Speaker, were introduced and 
recommendations were proposed by the member of parliament 
from Yorkton-Melville, Lorne Nystrom. For almost 20 years 
Canadians have enjoyed the benefits of low-cost generic 
prescription drugs. Similar arrangements should also exist for 
Canadian farmers, so that we could begin to see . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I really quite fail to see where 
the issue of generic farm chemicals is related to this particular 
topic. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, because they come under the 
provisions of the Patent Act, and I’m talking about the Patent 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — We are talking about the Government of 
Canada for proposed changes to Canadian patent legislation 
which will limit the development of low-cost generic 
prescription drugs, not farm chemicals. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Anyway, there is a bit of a relationship, and 
if you’d let me conclude, I’ll show you. 
 
The Patent Act changes now being proposed, however, will not 
only severely curtail the benefits of low-cost generic drugs, but 
they also make it much more difficult to make future changes, 
Mr. Speaker, change available to allow for low-cost generic 
farm chemicals. And for that reason these proposed changes 
would be an unfortunate and dangerous precedent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the widespread availability of low-cost generic 
drugs is an integral component of Canada’s high-quality 
medical care system. That system has been built on the 
principles of universality and affordability, and it has served 
Canadians well. But at a time when we should be working 
together to improve and extend medicare in Canada, we are 
unfortunately being forced to defend it from erosion and overt 
attack. 
 
The federal government’s changes to the Patent Act constitute 
just one such erosion of medicare. I’ve listed the other erosions 
earlier in my remarks, when it comes to this particular 
government. These changes will seriously and severely reduce 
the availability of low-cost generic drugs. They will weaken the 
fundamental principles of universality and affordability. 
 
I would therefore like to move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Centre, the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of Canada for 
proposed changes to Canadian patent legislation which will 
limit the development of low-cost generic prescription drugs 
and thereby 

 increase the cost of prescription drugs for low-income 
families, the sick, and the elderly. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1230) 
 
Ms. Smart: — I am pleased to rise in support of this motion 
and second it. I wish that it could have been heard in the House 
last December when we first submitted it, because it was more 
important at that time to speak to the issue of condemning the 
government about the proposed changes in the Patent Act, 
changes which have now gone before the Senate and are about 
to become law. But because the legislature was not called back 
for these many months, we haven’t had an opportunity to speak 
on this issue until now. 
 
I want to speak to it as the critic for Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs, because it’s very much a consumer issue, and because I 
didn’t hear any comments coming from the Minister of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs to oppose this legislation 
when it was brought forward, the federal government. And 
that’s too bad because it’s an issue that many, many consumers 
are very deeply concerned about. 
 
I’ve listened over the past few days since the budget came 
down, with some amazement at the way in which the 
government has been defending its support of medicare, when 
it’s brought in the changes to the drug plan which were 
inevitable as a result of this Patent Act going through. The 
Patent Act means that now multinational corporations will be 
able to produce drugs in Saskatchewan at a much higher price 
than the generic firms which were operating before. And that 
higher price is being passed on to the consumer. Obviously 
something would have to happen, and the drug plan had to 
change. 
 
It’s very unfortunate that the drug plan has had to change. And 
it’s really amazing that the government opposite, which 
promotes itself as creating positive alternatives and being all for 
change and wonderful progress, would dismantle the drug plan 
which has been in effect only for – since 1974. Not so many 
years, but a very great change when it was developed, and a 
great possibilities for the future in providing drug care to people 
at reasonable cost. It’s not unusual that the drug plan would 
come into effect then because that’s when drugs were being 
developed – remarkably, many drugs being developed to help 
people when they were sick. 
 
And the drug plan came into being as a result of the 
development of drugs in the medical field, as a way of helping 
people. And I know in Saskatoon Centre constituency for 
example, where Crocus co-op operates in support of people 
who are mentally ill, that drugs have made a tremendous impact 
on the lives of people with mental problems in helping them to 
continue to live in the community. And I’m very deeply 
concerned about what’s going to happen to people like that to 
be able to afford the costs of the drugs that they have to take 
over periods of time continually. The costs are going to be very 
high, and they’re going to have to continue to have to pay at 
least 20 per cent of the costs of these expensive drugs, even 
though they get back 80 per cent at some time in the 



 
June 30, 1987 

 

871 
 

future. 
 
But we don’t even know when that will be, whether it will be at 
the end of the year or whether it will be every time they pay for 
their drugs. A lot of money will have to be available up front 
for people who are taking drugs, to pay for them before they get 
anything back from the government, and what they get back 
from the government will not be by any means the whole cost 
of drugs. And I know there are many people who are looking at 
the possibility of having to spend 100 or $200 a month of their 
incomes to help themselves to stay well in this society. 
 
In the earlier 1970s it was very interesting for me to be part of a 
movement in Saskatoon called the Women in Drug Use 
Society, which started up at that time because one of the groups 
of people that were being treated for overdose of drugs in the 
city hospitals were housewives, and they were being treated for 
prescription drug abuse in the area of valium and librium and 
the mood modifying drugs that were very popular when they 
were first developed. And as a result of our group of people 
talking to the doctors and talking with the consumers, we were 
able to have a tremendous impact on the use of those drugs and 
cut them down and cut them back, so that the prescribing of 
mood modifying drugs did not take place at an accelerating rate. 
 
That was one way of stopping the cost of the drug prescription 
plan from going up. It was a very useful idea. We had an 
impact. It’s the sort of thing the government could be doing 
from now on in the future – talking with doctors, talking with 
consumers about the use of drugs, and helping to control the use 
of drugs which would then control the price of the drug plan 
without destroying the drug plan. This is an opportunity that’s 
been missed. It’s something that could have been done, and I 
know from my past experience that it can be a success. 
 
Another thing that could have happened was for the government 
to oppose the Patent Act being changed, because that would 
have meant that we could develop generic prescription drugs in 
Canada – continue to develop them and have them available. Of 
course the cost of the drug plan is going to go up tremendously 
with multinational drug companies being involved in the 
production of drugs under the protection of the Patent Act. They 
can charge whatever they like herein Canada and we will have 
to pay for it, and the inability of us to now produce our generic 
drugs will have tremendous impact. 
 
And I want to link that issue very much to the issue of the 
development of generic agricultural chemicals, because in the 
budget speech the government said, we are continuing to 
support the production of generic agricultural chemicals in 
Saskatchewan. That’s a direct result of the Patent Act which 
we’re now discussing, and it’s entirely reasonable to look at 
what will happen when generic farm chemicals are produced in 
this country. The cost of farm chemicals will go down. 
 
When we had generic drugs, prescription drugs being produced 
in this country, the price was lower. Very logical; cause and 
effect – something that the 

government seems to not pay any attention to. You can’t have it 
both ways. You can’t support the generic production of 
agricultural chemicals for a lower cost and at the same time do 
away and support a government that does away with the 
production of generic prescription drugs. That’s a contradiction 
that’s unacceptable to reasonable people in Saskatchewan. And 
that’s why so many people are opposing this destruction of the 
drug plan. 
 
Now in question period the other day the Premier told us that if 
we knew of people who are having difficulties with the drug 
plan, that we were to get their names and addresses and their 
stories to him and he would do something about it. I find that 
completely unacceptable as a prescription of what to do to help 
people to afford the cost of drugs. We would all have to be 
going door to door across this whole province to find out who is 
hurting from these drugs, and make sure that their conditions 
are brought forward to the Assembly. 
 
That’s a very unprogressive prescription, It’s unrealistic. It’s 
totally unacceptable. I will do everything I can to help people 
who get caught with high drug costs now that this is going 
through. And I make that pledge to the constituents of 
Saskatoon Centre constituency, that we will do all we can. But 
it is unacceptable to say that each individual case has to be 
looked at in a unique way, because many, many people are not 
going to get that attention. And many, many people are going to 
be having to make a choice between whether they buy their 
groceries or whether they buy their prescription drugs. 
 
There are so many people living on low incomes in this 
province. I’m afraid the government opposite doesn’t 
understand what it’s like to live on $700 a month or $400 a 
month. In my constituency there are many people, and again I 
say it’s mostly women – women who’ve been widowed early, 
women who are not senior citizens. They are not eligible for the 
old age pension; they are not eligible for senior citizen benefits; 
they are not eligible for the $50 initial prescription fee, they 
have to pay the 125. They may be left with their house which is 
considered an asset, and they are not eligible for social 
assistance, and they are going to get no help. They’re going to 
have to pay for their drugs up front. And many older people, 
before they become senior citizens, are already suffering from 
some sort of disease or illness that requires them to have 
expensive drugs. 
 
I am so concerned about these people and how they’re going to 
manage. I don’t understand how people can manage on such 
low incomes when housing is so expensive, when city taxes are 
going up because the municipal government is not getting the 
money from the province to help pay for the property taxes, 
when the cost of transportation’s going up, the cost of sales tax 
is going up. People are just going to be absolutely desperate, 
and I know that they’re going to hurt when it comes time to try 
and pay for their drug plans. 
 
So I speak as a person concerned about consumer affairs, 
particularly concerned about people managing to pay for the 
cost of their drugs, now that this Patent Act has come forward, 
and we’ve already experienced these changes in our drug plans 
here. 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

872 
 

New drugs are supposed to be new developments. The drug 
plan was a creative innovation, a plan for helping people to deal 
with this new development. This government says it’s all for 
change and development and I can’t understand how they 
would destroy the drug plan when they prescribe, with great 
rhetoric, to such progressive ideas. They’re not progressive, not 
one bit, when they can do this sort of thing. 
 
Drugs are important for keeping people out of nursing homes, 
keeping people out of hospitals, keeping us going in our 
community as much as we can. And the fact that we have not 
opposed the drug plan ...The Patent Act changes indicates that 
we’re quite willing to let a lot of people go through a lot of 
suffering. And that is not progressive. That is not progressive 
one bit. 
 
Twenty-five years of medicare, and we’re going back in time – 
rapidly back in time. The people of Saskatchewan know it, and 
they’re deeply concerned. 
 
You could have, if you wanted to be useful, you could have 
supported educational seminars and worked with consumers 
and with doctors to cut down on the drug plan costs and the 
prescribing of drugs. You could have done that. We did it, as a 
group of women, in the early ‘70s, and it worked; it was 
successful. That’s a progressive thing that you could have done. 
 
You could have supported the development of generic drugs in 
this country, and that would have kept the costs down. That 
would have kept the costs very much down. 
 
That’s what you could have done, and you chose not to do it. 
You chose to go with the multinational corporations, you 
choose to go with the high price of prescription drugs for 
everybody in Saskatchewan, and yet you will not see that if you 
supported the generic development of prescription drugs, you 
could have kept the cost down. Just like you want to support 
generic farm chemicals, and that’s fine, you won’t do the same 
thing for prescription drugs. 
 
You think that a multinational corporation’s going to come into 
Saskatchewan and market the drugs cheaply? Well, the example 
in Manitoba – and you love to refer to Manitoba so, by all 
means, let me refer to Manitoba – there’s a multinational 
company there producing fertilizer, the Simplot Chemical Co. 
Ltd. Of Brandon, Manitoba. And the drugs that that 
multinational corporation develops in Manitoba sell for a lower 
price in North Dakota ...(inaudible interjection) ...And I’m sorry 
that the members opposite are yelling at me as I’m trying to tell 
this, because I guess they don’t want to hear it. 
 
But this farm chemical, manufactured by the multinational and 
the North Dakota ...in Manitoba sells for less than North . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I am sure 
we all realize ...I am sure we all realize we’re having a little 
difficulty hearing the member from Saskatoon Centre, so if you 
could just quieten down a little bit, please. 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m trying to make the 
point that the multinational operating in Brandon, Manitoba is 
selling its product cheaper to North Dakota than to the farmers 
in Manitoba where it’s produced by a multinational corporation. 
 
You want to bring a multinational drug corporation into 
Saskatchewan. It’s not going to work; they’re not going to 
come. But if they do, the prices are going to be just as high. 
They’re going to be higher for us in Canada than they are in the 
States. You’d better learn from what’s already taken place. And 
you’d better get your act together and promote generic chemical 
production of farm chemicals and of prescription drugs so that 
people will have the benefits of cheaper drugs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — I deeply regret that it’s take so long for this 
resolution to be discussed in the House because of the moves 
that the federal government have already made in enforcing the 
changes in the Patent Act. 
 
And on behalf of the people in Saskatoon Centre, I want to 
again reiterate our great disappointment that this legislature was 
not called earlier this year so that these issues that are so 
important to the people of Saskatchewan could be debated in 
time to make some changes. 
 
Instead you put on the backs of the people of Saskatchewan the 
cost of this Patent Act change, the cost of the multinational 
prescription drugs that are coming in, and you are making the 
people that are already living on relatively low incomes, or very 
low incomes, an even heavier burden for them to carry. 
 
I’m concerned. I’m disappointed. I support this resolution, very 
strongly urge all of you to, and hope that we can do better in the 
future in preserving medicare and preserving good health 
systems for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Legislative 
Secretary to the Minister of Health in Saskatchewan, I’m 
pleased to have the opportunity to participate in this debate on a 
topic that I’m sure is of great interest to many people in our 
province. 
 
As with any other policy related to the government, whether it 
be the Government of Saskatchewan, or the Government of 
Canada, I think it’s important that the people be given accurate 
information so they can understand the issues and weigh them 
properly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must admit that, as I enter this debate, I do so 
with a twinge of regret and disappointment – disappointment 
because members opposite put forward resolution which once 
again displays their attitude of having their head in the sand, of 
living in the past, of not wanting to look to the future. 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

873 
 

The member from Saskatoon Nutana has put forward virtually 
the same motion as was put forward 6 months ago, in 
December. She and her colleagues had failed to put forward any 
convincing arguments at that time. Yet, if they insist on being 
reminded again of their weak and illogical position, I suppose 
we must take the Assembly’s time to cover the same ground all 
over again. 
 
Therefore, at the end of my remarks I’ll be moving an 
amendment to this motion as follows: 
 

That Resolution no. 1 be amended by deleting all words after 
the word “Assembly” and substituting the following: 
 
commend the Government of Canada for changes to 
Canadian drug patent legislation which will enhance research 
and development in Canada in the area of prescription drugs, 
and will provide Canadians with better quality health care, 
and increased employment. 
 

In my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I want to set the record straight 
with regard to the proposed amendments to the Patent Act. 
Unfortunately, in putting forward this motion, the NDP has 
once again displayed its consistently negative attitude to any 
economic development that isn’t directly controlled by 
government. It’s also displayed its tendency to use an attitude of 
frightening seniors, low-income families, others on fixed 
incomes, with predictions that dire consequences are in store for 
them – an abhorrent and disgusting attitude toward the people 
of this province, the electors who supposedly elected 
responsible members to the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe those kind of tactics have worked 
in the past, and they’re certainly not going to work in this 
present time when the people understand the issues and are 
prepared to get the information on them and to make decisions 
based on the information that’s available to them. 
 
Many times we’ve seen a display of that attitude by the 
members opposite in this House – ignore the facts; ignore the 
realities; live in the past; not only live in the past, but try and 
take everybody else back to the past with them; try to create 
unfounded fears and anxieties amongst the people; not try and 
work together with other people in this country to move ahead, 
to move into the future, to see new developments, to create 
economic development and diversification. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, I find it a deplorable tactic, but perhaps 
it’s the only one that they have left since they certainly don’t 
seem to have reason or common sense in their arguments on 
this particular issue. Mr. Speaker, the NDP claims that the 
proposed amendments to the Patent Act are going to result in 
substantial increases in the cost of prescription drugs for seniors 
and low-income families. Mr. Speaker, let’s keep in mind that 
this Act pertains to new developments, to new drugs. Drugs 
which are presently being produced in this country will still be 
available, whether they be prescription, whether they be patent 
drugs, or whether they be generic chemicals. 

Mr. Speaker, that argument of theirs once again is simply not 
true, and if the NDP believe it is, then they obviously haven’t 
take time to understand what the amendments are really all 
about. Let me just provide some very relevant and important 
background information, Mr. Speaker. When the amendments 
were being developed, our government was in continuous 
contact with federal officials with regard to these amendments. 
The legislation which was tabled in the House of Commons, 
and which is now being reviewed, contains several major 
revisions that came about as a result of this consultation. 
 
Let me highlight some of the ways in which the final version 
differs from the one proposed earlier. A clause is now included 
to clarify that all generic drugs currently being produced are 
exempt, as I said earlier. For new drugs, exclusive rights are 
effectively reduced from 10 years to seven years – provided the 
generic manufacturer makes the ingredients in Canada – 
thereby, employing Canadians and helping to develop our drug 
industry. The earlier version specified 10 years for all new 
drugs. On average, this seven year period represents very little 
change from current practice. 
 
The industry must now provide sales revenue information for 
all their drugs in Canada, not just on patented products as 
earlier proposed. This will help the prices review board hold 
industry to its commitment to double research and development 
expenditures to 10 per cent of gross sales by 1995. And it is 
expected to generate an extra $1.4 billion in research dollars. 
 
As well, the legislation now provides for drug price review 
board hearings to be public. And to ensure a fully independent 
board, the federal minister can now establish a panel to advise 
on review board appointments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these new features in the proposed 
legislation will help to make it more effective and reduce the 
price inflation we have seen for many years now. 
 
As I have said, they have come about because of the federal 
government’s willingness to listen and respond to 
Saskatchewan’s ideas and suggestions, not to be held up to 
ransom to companies who are producing drugs elsewhere in the 
world and are only importing them into this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health, my colleague from 
Meadow Lake, wrote to the federal Minister of Consumer and 
Corporate Affairs to reinforce Saskatchewan’s interest in three 
major aspects of this legislation. 
 
Number one, we want to ensure that Saskatchewan receives a 
fair and appropriate portion of the proposed $100 million 
compensation fund. Number two, we want to see a fair share of 
the new research and development come to this province, 
something new for Saskatchewan, a new industry, to get away 
from the resource-based dependency that we’ve had in the past. 
Number three, we want to see that the prices for review process 
is truly an effective one. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, we analysed the proposed 
legislation carefully and weighed its implications. We 
  



 
June 30, 1987 

 

874 
 

identified areas of concern in the original proposals and 
presented our case to the federal authorities. We worked 
co-operatively with those officials and were able to secure a 
number of substantial changes that have resulted in a piece of 
legislation that will be beneficial for Canada and Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a far cry from the doom and gloom 
approach of the members opposite. We just heard the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale talking about diversification, and I 
found it very strange the topics that he chose to discuss for 
diversification. His main point of contention was the CF-18 
debate that recently went on between western Canada and 
eastern Canada. I find that topic especially interesting coming 
from the benches opposite when one of their major beliefs and 
proposals, if they should ever come to government, is to do 
away with defence spending, to get out of our NATO (North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization) commitments. But yet they want 
a dependency in western Canada built up on those types of 
dollars and those types of expenditures from the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s contrast some of the things that they want: 
they want to return to the past; they want to go back to what 
they had years ago. I would contrast that to what we’re looking 
for: we’re looking for diversification; we’re looking to build to 
the future; we’re looking to get away from a dependency on 
resources that we’ve had to live with in the past. They want a 
dependency on foreign suppliers; they don’t want a Canadian 
industry. We would like to move forward into the future, get 
some self-sufficiency built into our drug plan, our drug 
availability in this country, and the development that will come 
from money spent on research and development in that area. 
 
They want the R&D, the research and development money 
spent elsewhere in the world. They want it to go out of this 
country; they want the money that we pay for our drugs to be 
spent elsewhere. Mr. Speaker, we would see that spent here in 
Canada. We would see that jobs created here in Saskatchewan 
and the rest of Canada, and we would see further diversification 
into something new. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they would destroy the incentive that there is 
available to people to create new things, to research new 
projects. They would pirate on somebody else’ time. They 
would pirate on somebody else’s investment. They would rather 
just stick to what somebody else has done and develop only a 
generic industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we’re to have true economic development and 
diversification, there must be some incentive for people to spent 
money on research and development. There must be some 
incentive for them to invest their money in our country and in 
our province. Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely imperative that we 
must move into the future and away from the past and the 
resource-based dependency that we’ve had if we’re to live in 
the new world of the 1980s and the 1990s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have many, many more things that I would like 
to raise on this debate. Seeing as it is nearly 1 o’clock and time 
to close, I would move that we adjourn this motion at this time. 
I would like to adjourn debate. 

Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:57 p.m. 


