













































September 4, 1987 Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 4, 1987 

 

 

2309 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Unemployment Statistics 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question to the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, my question 

has to do with the unemployment figures that were released by 

Statistics Canada this morning, which were confirmed by your 

government’s labour statistics which were also issued this 

morning. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you aware that these figures show that 

Saskatchewan was the only province in Canada, over the past 

12 months, to lose jobs. There are actually 2,000 fewer people 

working in our province today than there were in August a year 

ago. By comparison, Mr. Minister, Manitoba created 4,000 new 

jobs over that same period of time, and in the province of 

Alberta 12,000 new jobs were created. 

 

In other words, Saskatchewan lost, over the period of this year, 

month to month, August to August, 2,000 jobs. I ask you, Mr. 

Minister: in view of the serious loss of jobs, what job creation 

programs does your government plan to introduce this month to 

try to avoid the unemployment problem worsening even worse 

as winter approaches? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Let’s start 

question period off on the right foot, not the wrong. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the statistics show that at 

present, or in the last month calculated, the province of Ontario 

had the lowest unemployment rate in Canada. The second 

lowest rate was in two provinces, the province of Saskatchewan 

and the province of Manitoba, with an unemployment rate of 

7.1 per cent in each of those two provinces. 

 

Second best in Canada is not quite as good as we’d like to be, 

but it is fairly high up in the statistics in Canada and shows that 

this government, with its project at the oil upgrader, with its 

projects in bacon, with its projects in paper mills, with 

improvements to pulp mills; despite the crisis in potash, despite 

the crisis in agriculture, despite those problems, we’ve been 

able to maintain a position that is second in Canada only to 

Ontario, which is booming on the auto business, and we don’t 

have any auto business here. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Minister, your own labour statistics which were 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member is 

being interrupted by other hon. members, and I ask for their 

co-operation in allowing him to ask his question. 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would want 

the minister to hear my question without being interrupted by 

his fellow colleagues on that site of the House. 

 

Mr. Minister, your own labour statistics show that in the month 

period from July to August of this year in Saskatchewan, the 

labour force decreased by 3,000 people. That’s the labour force. 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you not agree that if the labour 

force in this province hadn’t dropped by 3,000, we would have 

had – and that was because of out-migration because people are 

going somewhere else to find jobs – if that had not happened 

we would have, and Saskatchewan, had a major increase in the 

unemployment statistics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, members opposite 

like to compare this province to Manitoba, and that is a good 

comparison. But what you should take into account is that the 

province of Manitoba received from the federal government at 

least $400 million more in equalization than the province of 

Saskatchewan. And with an extra $400 million we would be 

number one in Canada in employment. And the reason that 

Manitoba receives the extra $400 million a year is because the 

NDP agreed to an equalization formula based on sky-high 

prices for oil, sky-high prices for potash and . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please! 

The Minister of Labour is answering the question. He’s being 

interrupted by hon. members. I’ve asked them three times for 

their co-operation. Please allow the questioner and the 

individual answering the question to proceed. 

 

Order, please. The member from Regina North West – I’m not 

even sitting down, and already he is interrupting. I think that is 

most discourteous, and I ask him to clean up his act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fact then 

is that the federal government, because the Saskatchewan NDP, 

when they were government, agreed to an equalization formula 

that gives Manitoba an extra $400 million per year benefit. And 

we are still tied with them in employment, right now, despite 

the $400 million of extra taxpayers’ money, some of it coming 

out of the Saskatchewan taxpayers’ pockets. So you cannot 

compare these provinces on an equal basis because they are not 

treated equally because of the formula the NDP left us with. 

 

Youth Unemployment 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 

Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, this is the first year, because 

of your mismanagement, that the province of Saskatchewan in 

10 years now gets equalization payments because we’re on the 

level equal to that of Nova Scotia. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2310 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, you can play with 

the figures all that you want, and the Minister of Finance can 

chatter from his chair all that he wants. But you can play with 

the figures all that you want, but that doesn’t change this fact: 

there were 36,000 Saskatchewan people unemployed last 

month. That’s 1,000 more than a year ago. 

 

The sorriest thing of all is that youth unemployment is a 

scandal. It’s a scandal, Mr. Minister. I say to you in my 

question: in light of the fact that Statistics Canada reports that 

last month there were 109,000 young people between the ages 

of 15 and 24 unemployed in our province – that’s a drop of 

6,000 from a year ago, 6,000 fewer younger people were 

employed in Saskatchewan this summer as compared to last 

summer – do you not agree that one of the major contributing 

factors to the youth unemployment problem was your decision 

to cut the job creation programs by nearly 70 per cent in this 

budget? And will you now be prepared, in light of these figures, 

to change the government’s position and do something about 

bringing back some of those job creation programs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, with respect to 

the equalization formula, and the allegations of “not true” were 

thrown across the Assembly here . . . The Minister of Finance 

advises me that in our first term Saskatchewan spent more years 

as a “have” province than Saskatchewan spent as a “have” 

province during all the time the NDP were government. So that 

indicates how well this government did under our management. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite does not read 

well. I thought I heard him say that Saskatchewan had 109,000 

unemployed youth. That’s what I heard. The fact is that 

Saskatchewan has, in the month of August, 109,000 youth 

employed. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s what he said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well we’re in a dispute as to what the 

member opposite said. The fact is that 109,000 youth are 

employed in this province right now, and that is approximately 

the same as last month. When it comes to youth employment, it 

varies depending on who is going on to school and who isn’t 

going on to school; it varies depending on whether they are 

youth that are permanently in the labour force. And so statistics 

can be argued about. But the facts are that things in 

Saskatchewan are quite good under the circumstances of a crisis 

in potash and a crisis in agriculture, and we are managing this 

situation very well. 

 

In the part of Saskatchewan that I come from, virtually every 

youth that wanted a job this summer got a job, and 600 more 

were employed out of the Yorkton-Melville Canada manpower 

offices than last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Special Drug Review Plan 

Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the Minister of Health and 

it deals with his total inability to tell the people of this province 

the truth. On October 14 you announced a special drug review 

plan, and I quote: 

 

To ensure that no Saskatchewan person is excessively 

burdened by changes to the drug Bill. 

 

This so-called review panel was to help those people who faced 

huge, catastrophic drug bills as a result of your decision to cut 

the drug plan. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Bishop family this week, here in Regina, was 

turned down for special coverage even though their total yearly 

income is $15,000 per year and the drugs needed to help save 

their daughter are approximately $1,700 per year — $1,700 a 

year up front in drug costs. How can you say that this kind of 

drug bill isn’t an excessive burden for the Bishop family? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the family that the 

member mentions, and I hesitate to get into the specific cases of 

an individual family, but I will say this: the family that that 

member mentions, the Bishop family of Regina, has in fact 

received special consideration. And that special consideration 

consists of, as I understand it, an envelope which they’ve been 

issued which says that they can have their turnaround time on 

their reimbursement money within one week. The family says 

that that’s not appropriate; I can’t help that, but they have been 

given special consideration. And the member quotes their 

monthly charges for drugs; if their reimbursement comes back 

within a week, there won’t be a monthly charge . . . the monthly 

charge will be solved . . . will be 20 per cent of that. The 

amount will be solved by that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll say to the hon. member, while she likes to 

raise the individual cases, the committee has looked at it, the 

representative of the College of Physicians and Surgeons, the 

representative of the pharmaceutical association, member of the 

drug plan; they’ve looked at it and they say this is an 

appropriate way to solve the problem for that particular family. 

That family has been dealt with in a special way. 

 

And the family, if they’re saying to the hon. member that 

they’re not happy with it, I’m sorry about that, frankly. And I’m 

sorry that the hon. member wants to persist in calling this 

particular case forward. But the fact is, it’s been dealt with in an 

appropriate manner. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, you can’t hide 

behind your drug review panel. You appointed it, you set the 

rules, and it’s your cuts to the prescription drug plan that have 

created these hardships. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now I ask you again. How can you claim 

that no one will suffer excessive burdens under the drug plan 

when you have turned down special coverage for the Bishop 

family? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And I’ll repeat again, Mr. Speaker,  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2311 

 

I’ll repeat again. I’m not hiding behind the review panel. Yes, 

the member says I appointed it; that’s true. I appointed the 

review panel. The review panel is doing what they are set up to 

do. They’re doing what they’re set up to do . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. The hon. 

member to my left, and he knows who I’m talking about, is 

interrupting unnecessarily. I ask for his co-operation. Perhaps 

he’ll want to ask his own question, but I’d just like to ask for 

your co-operation in allowing him to proceed with his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — That panel is doing what it was set up to 

do, and that is to give special coverage where that special 

coverage is appropriate and is reasonable. That coverage has 

been given. What is deemed to be reasonable and appropriate 

coverage has been given to the family that the member wants to 

bring into the legislature, once again. They have got coverage 

which other citizens in the province have not got, and it’s a 

reasonable coverage – coverage which they will be able to 

handle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will say only this, that the member can continue 

to raise that issue, or somebody else’s issue if they would like 

that. All I say is that this has been dealt with in an appropriate 

way on behalf of all the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question, Mr. Minister, in the rejection 

letter from your drug benefits review panel to the Bishop 

family, the letter says, in part: 

 

Because of the low deductible levels and generous refund 

policy, it should be possible for you to adjust to the new 

drug plan under which you already receive very substantial 

benefits. 

 

Mr. Minister, with a net income of $15,000 a year and a drug 

bill of $1,700 a year for just one child – one child alone – do 

you want to tell the Bishop family where they think they should 

get . . . where you think they should adjust their income? You 

tell the Bishop family where they should adjust their income. 

You tell them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member persists in 

talking about the drug bill of the particular family as so many 

dollars per year, without any recognition. She chooses not to 

recognize that 80 per cent of that money comes back to them – 

80 per cent goes back. And she also chooses not to recognize, 

which I have already said here, that that family has been 

covered in this sense, and that they have very speedy 

reimbursement time so that there’s a turnaround time of their 

money, so that the money goes back to them and then they can 

have it for to buy their next prescription. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s totally appropriate. It’s totally appropriate. 

It’s the way this family’s looked after. What the family would 

like to have is free drugs, Mr. Speaker. Well the family has 

been looked after in a way which is appropriate, which is more 

than what most families in the province have, and it was 

deemed to be a reasonable way  

to look at it by the committee which has been set up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what more can I say about it except to say that 

member’s playing cheap politics and putting half . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you set the parameters for the 

program. Don’t blame the committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, this family doesn’t live on a 

$60,000-a-year cabinet salary, and not many families in this 

province do. This family lives on $1,250 a month. Now you tell 

me, how do they pay for those drug costs up front? You tell me 

how they pay for them. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the committee is doing an 

excellent job. The committee has looked at this case in a 

compassionate way. They have said this is an appropriate way 

to deal with it. That family will have a turnaround, once they 

send their receipts in they’ll have a turnaround as early as a 

week, Mr. Speaker. The money will be back to them – 80 per 

cent of their costs. The member chooses not to acknowledge 

that in any way, shape, or form. And I just repeat again, Mr. 

Speaker, that family, it will be able to cope with this problem. 

 

The fact is, the family does not want to accept the fact that they 

should pay anything for their drugs. That is the case – that is the 

case. They don’t want to pay anything for their drugs. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that as long as they can handle it, and I say 

here to you here and to all members of the House today, they 

can, given the special consideration that they’ve been given 

through the committee. And, Mr. Speaker, as far as I can say, as 

far as I can . . . I can’t add anything more to it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — There’s one thing that you said, Mr. 

Minister, that’s true, and that’s that they shouldn’t have to pay 

for their drugs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. I have here an application 

form for the special drug coverage plan. These are the forms 

that the drug benefits review panel have people fill out before 

deciding whether or not they should get any kind of special 

status. Family income is one of the categories, Mr. Minister. 

Therefore family income is one of the criteria by which your 

committee judged the Bishop family not being eligible for any 

kind of status. 

 

Mr. Minister, with a drug bill of more than $1,700 a year, what 

family income would the Bishops had to have had in order to 

qualify? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the family that she wants 

to talk about, their costs are . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. We can’t have a question and then  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2312 

 

interruptions immediately, or we can’t have an answer, so . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — With the special consideration they’ve 

been given and with the turnaround time coming more quickly, 

which it will – and know that and they haven’t accepted it and 

I’m sorry about that – but the facts are, Mr. Speaker, and to all 

hon. members, the costs to the family, their own costs for the 

drugs, will . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member 

from Moose Jaw North persists in interrupting. I ask him for his 

co-operation, in all sincerity, and I hope that he will abide by it. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Their costs to that family, the actual 

cost that they will pay – will come from their pocket – will be 

in the order of 20 to $30 a month, Mr. Speaker. That’s not an 

outrageous amount of money, $30 a month. That’s their cost, 

Mr. Speaker, $1 dollar a day; that’s the costs we’re talking 

about. And they have their reimbursement coming back more 

quickly. And that was what was recognized by the committee 

that there may be a problem with the cash flow if the 

reimbursement is not quick enough. The reimbursement will be 

quick, and their cost is in the order of $1 a day, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s not inappropriate. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. $40 a day may 

not be very much for you on your income but $40 a month on 

$1,250 income is a lot. Now, Mr. Minister, the only help your 

little review panel could offer the Bishop family was to send 

them these claims priority forms to speed up their refunds. Your 

office said that it would take a three to four day turnaround 

time, but the drug plan advises this family that it will take over 

two weeks. And this still requires the family to come up with 

$150 a month up front in drug cots. How can you tell the 

Bishop family, and families in similar situations, that your drug 

plan is not an excessive burden? Tell them that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I will tell them just that, Mr. Speaker. 

The people in Saskatchewan do not believe that $1 a day cost to 

any family, $1 dollar a day, is inappropriate. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

not inappropriate. 

 

The member wants to take about giving free drugs to families. 

That’s what she says – free drugs, Mr. Speaker, people who are 

in the lowest . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And the members opposite will all 

applaud that. They say all families in Saskatchewan should 

have free drugs, says the member from Regina Centre. I hear 

that. Free drugs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not an appropriate or responsible position 

for any political party to take. That’s the position that that party 

takes, Mr. Speaker. It’s not an appropriate position. What we 

have said throughout all of this, in the drug plan, is that those 

most in need, those on welfare, will be looked after. And they 

are. They aren’t saying that, even in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, 

where they’re in  

government. Okay? Mr. Speaker, $30 a month, $1 a day, is not 

an inappropriate cost for a family for their drug costs. That’s 

not an inappropriate cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

New Powers Under Bill 36 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to 

the Premier, with respect to his potash legislation. Clearly the 

Premier wanted to create the impression of his government 

being aggressive and active, and also wanted an opportunity to 

embarrass the member for Riversdale. But in reality, Mr. 

Premier, I would ask you: what genuine new powers will you 

now have under Bill 36, apart from some legal matters and 

some items relating to penalties; what new legal powers are 

provided by Bill 36 that your government didn’t already have 

under The Mineral Resources Act of 1985? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, the 

legislation is before the House and it is being debated and has 

yet to be passed. So I don’t believe it’s appropriate for me to 

comment on the powers of the legislation directly until we 

complete it. I can only say the intent of the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, is to provide our province with the ability to manage 

the resource. And as we go through the legislation, I’m sure that 

will become evident. 

 

Resignation of Saskoil President 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Energy, and it deals, Mr. Speaker, with the 

occupational hazards of being president of Saskoil. And I’m 

talking about the forced resignation of one called Mr. Bill 

Douglas. In reacting to the forced resignation, the chairman of 

Saskoil, Herb Pinder, said that Mr. Douglas had not been 

aggressive and tough enough. 

 

I remind the minister that Saskoil in the first six months of this 

year made $9.4 million under Mr. Douglas. Mr. Douglas also 

presided over the selling of $110 million of shares last year and 

$50 million this year, all of which your government applauded 

with the appropriate adjectives – very flowery, and saying what 

a wonderful job Mr. Douglas has done. 

 

My question to the minister is this. You are responsible for 

Saskoil. Will you tell the people of Saskatchewan why, and in 

what way, Mr. Douglas was not aggressive enough or tough 

enough to remain president of Saskoil? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, this decision was taken by 

the board of Saskoil and done in their judgement, and that’s 

where that decision belongs, Mr. Speaker, even though the 

members across the floor don’t agree with this side of the 

House on it. 

 

I would also remind the member from Saskatoon South that that 

company that was nationalized some time ago has also been 

turned back to, in effect, a private company, Mr. Speaker, and 

this decision was made by the board. 

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2313 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, here goes our history lesson again, 

and abusing history once more. I want to ask the minister: is the 

real reason that Mr. Douglas was forced to resign because he 

opposed your policy of aggressively going into Alberta, buying 

up companies in Alberta, protecting the jobs in Alberta at the 

expense of jobs here in Saskatchewan, firing people from 

Saskoil? Is that the real reason why Mr. Douglas was forced to 

resign? Is that the reason? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I can only state again: this 

decision rests with the board, and that’s where it will remain. I 

do believe, however, that the member opposite, perhaps, would 

like to contact Saskoil and ask. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Potash Sale to the Republic of China 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report to the 

people of Saskatchewan and the members of this House a major 

sale of Saskatchewan potash to the Republic of China. 

 

Canpotex . . . I know the hon. members in the New Democratic 

Party do not want to talk about potash again, Mr. Speaker, but 

Canpotex, the company which markets Saskatchewan potash 

outside of North America has signed a contract with the 

Chinese company Sinochem which buys potash on behalf of the 

farmers of China. 

 

The agreement calls for the shipment of 300,000 tonnes of 

Saskatchewan potash to China over the next four months. I am 

also pleased to report that the deal calls for a significant 

increase in our price for potash over the previous deal between 

Sinochem and Canpotex. The contract calls for a price of about 

$100 Canadian per tonne at Vancouver. Canpotex officials are 

to be congratulated for completing their second major contract 

with China this year and for their aggressive marketing and 

landing the business at a higher price. 

 

For the past year Canpotex has been conducting a major 

campaign in China to educate Chinese farmers as to the benefits 

of using Saskatchewan potash, and the campaign is paying 

dividends. Canpotex signed a major contract to ship 150,000 

tonnes of potash to China last November, and this was followed 

by another deal for 550,000 tonnes of potash in January 1987. 

 

The latest contract means that between November 1986 and 

November of this year, 1 million tonnes of Saskatchewan 

potash will have been shipped to China, the first time that 

Canpotex has achieved this level of sales in any 12-month 

period. This is further proof, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 

intends to maintain its share of its potash markets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, my first words will be of welcome 

by the statement made by the Minister of Finance. But I want to 

remind the Minister of Finance that the inroads to China were 

made long before they became  

the government in ’82. And had we, Mr. Speaker, not made the 

mistake of remaining in Canpotex, which drove up the price of 

potash to China to such an extent that the Chinese people did 

not aggressively pursue the purchase of potash, we would not 

be just going into China today, we would be having an 

aggressive market in China a long time ago. 

 

I also want to remind the minister, because he alluded to the 

fact that it is the opposition that doesn’t want to talk about 

potash, I want to remind the people of Saskatchewan, it was the 

opposition who gave leave to introduce Bill 36, it was the 

opposition who asked them to bring the Bill forward last night, 

and it was the government that adjourned the debate last night 

on Bill 36. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — And I couldn’t help but hear on the media this 

morning that the government is now taking credit that Bill 36 

actually produced a sale of the potash in China. How ridiculous 

a situation, Mr. Speaker, do we have. I think it shows, it shows 

the hypocrisy of the government opposite as to why they 

brought in Bill 36. It was not because they needed Bill 36, but 

because of some heroic showmanship that they wanted to show 

that the Premier who’s been so ineffective – so ineffective of 

creating markets for our resources in the world . . . He’s 

travelled all over the world, and he’s been so ineffective in the 

oil industry, so ineffective in potash, so ineffective in uranium, 

that they had to bring forward a Bill in order to boost up the 

Premier a bit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly hope that the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan will be more successful in the future in creating 

markets outside of the U.S. Not that they shouldn’t maintain the 

markets in the U.S., but I think we can see the folly of not 

having pursued in the last five years, aggressively, markets in 

the world. And now we find ourselves in a situation where our 

largest purchaser of potash is putting the screws to us, and we 

now have to find other markets. 

 

As I said before, I congratulate the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. And as we have seen, Mr. Speaker, the 

government obviously doesn’t want to take credit for it, because 

when I asked the minister responsible for Saskoil, she says, 

don’t talk to me about it; I got nothing to do with that; you 

could have talked to Saskoil. So I assume that the government 

had nothing to do with this sale and that it was the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan that is responsible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will therefore give credit to the people of the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 37 – An Act to Amend the Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I’d like to move 

first reading of a Bill. 



 

September 4, 1987 

2314 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Would you please state the name of the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — I would like to introduce a Bill, the first 

reading, An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill, 

An Act to amend the Urban Municipality Act, 1984. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Composition of Public Accounts Committee 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 

I’d like to move three motions, with leave, dealing with the 

make up of committees. The first one would be, with leave of 

the Assembly: 

 

That the composition of the Public Accounts Committee 

be amended as follows: 

 

 (a) by removing Mr. Gardner and Mr. Pickering from the 

   committee and; 

 (b) by adding Mr. Muirhead and Mr. Neudorf to the  

   committee. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Composition of Non-controversial Bills Committee 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 

 

 That the composition of the Non-controversial Bills 

 Committee be amended as follows: 

 

(a) by removing Mr. Martineau from the committee and; 
(b) by adding Mr. Gerich to the committee. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Composition of Crown Corporations Committee 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 

 

 That the composition of Crown Corporations Committee 

be  amended as follows: 

 

(a) by removing Mr. Martineau, Mr. Muirhead, and Mr. 
  Neudorf from the committee and; 

(b) by adding Mr. Pickering, Mr. Gardner, and Mr. Baker 
to   the committee. 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mrs. Smith that Bill No. 36 – An Act 

respecting the Potash Resources of Saskatchewan be now 

read a second time. 

 

Hon Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had an opportunity yesterday to express my feelings on Bill 

No. 36, The Potash Resources Act, and I went on at fair length 

to express what the intent of the Bill is, so I, today, do not have 

an awful lot to say on the subject but I would like to perhaps 

just make a very short summary of what really the intent of Bill 

No. 36 is. And, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 36 is a Bill to manage our 

resources; more specifically, a Bill to manage the vast potash 

resources that we have here in this province. Mr. Speaker, I 

think it is incumbent upon us as legislators to go ahead and 

manage those resources. I believe that the vast majority of 

people in the province of Saskatchewan would agree that it is 

our job, it is our duty, to manage those resources. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have a constitutional right enshrined in 

our constitution that says, yes, provinces can go ahead and 

manage those resources. This, Mr. Speaker, is precisely what 

this Bill is going to do, and I do hope that by now, that the 

members of the NDP party have had time to analyse the 

situation. Once again, Mr. Speaker, I invite them, I invite the 

members of the NDP party to stand up, to stand up and join us, 

and join us in this debate. 

 

I do realize, Mr. Speaker, that the members of the NDP party at 

present do not have a leader, and I can sympathize that it is 

probably very difficult for them to join as a cohesive unit and 

take a stance on this issue. But, Mr. Speaker, in the interests of 

the people of Saskatchewan, in the interests of the potash 

industry of this province, I am asking, I am asking the members 

of the NDP party and at least one of them, at least one of them 

on the opposite side of the House, to stand up and take charge 

of your caucus. 

 

Stand up and take charge and lead your caucus, and either join 

us in this debate, either join us in managing our resources, or 

stand up in this legislature here today and give us reasons why 

this Bill will not be effective. Stand up in this legislature today, 

or next week, and come forth, come forth with some solid, 

some solid suggestions as to what may be a better answer. But 

as yet, Mr. Speaker, we in the Legislative Assembly, the people 

of Saskatchewan have not heard any suggestions from the NDP 

whatsoever as to how we could better manage our resources. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will take my seat, and once again I 

do give the opportunity to the members of the  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2315 

 

NDP party to stand up and join us, or at least to stand up and 

give us some alternatives. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrews: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join in this 

debate and review what in fact has taken place in the potash 

industry and what has taken place by various governments 

across the piece that deal with potash, and why it is very 

important, I think, that we in this Assembly take a position in 

support of this bill and stand up for our people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you look at the problem associated with potash, 

you go back to the mid- or late 1970s. At that point in time the 

so-called experts of the world would have us believe and advise 

that the demand for potash into the future, into the ‘80s and into 

the ‘90s, would increase and increase substantially. In 1980 the 

demand for potash was something like 27.4 million tonnes. 

They projected that would increase to well in excess of 35 and 

into 40 million tonnes into the 1980s and 1990s – the so-called 

experts. 

 

As a result decisions were taken; because of that and because of 

other reasons, decisions were taken to expand capacity. That 

decision was taken to expand capacity within Saskatchewan and 

within other jurisdictions of the world so that we could meet 

this so-called demand. The results, however, five years and 

seven years later, is in fact the demand did not go up. The 

demand in fact stayed for the most part level, slightly less than 

what was purchased in 1980. And the result of that has been of 

course an over-supply of potash. 

 

This is not a problem exclusive to potash. If you go back to the 

Club of Rome, they said the same thing about the production of 

agriculture products in the 1960s, that the world would not be 

able to feed itself. The world responded by increasing 

production, and now you have the problem you see in 

agriculture, not unlike what we saw in the oil industry of the 

1970s. You must increase the production of oil because we’re 

running out of oil. And what happened? We and many others 

went into a grand scheme of developing the oil in Hibernia, or 

the oil in the Beaufort sea, spent billions and billions of dollars 

only to find out that, quite frankly, the world was not running 

out of oil, and those investments were misguided. 

 

The same thing applies to potash. For the person now looking at 

the potash situation, what we have in the world is four million 

tonnes a year more than the world is using or demanding – four 

million tonnes a year. And for the most part, what you are 

dealing with is a variety of places and locations in the world 

that supply potash. The largest producer of potash in the world 

is the Soviet Union and the East Germans, if you combine the 

two of them together. The second largest producer is 

Saskatchewan, followed significantly down the line, very 

significantly down the line, by countries like West Germany, 

France, Israel, Jordan, and of recent, New Brunswick. But each 

of those supply but 3 or 4 per cent of the world’s production of 

potash. 

 

So where do we find ourselves in a position? We find ourselves 

in the classic position, not unlike what our  

wheat farmers find themselves in today. There is a limited 

market out there, and there’s more product chasing that market 

than the market wants. 

 

(1045) 

 

And what is the result? The result is that the price drops. And 

the price continues to drop as everybody seeks to sell their 

product to the world. And at the end of the day that race to 

maintain market share, to sell your product, comes to the point 

where price is driven below what is reasonable and what is 

valid for the for the long-term stability of that industry. There is 

the problem we face today in the potash industry. 

 

Now let’s look at who the major competitors for Saskatchewan 

are. It’s not the New Mexico mines. They produce such a small 

amount of the potash of the world that it’s almost irrelevant. It’s 

the Soviet Union, Israel, and Jordan, and included in the Soviet 

Union is the East Germans. Now each of those countries run by 

different economic rules than we do. 

 

The Soviet Union are not concerned about do they have a job 

for a worker in the mine in the Soviet Union. Far from it. The 

salt mines of the Soviet Union are not seen as a prize job like 

they would be in Saskatchewan. What the Soviet Union looks 

for is a way by which they could earn foreign currency. So as a 

result what happens is that the Soviets and the East Germans 

and the Jordanians and Israelis sell their product into the world 

so they can earn more foreign currency. 

 

That’s the competition we face, not whether or not they show a 

profit, not whether or not there will be a job for their miner, but 

whether or not their government can earn that foreign currency. 

There is the problem that the world faces today – spot market 

mentality. You sell for today and don’t worry about tomorrow, 

or don’t worry about the future and the customer that you wish 

to serve not only today but next year and 10 years from now 

and 20 years from now. 

 

Clearly we learned that in Saskatchewan when we first obtained 

the Chinese market for wheat. Our wheat farmers treat the 

Chinese as a very valued customer, and over the period of time, 

by treating them as a valid and valuable customer, they come 

back to buy our product because of our security of supply and 

because of the way we have treated them. And that must be 

done the same way in potash. 

 

There is the problem that we all face and because we in 

Saskatchewan are leaders in the world. The Soviets use most of 

their potash within the Soviet Union. What they export is to be 

used to gain foreign currency, so it’s Saskatchewan potash 

mines that are the largest exporter of product in the world. We 

are the major player. Put in another way, we are like Saudi 

Arabia is to OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting 

Countries), the key swing producer, the key player. Therefore 

how we deal with the world problem in potash falls upon our 

shoulders as companies in Saskatchewan, as employees in 

Saskatchewan, and as legislators in Saskatchewan. That’s the 

dilemma that we must face up to, and that’s the leadership that 

the world is looking to us for. 

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2316 

 

So there’s the world-wide situation which is clearly the 

problem. Superimpose that upon that world problem, Mr. 

Speaker, is the American situation. The Americans are but a 

small producer of potash. They can only produce less than 10 

per cent of what they themselves could use, therefore they are 

not going to influence the market of the world by what they can 

produce. The U.S. industry is an old industry. The U.S. potash 

industry was significant in the early 1960s or before that. But 

those companies then said, we are running out of product – that 

was back in the 1960s – our mines will not be able to produce 

the demands for potash in the world. And they moved north to 

Saskatchewan and started to develop reserves that had been 

discovered here. 

 

And over that period of time the New Mexico mines grew more 

and more and more obsolete. Ownership changed time after 

time after time to the point where there’s now approximately 

600 people employed producing potash out of mines that have 

at best five years more life, if you strip all the product out of it 

and all the ore out of it. So they are not a significant player, but 

they can disrupt the markets of the world. 

 

And for why? The problem is in United States today 

protectionism is sweeping the country. They are saying the 

whole world deals unfairly with United States, and that the only 

trader in the world that is fair is the American. We reject that; 

we do not accept that, nor do most of the people of the world. 

There is the problem. What the American producer then does is 

say we will seek relief from this unfair competition by going to 

our system of dealing with foreign competition, which is our 

department of commerce through what is called an 

anti-dumping action. 

 

There producers mount their attack, go to Washington, and say, 

these Canadian producers are selling at such a low price that 

they’re losing money back home, and that they are injuring our 

producers in New Mexico. That’s what they are saying. The 

unfortunate thing, Mr. Speaker, is this: the department of 

commerce and the American law, as it relates to anti-dumping, 

treats a company outside of United States different than a 

company inside United States. One, you cannot injure a U.S. 

company because the problem with the U.S. company or U.S. 

industry is that it’s obsolete, it’s in the winter of its mine, and 

that mine will close. That cannot be avoided because that is 

nature. The ore body is gone, the ore body is poor quality, and 

the mines are obsolete and do not have economies of scale. 

 

They go to the U.S. Department of Commerce, and the U.S. 

Department of Commerce looks at the petition in the interests 

of the U.S. producer. And they assess dumping duties against 

our producers, not by the same test that they would judge their 

own companies, but by a different test. We have to meet far 

higher standards than would the New Mexico mine. U.S. 

Department of Commerce, I suggest, in some way responding 

to this growing protectionism in United States, come down with 

what I think are misguided and unfair preliminary dumping 

duties against our companies. 

 

But what is the impact or the result of those particular dumping 

duties? They, in our judgement, sit and  

determine which of our companies in Saskatchewan are going 

to be assessed what duty. In effect, what the Department of 

Commerce is saying is we, the American government, the 

American Department of Commerce, will decide which mine in 

Saskatchewan will produce more and which one will produce 

less. That is what is fundamentally at issue in this particular 

Bill. 

 

The question, Mr. Speaker, that we must deal with as 

legislators, while it is fundamentally important that we protect 

our jobs of our workers, that we protect a fundamental industry 

of this province – what is at issue here as well, and more 

fundamental, is that we protect our resource. And in so 

protecting our resource, we protect the very sovereignty of this 

province. That is what is at stake, and that is not something that 

we on this side of the House have somehow invented. And it’s 

not something new, and it’s not something that leaders in this 

Assembly, sitting in this very legislature, have not fought for 

before. 

 

Go back to the beginning of time. In the history of this 

legislature, the issue has reoccurred over and over again – 

whether it was Tommy Douglas, whether it was Ross Thatcher, 

whether it was Allan Blakeney, or whether it’s the present 

Premier. They have all faced that same question. And that 

question is simply this: will it be the United States government 

that determines how we produce and manage our resource in 

this province? Will it be the Department of Commerce that 

says, IMC (International Minerals and Chemical Corporation), 

you can produce this much; potash corporation, you can 

produce this much less; and Noranda, you can produce that 

much less? 

 

Think about the implications of what they are doing. Do we 

own our resource in this province? That is what is at issue, and 

it’s no different than the battle that this province fought in the 

‘70s over the ownership of oil, or the battle over potash in ‘60s, 

or the battle over anything else back to the history of our 

province. That is what is at issue. 

 

Now this is not a partisan political argument. All political 

parties have stood on that very firm and fundamental ground 

from the beginning of the history of our province – and they 

must. To do something else, can you imagine what the results 

would be? Can you imagine the people who own the resource of 

this province, one, conceding the management of that resource 

to Pierre Trudeau in the 1970s? Can you imagine a government 

that said, you have it, you run it, you control it? The people 

would run them out of town on the rails. And if it’s fundamental 

that we do not let central Canada and Ottawa control our 

resources of oil, surely it is 10 times worse to let a foreign 

country come in and say, we will control and determine the rate 

of production and where that production will be in our province 

– fundamental, Mr. Speaker. It is fundamental to what this Bill 

is about and what this Bill stands for. 

 

Here’s what could happen. If some company, the way the 

anti-dumping action has come down . . . here’s the result: one 

company has 9 per cent dumping tariff; one has 17, another has 

36, another 52, and another 85 – 60 per cent of our product goes 

into the United States. How can a  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2317 

 

company that pays 85 cents on the dollar tariff to the U.S. 

treasury compete against a company that is paying 9 cents a 

hundred on each tonne of potash to the U.S. treasury? How can 

you expect those two companies to compete? Obviously you 

cannot. 

 

And what would be the result? The result would be, those that 

have a lower tariff established not within the boundaries of this 

province but in some other country, those with a lower tariff 

expand and increase their production. Increase and expand their 

mines at the expense of who? At the expense of the worker who 

works in another mine that the Americans have saw fit to put a 

higher tariff on. 

 

And we should stand by as legislators and let that happen? Or 

we should stand by and in effect lose control or our ability to 

manage our resource, not only for us today but for our children 

and their children into the future? That is what is at stake here, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is what this legislature must deal with, 

and that is what this Bill deals with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we are seeing today . . . And let me talk on a 

side issue on this particular case, and that is the whole question 

of protectionism because that’s really what we’re talking about. 

 

Well it is fundamental for us to stand on our principle of 

ownership of resource, our ability to manage the resource and 

the sovereignty of this province – that is so fundamental. Let’s 

look at the fallacy of the U.S. argument and the U.S. action. 

What have they done? They have said, we are going to protect 

the resource producers of New Mexico who we have seen, and, 

they readily admit, are obsolete and about to close down with 

five years. 

 

(1100) 

 

What have they done? They have said, we are going to protect 

these mines because somebody is injuring them. Mother Nature 

is injuring them, Mr. Speaker, not us. But what are they doing? 

They are saying, we are going to put barriers up for the export 

or the import of potash into the United States. But barriers to 

who – barriers to the Soviet Union? No. Barriers to Israel? No. 

Or to Jordan or to West Germany? No. Barriers to Canada, 

because we export the largest amount of product into the United 

States. 

 

So they protect 600 jobs – artificial rules – but what is the result 

of that action? The result of that action is very simple. It will 

raise the price of potash to the U.S. consumer. And if the 

average is 38 per cent, and the market share shakes out, one 

would have to assume that the price to the U.S. consumer would 

go up at least 38 per cent. 

 

So now what have the Americans done to themselves, Mr. 

Speaker? What have they done to themselves? They have 

helped an obsolete mine go out of business sooner, because they 

will produce more. They have saved 600 jobs, and they’ve 

impacted 250,000 of their own farmers to make the cost of 

farming more expensive in a world where their farmers are no 

different than our farmers, and have a difficult time making 

ends meet. 

Now that is the wisdom of what the Americans have done. So 

how then do we, and are we, to respond? We could respond by 

saying, we will do nothing. That’s the advice we get from the 

members opposite – do nothing. Or they say, go hire a lawyer. 

Well I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, we’re hired many lawyers, 

and they’re expensive, but you have to do it because you’re 

defending something that’s fundamental to what we are and 

what we believe in, and what our sovereignty is as a province. 

That is what we have done. 

 

Or they say, Mr. Speaker, you people – you’re only a provincial 

government – you shouldn’t be involved in this; give it over to 

the feds to do, and let the feds deal with Washington. What 

does that say, Mr. Speaker? That says, let’s rely upon the 

federal government to protect the resources of Saskatchewan. 

Now I couldn’t believe that coming from the members opposite 

and from the member from Riversdale because he was in 

government the very time that western Canada fought Trudeau 

to have control of the very resources we are once again 

defending today. So somehow we should say, give it over to the 

feds and let the feds look after us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this issue falls four-square in the Assembly of this 

province, and I believe one who would argue any other way but 

for this legislature to deal with this question would be 

abdicating his responsibility as an elected person of our 

province. And anyone to do that would, I believe, be very 

short-sighted, be driven by some short-term political point that 

they would seek to score at the expense of the very basis of 

what we are as a province. And the members opposite would 

have a say as well. This just proves why you should not trade 

with the Americans. This just proves why we want no truck nor 

trade with any kind of a trade negotiation with United States. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how absurd. How can a potash worker be served 

by us saying to the Americans, we don’t want to trade with you, 

when 60 per cent of our product is sold to them? How can a 

uranium miner be better served by saying to the American, we 

don’t want to trade with you, when we supply one-third of their 

entire needs? How can a Saskatchewan cattleman be well 

served by saying, Americans, we don’t want to ship our red 

meat down to your market? How could we be better served? 

 

Mr. Speaker, and that is what is fundamentally at issue in these 

trade negotiations. Do we have access to that market or do we 

not? And that is the rule and that is the fundamental thing that 

we have stood for in the trade negotiations. We must have 

access as an economy to that very large and vast market down 

there, number one. 

 

But we’ve said something else that is so fundamental to this as 

well, and that is, we agree there should be rules established as 

to what is fair and what is not fair trade. But those rules should 

not be controlled totally by the Americans; they must be 

controlled jointly by Canada and the United States. 

 

To do otherwise, Mr. Speaker, what do we face? To do 

otherwise, we face the same problem we have today, that the 

American system will determine who produces what. The 

American system will tell us who is dealing fairly and who is 

not dealing fairly, not ourselves, Mr. Speaker. And  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2318 

 

those are the two fundamental and most important issues. 

 

So let me in summary say to the members and to all the 

members of this Assembly: this issue rises above partisan and 

petty politics – rises above it, Mr. Speaker. What is at issue is 

sovereignty – sovereignty of this province. That’s number one. 

What is at issue is who will manage the resources of this 

province. That’s number two. Number three, who and how do 

we approach our trading partners to bring sanity to the world, 

whether it’s in potash or uranium or red meat or government 

products of any kind? And that is also at issue here. Number 

four, Mr. Speaker, we were prepared to take a strong stand 

against the Americans. The Americans are our best customer. 

But at some point in time if they push too hard, you must stand 

your ground, and you must stand your ground on fundamental 

principle. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we also must stand for the 3,800 people that 

work in our mines, whose livelihood depends upon how we as a 

province deal with this. I say to the members opposite, to the 

NDP members opposite, stand in this House and support this 

legislation. Petty politics aside, and that passes, stand in this 

House. I say to the members opposite . . . and defend the 

fundamental principles of our province. Stand and look farther 

ahead than tomorrow. Look beyond the simple pettiness of what 

you’re dealing with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is fundamental legislation, dealing with 

fundamental principles that this legislature has stood for for 

almost a hundred years. And, Mr. Speaker, to not stand on this 

legislation on second reading, dealing with the principle, Mr. 

Speaker, the principle of what we’re doing – and that’s what 

second reading is about: the principle – for the members 

opposite not to support this legislation is tantamount to them 

saying, there is no principle to the question of sovereignty; 

there’s no principle to the question of who is going to manage 

our resources. That is what this debate in second reading is 

about – always has been; that is what the rules of this Assembly 

are. 

 

The members opposite must stand when the vote is called in 

second reading, Mr. Speaker, and vote with this Bill. They must 

vote in favour of this Bill. To do otherwise, Mr. Speaker, is to 

vote against sovereignty and to vote against who is going to 

manage the resources – two of the most fundamental issues that 

governments stand for. 

 

I challenge the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, to take their 

place, to take their place, to state their position, and when the 

vote comes, to stand and vote with this government and vote 

with principles that this province was built on and this province 

will go forward on. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 

pleasure to rise to speak in this House. 

 

Bill 36, An Act Respecting the Potash Resources of 

Saskatchewan, is an important piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

I welcome the opportunity to speak on this Bill. What is at 

stake, is at stake here is the very future of the potash industry, 

Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Energy and  

Mines introduced Bill 36 in this legislature to protect the future 

of the potash industry in this province. That is the primary 

objective of the Progressive Conservative government – to 

protect the potash industry. 

 

The Potash Resources Act will protect jobs, the jobs of over 

3,000, Mr. Speaker, workers whose . . . those who work in jobs 

dependent on this industry. The Potash Resources Act will 

protect revenue and investment – the revenue from future sales 

of potash and the millions of dollars of investment in this 

industry. The most important . . . The Potash Resources Act will 

provide for the management of the province’s potash resources 

to maintain a viable potash industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to participate in this debate on Bill 36 it provides 

me with the opportunity to point out the clear differences 

between the Progressive Conservative government and the NDP 

opposition with respect to the potash industry. 

 

The NDP opposition takes the position that this government 

should lobby the American government in Washington. That is 

a very simple approach to a very complex problem. In reports in 

the press I note that the officials from the U.S. Department of 

Commerce state that lobbying would have no impact 

whatsoever. At a time when the very future of Saskatchewan’s 

potash industry is at stake, the opposition wants to lobby. Quite 

frankly, that sums up the whole attitude of the members 

opposite. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe it would serve a purpose to remind 

the legislature of some important facts with respect to the 

potash industry in this province. World economic conditions are 

such that Saskatchewan potash sales have declined seriously 

over the past few years. Our potash sales to the United States 

have declined by almost 20 per cent since 1980. Government 

revenues have gone from 280 million in 1980 to just 37 million 

in 1986. These cold, hard facts show how serious the crisis in 

the potash industry really are. 

 

That is why, at this point in time, decisive and firm actions are 

necessary. That is what Bill 36 will accomplish once it is passed 

by this legislature. As has been pointed out by the Minister of 

Energy and Mines, this legislation will apply to all potash 

resources in Saskatchewan. And I should point out that 

Saskatchewan has a constitutional right to protect those 

resources, according to legal experts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve very surprised that the opposition has chosen 

to speak against Bill 36. In 1975, Mr. Speaker, they told the 

people of Saskatchewan that the potash belonged to the people 

and should be state-owned. They said it very clearly 12 years 

ago in this legislature that it should be a state-owned industry. 

Now in 1987 the NDP refuses to support a piece of legislation 

that would protect our potash resources and industry. Quite 

frankly, I fail to understand their reasons for not wanting to 

stand up in defence of the resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, could it be the opposition does not have the 

honour and principle to admit that Bill 36 is a good piece of 

legislation designed in the best interests of  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2319 

 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was in opposition for four years, and many good 

pieces of legislation did come in to this legislature by the 

government opposite, and we supported it, Mr. Speaker. We 

would support good legislation. 

 

And I notice from 1982, Mr. Speaker, to 1986, that when we 

brought in good legislation, the members were supporting it, 

like the gas tax, that 8 per cent money for farmers, they had to 

stand up and vote. But they found out that didn’t bring them to 

this side of the House, so they’ve tried a new concept, Mr. 

Speaker. And the new concept is to vote against everything that 

this government brings forth, whether it’s right for the people of 

Saskatchewan or whether it’s wrong. They just decide to go 

against. That’s the principles, Mr. Speaker, of the members 

opposite is to be against everything that this government bring 

down regardless of whether they even think it’s good or bad. 

 

(1115) 

 

There must be a future management of this resource. That is 

why the Bill contains provision to regulate the potash industry 

in this province. The volume of potash mined in Saskatchewan 

must be controlled, Mr. Speaker, otherwise we shall see ever 

increasing over the supply. All of these actions will put stability 

and order in the industry. 

 

Without this legislation, mine closing and job loses would be a 

certainty. Who amongst us would want to see mines close and 

people lose their jobs? On the weekend, Mr. Speaker, I 

contacted as many workers from the mines in my constituency 

that I possibly could get a hold of. And they were very, very 

surprised, Mr. Speaker, that this government brought forth the 

legislation that we are, but very pleased – and are very 

disappointed with the members opposite who thought . . . they 

thought they could depend on. 

 

An Hon. Member: — For what? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Yes, and for what, Mr. Speaker? Protection 

of the potash industry is a priority of this government. Saving 

the jobs of the workers is a priority of this government, and 

keeping the industry viable is a priority of this government. The 

immediate problem at hand is the ruling by the U.S. Department 

of Commence, as a result of the representations by the New 

Mexico potash industry. All agree the U.S. commerce 

department ruling is a protectionist action. Protectionism does 

not deal in fairness or the free market. Protectionism is 

economic warfare. And the province of Saskatchewan must act 

in a strong and decisive way to protectionism, and I believe this 

government is showing leadership and strength in standing up 

for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the premiers of the other provinces of Canada 

support the Government of Saskatchewan’s position with 

respect to Bill 36. The federal government in Ottawa supports 

Saskatchewan defending the industry, and I am confident that 

most Saskatchewan people would see the need for Bill 36. 

 

We are talking about a resource industry that is very much  

a key part of our provincial economy. That is why 

Saskatchewan must show leadership in defending the industry, 

Mr. Speaker, and for those who think this action is not 

effective, I should like to point out that the vice-president of the 

National Corn Growers Association in the United States was 

interviewed by the CBC – the American National Corn Growers 

Association says the U.S. agriculture interests will not go for 

higher fertilizer cost. They say Saskatchewan’s strategy is very, 

very effective. These same people representing thousands of 

American farmers will put pressure on the U.S. government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers in major American farm sites . . . farm 

states like Iowa, Kansas, and Illinois will see the price for their 

fertilizer increase. American farm leaders will point out that the 

actions of the U.S. government in putting severe duties on 

Saskatchewan potash is going to hurt American farmers. Mr. 

Allen Tank, the vice-president of the American corn growers 

association said, and I quote, “Premier Devine realizes that his 

best allies are going to be the American farmers in this issue.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I note from Hansard of August 26, the Leader of 

the Opposition said, and I quote: “ . . . our best ally in this case 

. . . will be the U.S. farm lobby . . .” Well, Mr. Speaker, those 

were the words of the Leader of the Opposition. Now I note the 

NDP opposition is speaking against Bill 36, the very Bill that 

has got the U.S. farm lobby on our side. 

 

On August 26, the NDP was saying, our best ally will be the 

U.S. farm lobby. Mr. Speaker, the reason why the U.S. farm 

lobby is standing on the side of Saskatchewan is because of Bill 

36, yet the NDP speaks against Bill 36. So one obviously has to 

ask this question: why is the NDP opposed to Bill 36 when it is 

the reason large American farm groups have allied with 

Saskatchewan? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we know that the members opposite do not 

understand the farming crisis in North American, not just 

Saskatchewan, all North America. They don’t understand, and 

you’d almost think, Mr. Speaker, that they don’t care. 

 

Bill 36 is very crucial in putting pressure on the American 

government to reverse the U.S. commerce department decisions 

about Saskatchewan potash. Time and time again government 

speakers in support of Bill 36 have emphasized how crucial this 

legislation is for the industry. In fact, that powerful farm 

organizations in the United States see the logic in supporting 

Saskatchewan is a compelling reason for us to pass Bill 36. 

 

Indeed, I am pleased with the immediate impact of Bill 36 as 

part of this government’s efforts to defend the industry. Bill 36 

will have significant effect in our efforts to protect the 

long-range future of the development of potash in our province. 

It is a well-constructed piece of legislation that this government 

can be proud of, Mr. Speaker. The merits of Bill 36 are obvious. 

If we as a province have a genuine desire to protect the 

industry, then we must pass this Bill. To suggest otherwise 

would be to invite economic ruin for the potash mines and those 

who depend on mining for their living. 

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2320 

 

That is the message I’m hearing from the constituents who I’ve 

been in contact with. The people in my constituency want this 

government to do everything within its powers to protect the 

industry and our resources. The Progressive Conservative 

government of this province is determined to take positive 

measures to protect this vital industry. Bill 36 is an exercise in 

leadership. 

 

I am confident the economic future for potash mining will be as 

bright as the result of Bill 36. We on this side of the legislature 

see it as a part of building Saskatchewan. I would suggest that 

the potash resources of Saskatchewan will hold this province in 

good stead in future years because of the actions of this 

government. I congratulate the Premier, the Minister of Energy 

and Mines, and the government for its leadership in defending 

our industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I urge all members of this legislature to 

do what’s right for the province of Saskatchewan and vote 

together and be unanimous so it’ll have far more impact. And I 

thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for the privilege of stating 

my views. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to deal 

with the issue of potash in a number of ways. And one of the 

ways I’m going to deal with, as the Minister of Justice did, on 

the matter of sovereignty and the responsibility we have and, 

Mr. Speaker, the sovereignty that we have in this province in 

dealing with our resources as given to us in the BNA Act and in 

the charter, and jobs, and stabilizing the resource sector of our 

province. 

 

My purpose for entering this debate is because I wish to be on 

record, Mr. Speaker, supporting the protection of our potash 

industry. The members opposite say that we’re filibustering our 

Bill. Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing is, we’re clearly 

establishing the perspective to which we want to deal with the 

aspects of the potash industry. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 

is our responsibility – not only our responsibility, but our 

privilege – to deal with it as legislators when a . . . not an 

opportunity, when actions are placed against the Assembly and 

against the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Potash Resources Act of Saskatchewan will be effective in 

protecting the future of the industry. During the course of the 

debate on this Bill we have heard very good reasons why The 

Potash Resources Act of Saskatchewan is a timely and 

necessary piece of legislation. I’d like the following questions: 

who would like to see the potash mines closed? Who would like 

to see over 3,000 potash workers lose their job? Who would 

like to see the millions of dollars of investment in the potash 

industry lost or eroded more? 

 

Every member of this legislature knows the answer. There is no 

one in Saskatchewan who would want to see these kinds of 

things happen to the potash industry. And that is why we, in this 

Assembly, and as government of the province, have introduced 

this Bill into the Assembly; to deal with the aspect of resource 

management, which is not too much different than some of the 

other sectors of the resources that we’ve got in this province. 

During the course of debate on this Bill I have heard opposition 

members raise questions which I feel must be addressed. One 

very important question is whether or not this piece of 

legislation is constitutional. I have every confidence that this 

government is on solid constitutional ground when it comes to 

the potash resource and this Act. The Minister of Energy and 

the Minister of Justice have both indicated that Saskatchewan is 

acting within its constitutional authority in introducing this 

legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill Lakes, who has a 

potash mine in his constituency, should be very precise in what 

he says in this legislature because the people in his constituency 

have probably a view of their own, and it probably is different 

than his in relating to the potash industry. And if he has the 

courage, he should probably be addressing the issue here in this 

Assembly today. 

 

Obviously anyone could challenge an action or a court. Any 

court could choose to decide that they . . . or any person could 

choose that he wanted to take an Act to the court and deal with 

it on a court basis, but I doubt whether there will be any 

challenge in this matter. In challenging a piece of legislation 

such as The Potash Resources Act, they would not be acting in 

the best interests of Saskatchewan. 

 

Another matter raised by the opposition is the fact that this 

legislation is the matter in relation to the trade with the United 

States. It is very apparent that farmers in the farm states like 

Iowa, Kansas, Nebraska, many others, Idaho – I have a member 

of my constituency who markets potash into the state of Idaho – 

will have serious problems as it relates to the higher prices. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have three things that we want to deal 

with in this discussion: sovereignty, jobs, and the stability of the 

resource – jobs in Saskatchewan as it relates to a primary 

production like mining, and production of a resource and 

manufacturing a resource that is used by the farmers in United 

States. 

 

And it’s expected, Mr. Speaker, that the increased cost to the 

producers in the United States is roughly going to be 10 cents a 

bushel for every bushel of production. In the corn producing 

states in Iowa and Nebraska and all along the Mississippi River, 

those farmers who generally produce about 150 per acre on 

their corn will roughly have to pay an additional $15 an acre to 

have the freedom to bring potash into United States. 

 

And the Minister of Justice outlined very precisely some of the 

problems that were involved in this in the international trade 

aspect. The problems deal with the international market as it 

relates to currency. The American potash industry is in serious 

trouble in dealing with its mines; it hasn’t the volume to 

produce; it hasn’t the equipment to produce the potash required. 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the volume of potash in United States can 

hardly be supplied by those people who have investments in 

other countries of the world and if they want to put it into 

United States. It can hardly be done. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, the action of the U.S. commerce of 

trade ruling on this matter is going to cause  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2321 

 

an increased cost to those producers in United States. And what 

it in fact will do, Mr. Speaker, is it will transfer the funding that 

the U.S. treasury made available to the farmers in United States, 

it will transfer that funding through the U.S. farm Bill and 

through the reduction of their acreage and production. It will 

move that funding from those producers into the international 

market-place. 

 

The people who produce that potash will get the benefits of all 

those increases in deficiency payments that the United States 

government is going to have to pay those farmers to 

compensate for this. And what will happen, Mr. Speaker, 

another thing that will happen, the farmers who are going to be 

required to pay more because of the prices that are going to be 

increased in the next few weeks, because of this tariff, are going 

to go into the state of New Mexico. And they are going to go 

into a non-agricultural state, and I would say that the American 

farmers are not going to tolerate that. 

 

(1130) 

 

I believe that it is very important for us not only to discuss it but 

also to realize that we have to deal with this aspect on an 

international basis. 

 

I believe that American producers will put up a significant 

response to the politicians and the administration in Washington 

on this in this area. I am confident that the farm lobby in United 

States, as it gears up, will also be able to place some emphasis 

in the matter to the American public and also the 

administration. It amazes me that the opposition has not come 

forward with a positive criticism, or a positive statement, as it 

relates to suggestion. And they say, for example, that we should 

go through the external affairs department in Ottawa. Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Justice outlined for us earlier a very 

clear and important point in dealing with the relationship of the 

provinces to Ottawa, as it relates to resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were given the responsibility in 1930 or ’31 

through the BNA (British North America) Act, a revision in the 

BNA Act or an amendment to it, that we had the responsibility 

to manage, to deal with the resources that we have, the natural 

resources in our province. Mr. Speaker, that was a major, major 

change in the view of the federal government in this country. 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we, as legislators in 

this Assembly, have not only the right but we have the 

responsibility to deal with the aspects of our resource 

management. And I believe that to say that we should go to 

Ottawa and say: look it, you guys do this for us, I think that is 

shirking our responsibility, and I think it is also – not that we 

don’t want their help and, Mr. Speaker, they probably will be 

doing that – but I would say that it is reducing our responsibility 

if we require that they be the agency of record in dealing with 

this problem that we have. 

 

Dealing with Ottawa is not the solution. It is an asset, but not 

the solution. Mr. Speaker, the opposition says, make 

representation to the President of the United States. Our 

Premier and this government have from time to time in the past 

year and a half, as it relates to the trade discussion, been visiting 

with the farmers of United  

States, with the state governors in United States; it has been 

dealing in many ways with the various aspects as it relates to 

the governments in the United States. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that that is very important. And 

why has that opportunity at this time presented itself to the 

people of Saskatchewan, where our Premier can go to United 

States and visit with those people? Mr. Speaker, it was done as 

a part of the trade negotiations with United States. Mr. Speaker, 

our Premier is co-chairman with agriculture issues as it relates 

to the trade talks. And these are very important times and very 

important issues as it relates to Saskatchewan, because potash is 

a fertilizer used for agriculture. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that our Premier has done this, and 

done this very well. Their comments are not original because 

we have already been doing that. We have been speaking to 

different groups and associations down there. And I noticed in 

the news, in the papers, that the American farm lobby groups 

are beginning to respond, and I think they will be coming on 

our side in this issue. 

 

What it says about the opposition, Mr. Speaker, is that really 

their lack of interest in this issue is being demonstrated by their 

quietness. Their counterparts . . . and maybe they don’t really 

understand the issue, although some of them probably do – but 

they are split on this. Here in Saskatchewan we really don’t 

know what their position is, but we do in Ottawa. 

 

In Ottawa they say, don’t sell anything to United States – don’t 

sell anything to United States. Well, Mr. Speaker, what do their 

members of parliament that they have here in Saskatchewan, do 

they stand up and say don’t sell anything, when the potash 

mines in their constituencies are going to go to pieces when 

they’re shut down? And you have to be very clear on this, that 

when a potash mine does shut down, it literally rusts to pieces 

because of the salt component and all of the things related to 

that. It must continue to operate. 

 

Their members of parliament are saying, embargo – where 80 

per cent of our potash goes. I think that is rather foolish, Mr. 

Speaker. And here is where the foolishness comes to play. 

Because they say shut them down, who will the biggest area of 

negative response come to? It will come to the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. They’ll be the second largest; the 

largest will be Central Canada Potash because they have a tariff 

of 85 per cent and we have a 52. Who will be the biggest 

beneficiaries are those people who have the 9 per cent tariff. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, here we have, clearly in my mind, a 

very interesting concept in this position that the United States 

government has taken in relation to this, and that they have 

spread this tariff or this requirement that we buy a bond for 85 

per cent, 50 per cent, 48 per cent and 9 per cent, that they have 

made those variables. And I think that that, Mr. Speaker, is 

wrong. They said, you’re worse than he is. Then they said that 

all the other international markets, that doesn’t bother them at 

all. I think that that’s wrong. 

 

It flies in the very face of some of the things that the United  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2322 

 

States people there believe in. They believe in open 

competition, and I believe that we have to put this rationale and 

the reasoning behind what we’re doing before the public in 

United States. I believe this is only one way, and there are 

going to be others. 

 

We have heard from the various people that protectionism is a 

part of what the United States is trying to say that they’re doing 

in relation to Canada and other countries in the world, and their 

response to this protectionist feeling that they have is very 

typical of what the NDP have on the other side of the House. 

They believe in setting up a wall around themselves, and we 

will be a society to ourselves. 

 

And really United States is doing that in a very real way when it 

comes to many of their agriculture products. They did that to 

our uranium. They’ve done that to our potash. They’ve done 

that to some aspects of marketing ham . . . or pork, live pork, 

into United States. They have done that in considerable amount 

of areas. And what they have done, Mr. Speaker, is this. They 

have said, we will build a wall around ourselves to protect our 

farmers. And what it really does, Mr. Speaker, is that that wall 

comes tumbling down because it isn’t built on a reasonable kind 

of a foundation. 

 

International trade is the best method that you can have to give 

the customer and the producer the greatest amount of 

advantage. And here is where we come into a very important 

aspect as it relates to potash. United States is the world’s largest 

producer of grain. And what have they done as it relates to grain 

in the international market? They said, you buy one bushel, 

we’ll give you another one. And have we ever done that as it 

relates to potash? Never, Mr. Speaker. They say we’re dumping 

into United States. But what are they doing on the international 

wheat market? They say, you buy one bushel, we’ll give you 

another one. And that’s what they’re doing in the international 

trade market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re not even beginning to think about the 

actions they’re taking on one hand, and the thing that they’re 

doing on the other. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is what 

we must clearly make them understand. And why it’s a problem 

today is because of the way their mechanism works, and that is 

why trade negotiations with Canada and United States are very 

imperative. And they are imperative because the mechanism 

works for individual, isolated instances in United States as it 

relates particularly to potash in New Mexico, and it’s a negative 

impact on their producers in other states, so other states will 

have to pay for that extra cost. And it gives the international 

market-place a negative impact. 

 

And that impact comes into Canada, and we in Canada have no 

recourse to the international market for them dumping their 

wheat. That’s part of the complexity of this trade discussion that 

we have to rationalize within in our system. That’s why it’s 

important for us to have a system where we can deal with the 

United States, because this proves that it’s necessary to have it. 

Because we need to have a mechanism in this country in order 

to respond to that, and we don’t. 

 

And if you want to use another example of the thing that  

I’m talking about, we’ll use beef moving in from the European 

Economic Community. Beef moved into Canada from Ireland, 

from Denmark, and various other Scandinavian countries, and it 

moved in here, and what happened? Mr. Speaker, they paid a 

high price for it. They lowered the price; they moved it into the 

Canadian market at way below the cost it was to produce, and 

way below the cost it was to provide the funding for the 

producers there. And we in Canada had no mechanism to stop 

that. 

 

And that is why it is necessary for us to begin to negotiate a 

trade relationship with the people we do a lot of trading with, 

and especially when we are in a position, as we are in potash, 

and they are on the international grain market, where they 

provide the high volume, where the capability is there to 

produce those volumes. And we in Saskatchewan, for example, 

have huge volumes in potash. We have tremendous volumes of 

potash, just like they have tremendous volumes of grains and 

various things like that. And we need to have a mechanism 

whereby we can say, in Canada, these are problems that are 

arising because of the inconsistencies on your side of the 

border, and we are trying to deal with the ones on our side. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is why we have to deal with the protectionist 

attitudes that are down there. And we cannot live in isolation, 

and that’s what protectionism does. And I believe that it’s not 

only wrong, but it’s not good for us. 

 

I believe that this Act, The Potash Resources Act, is a 

responsible Bill that sets out a responsible course of action. We 

must protect our potash industry – for what? I have outlined 

some of the things — sovereignty, but we also have to do it to 

protect some jobs. 

 

We have in this province a large number of people who work in 

these mines and, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in one of them, and I 

don’t live in a community that has the potash mine, but I do 

know that the kinds of volumes of the economic impact that 

they have in Saskatchewan are tremendous. And that’s why it’s 

important for us, as a government, not only to put this Bill into 

place but to place before the people of the province the 

perspective that it has in the international market, and also in 

what it provides for us as jobs. And you know what it does, Mr. 

Speaker, because one of those mines is in your constituency. 

 

The objectives of the Bill we are debating in the legislature are 

– there are a number of them, but some of them I have already 

addressed. Let us look at the facts as they pertain to the potash 

industry. World market for potash is very depressed at this time. 

That has meant that potash sales have been down, sales have 

been down for American potash . . . for the American potash 

industry, too. That is why the American potash producers use 

protectionist action against Canada and against this province. 

That is the reality of the situation; we can’t sit and ignore such a 

serious economic crisis. 

 

That is why this government has to show some leadership in 

introducing this Bill. It is the only way we can truly protect our 

province and the potash industry, and I’m sure  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2323 

 

every member here understands that. 

 

In the past, we as a government have made every effort to 

conduct trading issues in fairness and good will, and I have 

spoken to some extent about that. We have to, Mr. Speaker, 

deal with this in a very precise way because we are dealing with 

huge volumes of production, with people’s lives, and the 

stability of the industry. 

 

(1145) 

 

One could honestly say that goodwill has been forthcoming in 

the past from our American trading partners on various issues, 

and I’ll use the auto pact that we have with the United States – a 

very fundamental, original agreement that was worked out with 

the American people and the Canadian people in the industry. 

And why? Because they had problems with it. And the same 

formula needs to exist between other areas of trade that we have 

with United States, and potash is one of them. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what we have to begin to do. And that’s why it’s 

important; that’s why it was important for the leader of the 

United Auto Workers union to have that auto pact in place. It 

was. 

 

But what we’re having, and what we’re seeing, is that he 

doesn’t want to give the rest of the trading relationships that we 

have with United States, as a part of a united way of trading 

with the people who supply some of the highest volumes of 

benefit in a trade impact, both here and in the United States. 

What happens? We find ourselves in a hostile situation. The 

people in New Mexico want to begin to interfere in the resource 

management that we have, and suddenly we find ourselves in a 

situation that doesn’t seem fair, and neither does it provide a lot 

of good will. 

 

No one can be so naïve to think that pleading or weak measures 

will save our potash industry. It is simply not the case. We must 

take strong and decisive action, and that is what The Potash 

Resources Act is all about. At the same time we must look 

down the road into the future and be prepared to protect our 

potash industry from future threats. The Potash Resources Act 

makes provisions for managing the industry, and I believe it 

does it in an effective way. 

 

I am proud of this government, that it has the vision to take 

such action on behalf of our province. It is a well-known fact 

that in the past the Government of Saskatchewan has come to 

expect revenue from the potash resources to increase the 

financial provincial government income. And what do these 

resources help do? For a time they helped us pay for education, 

for health care, for many of the services that we ask the 

government to provide for us. 

 

And what has happened in the last few years? Mr. Speaker, the 

farm income has gone down, and in proportion, the volume of 

fertilizer used has gone down, and in proportion, the income has 

gone down, and that’s why it’s important for us to take some 

steps here in relation to this. What happened in good times in 

agriculture? The potash industry assisted, providing economic 

benefits to the people of Saskatchewan. Naturally, it is our hope 

that in future years potash will again begin to bolster our 

provincial revenues. 

We count on potash, in the good years, and now, in the bad 

times for the potash industry, we must stand behind it and 

protect it, because in protecting the potash industry we are 

protecting jobs, our economy, our province, and our way of life. 

The Potash Resources Act goes a long way towards the goal of 

building potash resources in the future. If we are to count on 

potash resources in the future, there must be stability. And we 

can only establish stability through the structures that will be 

put into place in The Potash Resources Act. 

 

Opposition members can talk all they want about their views on 

this Bill, but in the end they have to admit that the decisive 

action is what is needed to protect our industry, and also to 

protect our investment, not only in finances, which they did, but 

in the jobs that are related to the industry. And that is why, Mr. 

Speaker, I am going to be supporting this Bill. 

 

Governments have a moral responsibility to act in the best 

interests of the public and in supporting our investment, in 

supporting the people who work in these mines – the people 

who have taken the time to make this investment. And I believe 

that our government needs to be encouraged and even 

congratulated on the fact that they have taken the interests of 

the people of Saskatchewan to heart. 

 

The Minister of Energy and Mines recently said, and I quote: 

“We can no longer allow the current situation to continue if we 

are to maintain a viable potash industry in Saskatchewan.” And 

I agree with her. It should be noted that the potash industry’s 

spokesmen have congratulated the Minister of Energy for her 

leadership on behalf of the industry. And I would say, Mr. 

Speaker, that some of them may not altogether agree that it is 

the most important thing that ever happened to them. However, 

under the circumstances I don’t believe that any of them can say 

that it was the bad thing to do. And I would say that that’s what 

we have to consider – we have to consider all of the aspects of 

the potash industry. 

 

The past couple of weeks have been tough weeks for our 

province, the potash industry, and all through it the Minister of 

Energy and Mines has demonstrated leadership in this crisis. 

This government has had the courage and conviction to do what 

is right in protecting the potash industry, and I am proud of that 

fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would have been easy to say, too, the situation 

was beyond our control and not had any suggestions for 

improvement. It would have been easy to send off a few letters 

of protest, and one to the governor of this state and one to the 

governor of that, and then sit and wait for them to respond. And 

what would happen from that? – nothing, Mr. Speaker, 

absolutely nothing. But I think it’s our responsibility to do the 

things that we’re doing in this case. It takes leadership to 

introduce a Bill like The Potash Resources Act; it takes 

courage, and I believe that we can build on our resources to 

make a better Saskatchewan. And that is what this government 

is doing; that is why we’ll support The Potash Resources Act. 

 

I want to be able to tell my constituents I stand firmly in support 

of protecting the future of our mines. In future  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2324 

 

years I want to be able to tell my constituents that I stood up for 

the industry, not only the industry but the people who work 

there, and I want to be able to do that. 

 

I am very positive, Mr. Speaker, very positive that we would 

not be in this situation today if the individuals on that side of 

the House who were in government then would have been 

responsible in their actions at that time. And I think that is why 

we are where we are today, and I believe that very, very firmly. 

 

I’ve talked about sovereignty, Mr. Speaker, in resource 

management. We have to know what we’re doing. I want to say 

one other thing about sovereignty; we have to begin to say to 

those people who are dealing with this resource, as they’re 

putting pressure on us from outside, that we as the legislature of 

Saskatchewan will stand for the industry. And at one time I 

recall the Premier saying that he would put the Government of 

Saskatchewan up, so that the people of the province could 

continue to farm. And here he is doing exactly the same thing. 

Through the Minister of Energy he is saying to the people of 

Saskatchewan and to the world: you cannot do that to our 

industry; you can’t do that, and you won’t do that. And what 

we’re saying is that we will, through this Bill, control our 

industry and manage the resource. 

 

This legislature is responsible for the natural resources we have 

here: the oil, the potash, uranium – all of the natural resources – 

water. We have to deal with this because we in Saskatchewan 

have been given that responsibility by Ottawa to defend it here, 

and we will. 

 

Now the jobs. Three thousand people plus have an opportunity 

to have their jobs just thrown out the window. And that’s not a 

very pleasant thing to think about, and that, Mr. Speaker, is why 

this government is taking seriously their responsibility to deal 

with it in the best way we possibly can. 

 

Stability. What kind of economic impact do high and low cycles 

in an industry have? What kind of impact do they have? Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that those high and low fluctuations in 

the market-place – whether it’s potash, whether it’s wheat, 

whether it’s livestock, or whatever – the biggest beneficiaries of 

those high and low variables and the fluctuation in the 

market-place are those people who have the least invested in it. 

They’re not the people who work in those potash mines. In high 

and low fluctuations the beneficiaries are not the people who 

work in the mines, they are not the people who own them, but 

in the traders. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that in order to 

supply some stability, we will provide stability to the work 

place, to the industry, and I believe that that’s important. 

 

The other aspect – and then I will be closing with that – the 

other aspect that I think is important, and that is the trade issue 

as it relates to the potash industry. I believe that the United 

States is acting very improperly in this matter, and that is being 

very kind to them. But they are not dealing fairly with us. They 

are not dealing fairly with us for a number of reasons. 

And as I’ve been . . . in viewing some of the reactions that 

they’ve had in the last while as it relates to the softwood lumber 

industry, as it relates to uranium, and as it relates to potash, I 

believe that we have some of the things that they talk about in 

their countervail and dumping and tariffs and subsidies and all 

of their discussion as it relates to trade. They’re not viewing 

some of the important things that they consider important for 

themselves as it relates to Canada. They’re saying, these are 

important for me, but those same facts that are important for me 

over in south of the border are not the same facts that want to 

relate to the things that are important north of the border. 

 

And I’m going to relate to the high volumes of grain they have 

in the United States, and they dump it all over the world. They 

dump it, Mr. Speaker. They sell their wheat for a bushel, and 

we’ll give you one. And we have never, never done that in 

United States with our potash. Never. And we have to compete 

on the international market, and I’ll tell you something else, Mr. 

Speaker. The problem that they are finding is that the quality of 

the product in grain is a part of their problem. 

 

We have moved from 15 to 16 per cent in international trade in 

the grain industry internationally to 20 per cent. Why? Because 

we have, in our industry, control of standards and our quality of 

potash. Why do people want to buy our potash? It’s a quality 

. . . it’s a standard quality and people internationally know that, 

and they accept that. And that’s why it’s important for us to 

protect the workers who provide that quality, protect the people 

who are going to be investing in the industry. And I believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to do that. And so I want to stand 

behind the Minister of Energy and this government for doing 

the things that they are doing through this Bill. And I will be 

supporting it, and I’ll be glad to support it. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it is with interest that I enter this 

debate. Mr. Speaker, before I launch into some discussion of the 

very important Bill that is before this Assembly, I want to 

comment on some observations that I see. 

 

Having spent 10 years in this House, I have never seen a 

situation like this, Mr. Speaker, where we have a opposition 

sitting silenced, completely silenced, given the opportunity 

today to speak in debate and bring in amendments on a Bill that 

is affecting the future of a very important part of the economy 

of this province. Not one member, not one member will budge 

from their seat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this brings to my mind a more serious situation 

that is affecting the opposition opposite. As they sit here in 

stony silence afraid to talk about potash and the pressures that 

are facing potash in Saskatchewan today because of their past 

record, because of their past record of the government of the 

day that saw fit to take the money of the people of 

Saskatchewan to buy potash mines that were here and not create 

one new job. That is a legacy and a millstone that is around 

their neck, and they know it very well. 

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2325 

 

I look with interest, I look with interest at the opposition, and I 

remember back to last November when they were first 

re-elected. Some of the old guard were re-elected, and some of 

the new people in the back benches were eager to spring up and 

speak on any occasion. 

 

(1200) 

 

I remember with distinction when there was some talk about 

setting up a committee, Mr. Speaker, to look at the rules, some 

of the antiquated rules of this Assembly. I remember how 

distinctly that the members in the back row, you would have 

thought they were spring-loaded the way they leap to their feet, 

to protest with great observations and with great articulation 

and really strut their stuff over a committee, forming a 

committee to look at antiquated rules of the operation of the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

I remember the member from Lakeview just jumping to her feet 

and saying, let me into this debate. But will she stand up today 

and talk about potash? The member from Moose Jaw North, in 

a very vociferous way stood up and told us all the terrible things 

about forming a committee; the member from Rosemont ever 

eager to be on his feet to debate in this Assembly. 

 

But today do we hear one – one voice from the back rows of the 

NDP? Not one. And I will tell you why that is so. Because I’ve 

watched over the last three or four weeks, since the member 

from Elphinstone saw fit to say, I have taken my time in 

Saskatchewan politics; I have done what I thought I should do. 

We don’t all agree with what he did, but I will give him credit, 

the man tried his best. But he has left – he has left this 

Chambers, and he’s left the Chambers with a few of the old 

generals in the front row – the old generals that sit there in utter 

embarrassment and ashamed of that take-over of the potash 

corporation. 

 

But more than that, Mr. Speaker, it hinges on what is in the 

ranks of the NDP party today. They’re going to have to replace 

the old general – and I don’t think they have the substance to do 

it, but that’s my own personal observation – but they’re going 

to replace him. And who is looking to be the front runner at this 

time in replacing the old general? It’s the boy wonder from 

Saskatoon, the member from Riversdale. He is the fellow . . . 

 

An Hon Member: — The labour lawyer? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — The labour lawyer, that’s correct . . . He is the 

fellow that says, let me take over the reins of this party. 

 

I’m just commenting, Mr. Speaker, on the inability of the 

opposition to debate the Bill. And I’m trying to cite a point why 

that is so. And that is so because that gentleman who hopes to 

lead the party knows full well that we on this side know that he 

was the main architect, the main captain of the ship, the 

member from Riversdale, for the take-over of the potash 

corporation by the NDP government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that brief introduction to explain the 

silence, the stone, deadly silence on the other side of this House 

on a very important economic issue, I would  

now like to revert to some of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, why I 

see it as very important to support this Bill that is before our 

legislature today. I join with the other members on this side of 

the House, and I am proud to support Bill No. 36, and I share 

the confidence that this government has that Bill 36 will protect 

the future of Saskatchewan’s potash industry. 

 

At issue with The Potash Resources Act is the very future of the 

entire industry and, I must say, a most important resource 

industry in this province. No other province in Canada has a 

large concentration of potash as Saskatchewan does. We have 

one of the most extensive reserves of potash in the world, and 

that could see production continue, Mr. Speaker, for 

approximately the next 200 years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can appreciate the extent and the 

importance that potash plays to the province of Saskatchewan. 

This province has become one of the world’s leading potash 

exporters, and in 1984 Saskatchewan potash accounted for 39 

per cent of the world trade in potash. Approximately 60 per cent 

of Saskatchewan’s potash is sold at present in the United States. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you stop and consider that approximately 60 

per cent of Saskatchewan potash is sold in the United States, 

then you can appreciate the seriousness of the recent 

protectionist decision by the United States Department of 

Commerce. You can also see the immediate need for strong 

legislation to protect our potash industry. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is what Bill 36 is all about – the need to protect our 

potash resource industry. 

 

I’ve listened during the past several days, and I’ve had the 

opportunity to review many press articles about the impact of 

Bill 36. What I note, Mr. Speaker, in the press reports, is that 

there is general agreement that strong action is necessary. For 

example, Mr. Speaker, and I cite some of these, in the 

Star-Phoenix on page 12, September 3, ’87, we see that the 

Governor of New Mexico at the time of the potash problem in 

1969, supports the action that is being taken, and is critical of 

the action being taken by the present Governor of New Mexico. 

He says, and I quote: 

 

Lashing out against Saskatchewan isn’t going to solve 

their problems, he said in a telephone interview on 

Wednesday. 

 

Looking at another article, the headline saying – from the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix – also saying that the “Potash Bill 

strikes the perfect balance.” 

 

The underlying economic theory of the Bill is this: if the 

excess production capacity is taken off the market, supply 

and demand come into harmony, the market stabilizes, and 

the price climbs. 

 

The minister – indicating that jobs will not be sacrificed by the 

action of the Bill; in fact, protect it. 

 

And in the Star-Phoenix on September 3, ’87 – “Potash move 

said satisfactory.” And the editorial goes on to say  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2326 

 

that at first blush it looks quite well. But what I thought was 

interesting, the editorial writer says: 

 

But on another score (and I quote) there is little doubt 

Saskatchewan people, particularly some directly connected 

with the potash industry, will be heartened that the 

government is seen to be standing up for an important 

corner-stone of our provincial economy. 

 

Another one states that: “Saskatchewan potash restrictions 

backed by Ottawa.” 

 

So I think we can see from the press reports over the last few 

days in the debate, Mr. Speaker, that many people, not just the 

people on this side of the House but people across this province 

and across this country are saying: you are on the right track; 

that it is necessary to bring in Bill 36 to protect this very 

important industry. 

 

Those who know, Mr. Speaker, and understand political and 

economic conditions in the United States, are quite aware The 

Potash Resources Act is necessary if Saskatchewan is going to 

make any kind of impact upon the U.S.A. More importantly, the 

time had come for us to deal with the long-range future of the 

potash industry. 

 

In discussing this legislation, let us make one point very clear: 

the obstructionist opposition have no plan or policy to put 

forward as a clear alternative to Bill 36. As I said earlier at the 

beginning of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, that you would think 

that if the opposition had some comment on the Bill they would 

rise in the Assembly with . . . if they don’t like the content of 

the Bill, to at least come forward with some amendment that 

they feel would strengthen the Bill. 

 

But that is not their way of trying to solve the problem. Their 

friends in Ottawa, their NDP friends in Ottawa call for an 

embargo. Every time you pick up a paper and look at the stand 

of the NDP on the potash issue, it changes – changes with each 

announcement. Their leader in waiting, the member from 

Riversdale, opposes an embargo. Their former leader, or the old 

general, the member from Regina Elphinstone, one day calls for 

action to win the support of the major farm organizations, and 

then, Mr. Speaker, when Bill 36 wins the support of major farm 

organizations in the United States, they sit in dead silence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can imagine the ineptitude, the indecision, 

and the total lack of direction should the members opposite ever 

have to deal with such a crucial matter. We can rest assured 

such a day will not come in the near future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I note that a certain political columnist, one we all 

know well, Mr. Dale Eisler, wrote in the Regina Leader-Post on 

September 3, the following, which I quote. He says: 

 

Someone should ask the NDP when it (delivered) this 

concern about the future of (the) potash mines being put 

(into) the hands of (the) cabinet. 

 

This is one of the concerns I noticed when the member  

from Saskatoon South, I believe that it is, indicated that this is a 

very great concern of his, that the potash, the control of the 

amount of potash to be put into the hands of the cabinet. 

 

And I say that is a valid question when you consider that fact. 

The member from Saskatoon Riversdale, and indeed the entire 

NDP in the 1970s were the socialists who brought in the state 

control of potash and put the control of the potash corporation 

in the hands of the cabinet – the total control unto the hands of 

the cabinet. 

 

Such an about-face, Mr. Speaker. Little wonder this opposition 

has no credibility on the issue of the potash industry. Then I 

note a headline in the press that reads: “Forget (all) about (the) 

potash Bill; lobby (the) Americans, (the) NDP says.” This is the 

same NDP that says we should cut off the free trade talks and 

never lobby the Americans. What kind of double standards have 

we here? On one hand saying, run down and lobby the 

Americans, and then on the next hand saying, let’s not have any 

free trade talks with the Americans. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of this Assembly and 

the people of Saskatchewan: where is the stand? That is strictly 

a double standard and about-face. And at a time like this it is 

easy for the opposition to deal in partisan political rhetoric. 

They are under no real obligation to offer any kind of a 

plausible solution. That is the nature of our legislative system. 

Yet we cannot allow irresponsible comments and ludicrous 

policies to be seen as respectable. 

 

I challenge the NDP opposition to come forward with one new 

and reasonable solution, and we all know that they can’t. Talk is 

cheap, Mr. Speaker. But I want to tell you it takes courage and 

it takes leadership to take a real stand and put forward a Bill 

like The Potash Resources Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other night I happened to be driving home in 

my car, and I was listening to As It Happens, which I do often 

on the way home, a CBC national radio show in which they 

discuss the topics of the day. I heard a fellow, I believe his 

name was . . . Mr. Tank was his name. He was from the United 

States. They introduced him as the international vice-president 

of the corn growers of the United States. 

 

And I know up here in Canada, in Saskatchewan, corn is not a 

major crop. But certainly in the United States, it is a very major 

crop, and in some states the major crop, and certainly one that 

requires good nutrients, potash, fertilizer, whatever is needed to 

get the high yields that they do there which they put through 

their red meat industry and so on. 

 

And I heard Mr. Tank being questioned quite pointedly by the 

interviewers on As It Happens, and it was the day that the Bill 

had broke and was in the news. And Mr. Tank said in that 

interview, or they asked Mr. Tank; they said, well, what do you 

think of Mr. Devine? And I’m sure Mr. Tank has not met Mr. 

Devine, but he said, I believe this, that he is a very wise and 

clever man. 

 

Here was the vice-president of the corn growers in the United 

States of American coming out point-blank and  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2327 

 

saying that the action taken by the Premier of Saskatchewan 

was probably very wise and very prudent in the interests of 

safeguarding our important industry. I thought I’d bring it to 

your attention, Mr. Speaker, and to any who happen to be 

watching this, because I’m sure not all have the liberty, as I do, 

to listen to As It Happens each night. 

 

So I like to repeat, Mr. Speaker, I believe members on this side 

– and I had phone calls the other day from Vancouver, from 

people phoning up and saying, say, that took some courage and 

you go see the Premier again and congratulate him on the stand 

that he’s taking. 

 

I say it takes courage and leadership to take a real stand and put 

forward a Bill like The Potash Resources Act. Leadership, not 

salesmanship, is what is required in a time of crisis. I tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, political jiggery-pokery is not honourable. It is 

void of principle, and I stand here to accuse the opposition of 

just that – political jiggery-pokery and the fear to stand on their 

feet and discuss Bill 36. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will not be 

hoodwinked by shenanigans of the socialists. You know, and I 

know, that they are totally void of any policy to protect the 

future of the potash industry. Let it be said, and let it be well 

understood, Mr. Speaker, that at this critical time in the 

economic history of the province of Saskatchewan that it was 

the Progressive Conservative government that showed 

leadership in protecting the future of this vital industry. 

 

(1215) 

 

The people in towns such as Melville, Prince Albert, Estevan, 

Lloydminster – or indeed go into any community in this 

province today, and you will find that people want action on 

this matter facing the potash industry. People will tell you that 

now is not the time for political posturing or for obstructionism 

or for dead silence – the time is for leadership and action. 

 

Bill 36 has been introduced in this legislature as part of a 

comprehensive strategy to bolster the potash industry of this 

province. Previous speakers have made reference to the fact that 

the province of Saskatchewan is the largest producer of potash 

in the free world. Mr. Speaker, statistics and facts have been 

cited in this Assembly about the very significant importance of 

potash to our province. During the last 20 years the provincial 

Government of Saskatchewan has become more and more 

dependent on revenues from potash, and when the world market 

for potash took a serious decline, then that created serious 

problems for this province. 

 

Yet the opposition, in an irresponsible and mischievous manner, 

takes great delight in attempting to blame this government for 

these economic conditions. I remind the NDP that when they 

took great delight in the decline of the potash industry, they also 

take great delight in the potential closing of mines and the loss 

of thousands of jobs. And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that the potash 

workers take no delight in the decline of potash sales. Indeed, 

most Saskatchewan people are reasonable and responsible 

citizens, have only one wish for the potash  

industry, and that is the wish that I have, and the members on 

this side of the House – they wish to see it succeed. 

 

I wish the members opposite were as vociferous in their support 

of Bill 36 and the potash industry today as they were in their 

socialist plan of state ownership in 1976. They know all too 

well that the people of this province know the NDP is not 

serious in wanting to save the potash industry at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us shows that this government does 

not hesitate to take action to protect Saskatchewan people. Time 

and time again since 1982, when any potential threat to 

Saskatchewan people came about, this government put the 

interests of the Saskatchewan people first. Mr. Speaker, you 

well know, and I do, that in agriculture we took measures to 

protect the farmers. I think back to such things as the 

production loan guarantees. I think back to the farm purchase 

program, back to the livestock cash advance program, fuel 

rebate program – all new programs since 1982 aimed at 

protecting the farm economy in this province. Each one of them 

– when there was a need we acted, and we acted in the best 

interests of the farmers. 

 

And I can tell you, when I campaigned in the election of 1986 

throughout the north-eastern part of this province – where we 

won every seat, by the way – the farmers of that area of the 

province said, right on the money. You came to our aid when 

we needed it, and we’ll support you. And they’ll do it time after 

time again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And I look across at the member from 

Humboldt, and I know he’s a neophyte in here, and I don’t want 

to pick on him too hard, but I just want to say to him that I 

cannot see a man of his calibre sitting there in stone silence, 

muzzled by the member from Riversdale because he doesn’t 

this to be discussed in this legislature. He wants it to pass by 

like a cloud that will soon be forgotten and that a golden 

horizon would come for him in his political aspirations. Let me 

tell you there are many clouds on his horizons, and muzzling a 

man like his agriculture critic, preventing him from speaking in 

this House on a topic such as potash and agriculture, I say is a 

shame. I say that doesn’t serve the interests of Saskatchewan 

politics, and my heart goes up to you, and I say stand up and be 

counted. You have potash mines in your seat; you’re the 

agriculture critic of the government. Don’t let these 

front-benchers tell you to sit still and let this one pass; don’t 

stake your political history on . . . future on what they’re telling 

you. Stand up, be a man, represent what you have the critic’s 

obligation for, and get into this debate and let him know where 

you come from. 

 

Let me also point out, let me also point out, when we help the 

people of Saskatchewan . . . I remember back, and I see the 

member from Saskatoon commenting from his seat – mostly 

he’s quite quiet but I guess I hit a nerve today. But I remember 

back when he was, shall I say, one of the more powerful men in 

the old regime, and interest rates – you remember as well as I 

do – in your constituency in Saskatoon, the middle of 

Saskatoon, the biggest issue was interest rates. People were 

losing their  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2328 

 

homes. Simply put, 1981 interest rates were running rampant in 

this province, and the government of the day with the old guard, 

the old generals, the worn out ones in the front bench, what did 

they do? They sat here, smug. They sat here while the people of 

Saskatchewan cried out for help. 

 

We were in opposition in those days and we were few. And I 

can tell you all we had to do was walk out through the doors 

and into the towns and villages of Saskatchewan and say: what 

is the problem? And they said, interest rates, and we acted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I bring these to the attention of the Assembly 

because I relate them to the fact that today there is a crisis 

facing potash, and this government has acted. As I said, when 

the crises were facing agriculture, we acted; and as the crises 

were facing people with homes and interest rates, we acted. 

When I was Health minister, I remember people crying out for 

nursing homes. They didn’t like a moratorium, but we acted. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan has 

taken action to protect the potash industry. Protection of 

Saskatchewan is first and foremost a priority of this 

government. It would be absurd for any government to ignore 

the protectionist mood in the United States, especially a 

province so dependent on the marketing of its resources. 

 

The gunboat diplomacy of the NDP will not work at a time like 

this. An embargo, as suggested by some of the federal 

members, men such as Mr. Nystrom, the NDP member for 

Yorkton-Melville, shows how irresponsible those people tend to 

be. They would put thousands of people out of jobs in order to 

show their rabid anti-American sentiments. Those who condone 

the burning of American flags on the steps of the Manitoba 

legislature obviously cannot act in a rational manner in dealing 

with the United States and the Americans. 

 

This government has shown a responsible course of action by 

working through established diplomatic procedures. We have 

put contacts into Washington; the Premier has spoken on many 

occasions in the United States, and has made many 

representations to public officials in the United States. At the 

same time we recognize the need to show that we in 

Saskatchewan will take strong action to defend our potash 

industry. 

 

Bill 36 is crucial to the survival of the potash industry in this 

province. I cannot over-emphasize that point. All of us in this 

legislature have a moral obligation to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and more important than that, I would say, to 

future generations, to protect this industry. Let history record 

that when the economy of Saskatchewan was threatened, it was 

the Progressive Conservative government that stood up for 

Saskatchewan. Let there be no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that I and 

my fellow colleagues here are proud to support this Bill. 

 

And I want to say, as I come to a close in these comments, the 

pride and the feeling that I had for my colleague who sits next 

to me here in the legislature, the member for Swift Current, in 

putting forth this legislation and bringing forward – and I 

listened to her speech in here – right  

from the heart, right on with what the Saskatchewan people 

want, the protection of our industries; to stand up to against one 

of the strongest countries in the world and say, look it, you’re 

not going to be playing funny games with us. We are going to 

stand strong for Saskatchewan; we’re going to stand strong for 

the potash industry, and we’re going to stand strong for the 

people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the vital issues in this Bill and what we are 

attempting to do is, number one, to protect as best we can, the 

jobs of the people of Saskatchewan that are in the potash 

industry; number two, to protect our market share of this 

industry because, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, the world is 

cyclical place, and times will change and markets go up and 

down, but those are the main ingredients; and thirdly, to see if 

this product of ours which has been in a depressed state, 

price-wise, that that cannot bring about a rosier day for this 

province. And fourthly, to see that we can get extended sales 

not only in the United States but around the world. 

 

And I commend all of those today who are in some way 

responsible for negotiating the sale that my colleague, the 

Minister of Finance, announced in this legislature this morning 

– the new sale to China. We all know that China is one of the 

fastest progressing nations in the world today. And we know 

that China may become one of our major consumers of potash 

in the years ahead. 

 

If Bill 36 can protect our market share and save the jobs of the 

people in Saskatchewan; if the decisions made by the people in 

the potash corporation can expand through Canpotex, or 

whatever way of marketing, to other markets around the world, 

Mr. Speaker, then I believe we on this side of the House are 

serving the interests of this province, serving the interests of 

this industry. And I’m very, very proud to support that kind of 

action on behalf of the people I represent in Indian 

Head-Wolseley and on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you. I will be supporting the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, like the rest 

of my colleagues, am pleased to be able to rise in this House 

today to speak in favour of this Bill. And in doing so, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to first indicate my full support for the 

Bill and for our province’s industry and for the potash workers. 

 

Having said that, I’d like to comment on the situation that 

caused the Bill we are debating to become necessary, Mr. 

Speaker. Potash over-supply is a problem that we have 

experienced before. Likewise, protectionist measures against 

the potash industry are a matter of historical record. Yet unlike 

past situations, the one we face today is extremely critical, not 

only to the industry but to the economic health of our province 

as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, billions of dollars worth of investments and 

industrial infrastructure are at risk here. Thousands of families 

and their livelihoods are in jeopardy. Such a situation requires 

serious action. Mr. Speaker, potash is our second most valuable 

natural resource. We must  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2329 

 

protect that resource for the future. Having a 500-year supply of 

potash will do no good to our children if the industry dies out. 

 

And as incredible as that may seem, Mr. Speaker, that very 

possibility does exist. If the glut of potash is allowed to grow, 

Saskatchewan’s potash industry will indeed suffer. Mr. 

Speaker, there is already evidence to support such a claim. Back 

in 1981, when the average selling price of a tonne of potash was 

about $156, there was a potash production world-wide capacity 

overhang of about 1.8 million tonnes. Almost 4,500 workers 

were employed by the industry in Saskatchewan at that time, 

Mr. Speaker. But by the end of last year the production capacity 

overhang reached 4.1 million tonnes. The average price of a 

tonne of potash had dropped to about $87, and there were 

nearly a thousand fewer people working in the industry here in 

Saskatchewan. It is clear that over-supply is damaging our 

potash industry greatly. 

 

And it is also clear that when that over-supply started to 

develop – and it was back in the late 1970s, Mr. Speaker, back 

when prices and the demand were going up steadily – there 

seemed to be no end to the optimism. Companies laid out 

ambitious exploration plans and the NDP government, and I’m 

sad to say this, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government rushed out to 

buy as much of that industry as they possibly could. 

 

And if I could I would like to quote from Hansard of December 

5, 1979, page 126, where the then premier, and the now official 

Leader of the Opposition said, and I quote: 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the future of the potash industry looks 

bright, especially for PCS. We are working toward our 

announced goal of control of 50 per cent of the province’s 

potash production. 

 

Such was the attitude of those people who felt that the industry 

could afford to keep on growing non-stop. As well, Mr. 

Speaker, there were kept those old, inefficient mines like those 

in New Mexico in production long past their useful lives, all in 

expectation of higher prices and higher demand. And many 

other areas, especially in the Middle East and in the Soviet bloc, 

saw production expanded in the hope that they could bring in 

more hard western cash, even if it meant operating near a loss 

situation. 

 

(1230) 

 

But they all made a big mistake. They lost their gamble, While 

production rose, demand stayed at about the same level. 

Suddenly there were mountains of potash that nobody wanted, 

and even if they did, they didn’t have to pay much of a price for 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For Saskatchewan things were worse than for other areas. Our 

mines are the most efficient of any of those in the world, and 

Saskatchewan is the largest exporter of potash in the world. The 

biggest producer of potash in the free world, Mr. Speaker, but 

most of our potash goes into the United States, and American 

demand has been steadily declining. Where in 1980 the U.S. 

once needed around 6.2 million tonnes of potash, in 1986 it 

only required 4.9  

million tonnes. The simple fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, 

that the American farmers were using less fertilizer as their 

commodity prices dropped. I think that farmers here in 

Saskatchewan can relate to that, Mr. Speaker, and things are not 

likely to get better very soon on the American farm scene. 

 

What this drop in demand means is that you have to be very 

efficient to survive, and Saskatchewan producers are just that. 

But some producers in New Mexico did not see it that way. The 

only thing they saw was prices going down, so they lashed out 

with a dumping allegation. They didn’t stop to examine whether 

or not Saskatchewan producers were to blame; they just 

automatically reacted. 

 

What is to blame, Mr. Speaker, is the massive, world-wide 

over-capacity to produce potash – too much capacity, too little 

demand, and that’s very simple. There needs to be a workable 

balance, Mr. Speaker, otherwise over-supply will swamp our 

province’s potash industry. 

 

There is the ever present danger of self-destruction through 

over-production. It has become acute following the recent 

American anti-dumping action. Mr. Speaker, we need to ensure 

that stability is brought back to our potash industry; I feel that 

this Bill will help provide this stability. And to those members 

opposite who say that managing potash production will lose us 

market share in the U.S., I can only remind them that New 

Mexico producers will never be able to even come close to 

filling in our share of that market. 

 

And as for mid-Eastern and the Eastern European producers, I 

remind those hon. members that dumping actions, similar to the 

ones against our Canadian producers today, occurred in 1984 

and in 1985 against the Soviets, the Israelis, the East Germans, 

and also the Spanish. If the American potash producers would 

launch an action against our producers, they would surely do so 

with regard to those countries I have just mentioned, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We hope that with this potash management Bill we can preserve 

and protect the future viability of our potash industry here in 

Saskatchewan. The jobs and the investment at stake are too 

valuable to forsake, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all hon. members to remember this and to 

join me in supporting this Bill. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I know 

very little about farming. I’ve been a city boy all my life. I grew 

up very close to this particular area, so I am by no means an 

expert on agriculture. What I do understand, however, is 

ownership. 

 

I understand the need for people in this province historically, 

because relatives of mine are what I would proudly say are 

Ukrainian farmers in Saskatchewan and in Alberta – proud to 

say that, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know what it is about Ukrainian 

farmers but they seem to be a special breed in many ways – 

certainly my  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2330 

 

mother-in-law is – so I understand why they came to this 

country in the late 1800s and the early 1900s because they 

needed to own some land, and here is where they could get 

some land. 

 

And so the people in this province when they hear us talk about 

ownership of our own resources know exactly what we’re 

talking about. They say, my God . . . thank God somebody 

stands up for ownership. The people of this province understand 

that for us to go head to head with the President of the United 

States or the very large Department of Commerce in the United 

States takes a lot of courage – some people would say guts, but 

I probably shouldn’t use that term in this House, but people 

know what I’m talking about. Our Premier and our Minister of 

Energy went nose to nose with the Department of Commerce in 

United States. We don’t even bother about Ottawa because we 

told Ottawa years ago that we owned these resources and stay 

out of here. We went nose to nose with the President of the 

United States and he blinked. And I’ll tell you what, he’s going 

to be blinking a lot more in the next few days when that strong, 

powerful farm community in the United States starts telling him 

what they think about this unbelievable decision that they made 

regarding the potash tariffs against our companies. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the member from Kindersley was 

speaking earlier about sovereignty and about ownership of 

resources, I was pleased to hear him talk like that. That’s 

something the people of this province understand. The people 

of this province always will understand the simple philosophy 

of owning a piece of land. Whether it’s a front yard, your 

backyard with a fence around it – that’s yours. That’s 

something in this province; it means a great deal to everybody 

in the world. 

 

In many parts of the world, of course, the people are not 

allowed to own land, but here we are and it means a great deal. 

So I was delighted to hear him speak about that because I know 

the people out there across the province who have had an 

opportunity to listen to us speak today can understand that. 

 

What I find really quite unbelievable is the silence – not a word. 

The unbelievable silence – I mean it’s awesome – of the 

members opposite who refuse to stand up and talk about such 

important issues as resource ownership, taking on the United 

States. I mean have they ever missed an opportunity to throw 

mud at the United States? Has the NDP in this province ever 

passed up an opportunity to take a shot at our friends across the 

line? I mean they’re opposed to free trade. I mean you pick an 

issue and they’re opposed to it if United States is in favour of it. 

Whether it’s automobiles or whatever it is, they’re opposed to 

it. But in this issue of something so fundamentally important as 

ownership of our own resources – not a word. It’s an interesting 

thing about silence, Mr. Speaker – it’s deafening, it’s deafening. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Especially from the member of Quill 

Lakes. 

 

Mr. Martin: — And we have the member from Quill Lakes 

who is disappearing out the back door any moment now. 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I think the hon. 

member knows the ruling on that and I don’t need to repeat it. 

 

Mr. Martin: — Would you enlighten me on that, Mr. Speaker, 

please? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. members in the House are not to 

comment on the absence or the presence of members in the 

House. 

 

Mr. Martin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I apologize to you. Like 

some of the other members in the House, I am new and I’m not 

totally aware. I apologize to the member from Quill Lakes. 

Unfortunately he’s not here, so I can’t comment on it. But I 

apologize to him, and I’m sure his colleagues will tell him. Mr. 

Speaker, I apologize to you in all sincerity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not surprised that the members . . . I’m not 

surprised, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite are not 

speaking on this issue because this somewhat understandable 

leadership party. I had hoped that the member from Riversdale, 

the soon to be crowned prince of the professional career, critics 

opposite would be on their feet to speak on this important issue. 

 

The member from Saskatoon South states that the problem 

started in 1982, because we had a government that would not 

take action to find new markets in potash. What a travesty of 

truth this fellow hopes to foist on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let us start by getting out what he is really saying, Mr. Speaker. 

He is saying that when this government came to power, it 

strengthened the central marketing arm of the potash industry, 

Canpotex. And if you recall, Mr. Speaker, the NDP had 

announced that they would cripple that organization by 

withdrawing the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan from it. 

And this, Mr. Speaker, is what the NDP mean by aggressive 

marketing. They mean that the government should have 

fragmented our sales effort and destroyed all other producers 

except the one owned by the government. 

 

Now I want the NDP to go and ask this direct question to the 

mine workers of this province: do you, the mine workers in the 

private mines, think we should drive our company and your 

company out of business because it is not government-owned. 

 

Surely what we should do is try to develop our production and 

marketing strategy that will see all the mines operating at the 

greatest capacity possible. Because what we’re really talking 

about here, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the sovereignty issue 

that I spoke about a few minutes ago about owning our own 

resources, is for people to work, people to work in the mines of 

this province whether they’re owned by the government or 

whether they’re owned by private business. And that’s the other 

issue, this other secondary issue of this Act today, Mr. Speaker 

– that is, to protect peoples’ jobs. I tell you, if we did nothing, 

the jobs would have disappeared by the hundreds. But it’s too 

darned important issue to let that happen. 

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2331 

 

Surely we should not say to the miner in the member from 

Humboldt’s riding, the Cominco mine at Vanscoy, surely we 

should not say to that miner: your job is not too important 

because you aren’t working for a government-owned mine. 

 

Well I challenge the member from Humboldt to stand in this 

House and tell his members that – that is, if the member from 

Riversdale will allow the member for Humboldt to speak in this 

debate. One gets the feeling that the NDP is so embarrassed by 

their $1 billion boondoggle, nationalizing the potash plants in 

the ‘70s, that they won’t get on their feet — $1.3 billion is what 

that $600 million investment cost this province, Mr. Speaker — 

$1.3 billion. Boy, could we have ever used that money today — 

$1.3 billion, instead of having to pay interest on the $600 

million that they squandered on these mines when we already 

owned the resource. We could have used that $1.3 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I look across this magnificent Assembly, this 

beautiful Assembly with its history of protecting people, going 

back to the early days of Scott, on the way through to Tommy 

Douglas, to Ross Thatcher, to Allan Blakeney, to our present 

Premier, I am embarrassed not only for myself but for the 

people of this province. And I’m embarrassed for the members 

opposite as they sink lower and lower and lower into their seats. 

Mr. Speaker, they practically have disappeared from view. Not 

only, Mr. Speaker, can we not see them; not only, Mr. Speaker, 

can we not hear them, but we can’t see them. They’re ashamed 

of themselves. 

 

I also have to point out, Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy of the NDP 

stand in this matter. In one breath they caution us to not go it 

alone. They caution us not to take on the United States. They 

say, you can’t put the Saskatchewan potash industry out in front 

by itself. They say, you’ve got to get together with other 

producers. And then we have the same NDP, Mr. Speaker, 

stand up before the cameras saying, get out of Canpotex. They 

say, don’t co-operate with these privately owned firms; go it 

alone in the market and forget about working with the other 

producers. Well they can’t have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. And 

in this case I challenge them again to stand up and tell us where 

do they really stand on this issue? 

 

There are at least two members opposite in whose ridings 

potash mines exist, and yet we have not heard from either one 

of them, and I’m amazed at it. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, 

I don’t think they’re even in the House at this moment. 

 

Should we co-operate with other producers and thus endorse 

participating in Canpotex, or do you still think we should go it 

alone and get out of Canpotex? Those are the kinds of answers 

we want to hear, Mr. Speaker; stand up and make a clear 

statement on the issue. You don’t have an agricultural policy. 

As a matter of fact, I don’t think you have a policy in many of 

the issues we’ve discussed; refuse to talk about potash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon South, the NDP’s 

professional career critic for energy, said a few more interesting 

things I’d like to comment on. For example, he said that this 

government did not go after the  

potash markets in China. Again, he’s either engaging in petty 

sniping by misleading his own electorate, or else he is 

genuinely uninformed of what has been happening in this 

province. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Speaker, if he would just pay attention, if he would just 

even read the newspaper or listen to the radio, he would have 

learned that yesterday this government made a 300,000 tonne 

deal with China which represents $30 million to this province. 

If he would just pay attention. 

 

Let me inform the hon. member who apparently has taught 

some history in the past, as a teacher, a little bit more about 

some history of the past years. The first news story out was that 

the Premier, our Premier had worked an agreement with private 

potash producers to offer China a free potash plant. This is 

some years ago, Mr. Speaker. The plant would be a pilot project 

to give the Chinese a demonstration of how they could enhance 

their own agricultural production by utilizing Saskatchewan 

potash. 

 

Now I’m going back a few years. There’s a Premier, newly 

elected, a farm boy, so he understands what potash is all about; 

a professor of economics, so he understands world economy. 

He gets on a plane, goes over to China, talks to the Chinese, and 

he’s showing these billions of people how they can improve 

their own agricultural product. A Saskatchewan boy from a 

small town in Saskatchewan. A farmer from Saskatchewan goes 

overseas and talks to these billions of people, and tells them, a 

people who have been civilized far longer than we have in this 

country . . . but he takes his expertise, his farm boy expertise, 

his economic expertise from the University of Saskatchewan, 

and jumps in a plane and away he goes over there and he tells 

them how to improve their plants. 

 

The second story I have is this article here. The headline reads: 

“Firm going all out to get China trade.” The firm was Canpotex, 

marketing Saskatchewan potash. The final headline was, and 

it’s here as well, “Potash sale to China announced.” The great 

effort was made, including an extensive advertising campaign 

right in China, to get growers in that country acquainted with 

the use of potash, and the results were sales to China. 

 

The member from Saskatoon South says the problem started in 

1982. Well, Mr. Speaker, 1982 sales of potash to China 

amounted to 421 thousand tonnes. After only two years, two 

years in office, in 1984 that amount had been driven up to 1 

million tonnes. It is true that sales have fallen off and that there 

is a situation of over-supply. If that were not true, Mr. Speaker, 

this legislation would not be necessary, but clearly the 

development of the market in China began in earnest under this 

government. 

 

Some other headlines, Mr. Speaker. This one says: “Canpotex 

arranges counter-trade with a major potash sale to China.” And 

speaking of counter-trade, maybe the members across the floor 

can explain why they never tried to use the mechanism to its 

full extent. So while they were running around this province 

saying there was no money for new technology in our hospitals, 

this government took the initiative, and yes, Mr. Speaker, we  

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2332 

 

traded potash for CT scanners. One of the most important 

technical instruments used in medicine today, the CT scanner. I 

can’t remember whether it was six or whether it was eight . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Six. 

 

Mr. Martin: — Six, I believe was the number – six CT 

scanners. We couldn’t afford to buy them, but we traded potash 

for them. Now I’m not sure whether you have to be a farm boy; 

maybe even a city slicker like myself might be able to put 

together a deal like that. I don’t have much skill in horse 

trading, or this and that and the other thing, but I don’t know 

who figured out that deal, but whoever figured out to trade our 

resources, potash plants . . . potash for CT scanners, did this 

province, Mr. Speaker, a tremendous service. And the hundreds 

and hundreds of people who have had the benefit of those CT 

scanners in our hospitals can think about that some day. It came 

because of Saskatchewan potash. What initiative! 

 

Mr. Speaker, there can be no question of the fact that under this 

government, and through co-operation with the producers of 

potash, the greatest marketing efforts in the history of the 

industry have been undertaken. And to whine that the markets 

are not there, and to pretend that some things happened that did 

not happen, these things, these kinds of arguments do nothing to 

address the challenges we face today. 

 

We have probably . . . well it may be certainly the most 

important issue that’s arisen in this House since my election, 

Mr. Premier, although I recall, as a young lad, coming over here 

many times from public school and sitting in the House and 

listening to speeches, back a great many years ago. But 

certainly this is the most major issue that I’ve been involved in, 

in the House, and perhaps may ever be – the issue of 

sovereignty, of owning your own resources, of going nose to 

nose with maybe the most powerful country in the world and 

telling them that they will not tell us how to market our potash; 

that they will not go to one company and say, we’ll give you a 9 

per cent tariff; another company, we’ll give you 35; another 

company, we’ll give you 85. 

 

How dare they tell the people of this province how we are going 

to market our own potash? That’s the important issue, Mr. 

Speaker. We will not allow the United States to tell us, just as 

we did not allow Ottawa and Mr. Trudeau how to tell us how to 

run our oil. We will not allow them to tell us how we’re going 

to market our own potash. It’s too important an issue and, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know it. The people of 

Saskatchewan know that we are right, and that is why the 

members opposite will not stand on their feet and speak, and 

that is why I am amazed that they will not stand up and say: you 

guys are right, and we know you’re right, and the people of 

Saskatchewan know you’re right, and we support you on this. 

 

If they fail to support this Bill, it’ll be an embarrassment that’ll 

extend for many years. I don’t know how they could ever look 

their children in the face and say, I refused to protect our own 

resources, Mr. Speaker. However, that remains to be seen. 

They’re not talking about it. Perhaps they will stand up and 

support us. 

Mr. Speaker, after passing along this information about China, 

the NDP’s critic, lead-off speaker, went into a long list of what 

didn’t happen and why that didn’t happen. So let’s just take a 

moment to examine what happened historically. Let me quote 

an NDP cabinet minister, from Hansard, speaking March 17, 

1978. He was justifying borrowing a great deal of money from 

American bankers to obtain title to Saskatchewan uranium 

mines. 

 

They were not borrowing money to build mines; they were not 

borrowing money to create jobs; they were not borrowing 

money to create anything new at all. But that’s nothing new. I 

mean, all they ever understand is nationalization. They don’t 

understand about creating jobs. They were borrowing money to 

get a piece of paper that said the government now owned the 

mines, instead of private interests. 

 

And here’s what that NDP minister said, Mr. Speaker, and I 

quote: 

 

Oil revenues of course will not last for ever. Similarly, 

uranium revenues from existing mines will grow rapidly 

and then ultimately decline (although the government 

wanted to buy those existing mines as well) but investing 

in potash we will guarantee an unprecedented measure of 

security for generations to follow. 

 

That is what he said, Mr. Speaker. Government ownership of 

the mines would, “. . . guarantee . . . an unprecedented measure 

of security for generations to follow.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, a generation has not yet passed, and those 

words should weigh heavily upon the NDP today. Perhaps 

that’s why they’re not speaking. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who was it said that? 

 

Mr. Martin: — I’m not sure – perhaps the minister . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The member from Riversdale. 

 

Mr. Martin: — The member from Riversdale. All right, the 

soon-to-be-crowned leader. Well, Mr. Speaker, a generation has 

not passed, but those words, as I say, should weigh heavily on 

the narrowing shoulders of the NDP. Tell us, where is this 

unprecedented security that you promised when you put this 

province in hawk up to its ears to a tune of $1.3 billion? And 

the good managers that they were, they borrowed more money 

to expend the mines, because to get this unprecedented security 

they decided they should pull as much potash out of the ground 

at once and throw it onto the market as fast as possible, that 

they decided to go on a major expansion of productive capacity. 

 

I’m not sure where they got the money for that, but I suspect 

they probably borrowed it again from some place in New York. 

Now they stand up and deny that. Today, Mr. Speaker, they 

deny that they ever said that, but let me quote a government 

advertisement from the Leader-Post of March 11, 1979 that 

says: 

  



 

September 4, 1987 

2333 

 

PCS mining is expanding production facilities to meet the 

expected rise in world demand for potash during the ‘80s. 

 

Great forecasters. Tell us, Mr. Member from Riversdale, or 

even the member from Saskatoon South, where is this huge rise 

in demand for potash that you so confidently predicted? It did 

not happen, Mr. Speaker. In fact, exactly the opposite has 

happened, and the people of this province are saddled with 

massive financial obligations, and all the potash that this 

foolhardy course chosen by the members opposite, all this 

excess potash found its way to the world market and created a 

price drop that is crippling the industry and affecting many of 

the programs that we could be putting money in today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One point three billion dollars that they saddled this province 

with, Mr. Speaker. We could use that money for educational 

opportunities. We could use it to expand our health facilities. 

We could use it to buy the type of equipment that we need for 

our hospitals. We need it for all those things; for the social 

services. We need it to help the young mothers with children – 

one of the greatest needs in our society today – young mothers 

with children, single mothers with children. We could use it to 

help them, to help them get an education, to create more 

opportunities for them, to expand our educational facilities and 

opportunities around the province. One point three billion 

dollars – boy, how we could use that money today. 

 

And then we get the real clincher, a set of insane duties against 

our potash by the Americans, which is why we’re here today. 

When we ask for some unity from the opposition, when we ask 

for a little co-operation, we get insults and misinformation. 

Instead of helping out, they condemn, they insult, they attack, 

and provide realms of misinformation. 

 

I will even say to the NDP, let’s, for the sake of argument, 

accept that the member from Saskatoon South and his 

colleagues actually had accurate information. Let us assume 

that all of the terrible things that he says happened did happen. 

The question is: what do we do now? What action should we 

take today? The NDP certainly have no answer. They shout 

from their tables, they shout from their desks, but they won’t 

get up on their feet and talk about it. Sure the member from 

Riversdale tries to have it both ways by saying on the one hand 

that he condemns the legislation and on the other hand that he 

has not made up his mind whether or not he will instruct his 

party to vote on it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well he 

certainly won’t let them talk on it. He won’t let them speak on 

it. He has a muzzle on them so they can’t talk about an issue as 

important as sovereignty and owning our own resources. 

 

The fact is that other than make up stories about what was or 

what might have been, the NDP has come forward with no 

solution to the crisis that is being faced now today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have no solution except to say: delay, deny, 

debate. They say, sue in the courts; hire a lawyer, they say. 

They say, let the federal government assume responsibility for 

our resources. Can you believe that? They say, let the federal 

government assume  

responsibilities for our resources. 

 

I suppose I’m not an expert in history, but I assume it was 

probably The BNA Act that allowed us to have control of our 

own resources, as it did education and some of the other factors. 

But whatever it was, we have control of our resources. They 

say, let the feds look after that responsibility. They say, leave it 

to the Prime Minister and Ronald Reagan. They say anything 

except action in this legislature to protect our own resources. 

 

I say to them, you had better give your heads a shake; pull it out 

of the mud; tell the member from Riversdale to take the 

muzzles off; give us the opportunity to stand up and talk about 

it; give us the opportunity. You say to the member from 

Riversdale, take off the muzzle; give us an opportunity to talk 

about it; give us the opportunity to stand up and say to those 

people of the province, we care about resources; we care about 

protection. 

 

Let’s go back to Tommy Douglas. He talked about those kinds 

of issues, as did Ross Thatcher, and now our Premier. I tell you, 

members of the opposition, that as a new member in this House 

I am embarrassed by your silence. I’m embarrassed that you 

allow some of those people along the front rows to control you 

in the back benches, to allow you, to force you to sit there and 

not talk about issues. 

 

I know that the member from Moose Jaw North is a sensitive 

man who cares about issues like this. Why doesn’t he get up 

and talk about it? Why doesn’t he get up and say something 

about how an issue like sovereignty, about our own resources, 

is important to us? Let’s hear him talk about jobs, about saving 

jobs of miners all across this province. 

 

Their silence is deafening. And I must say that I am particularly 

embarrassed by the two members who represent areas where 

potash plants exist. I cannot believe that they will not get up on 

their feet and talk about protecting the jobs of those people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have . . . Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, you can tell, you 

can tell by my enthusiasm that I have a great deal more to talk 

on this subject. There are many more things I’d like to say 

about my embarrassment for the members opposite, about how 

they’re failing to talk to the people of Saskatchewan – all kinds 

of things I’d like to talk about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But at this point I beg leave to adjourn the debate. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


