













































August 11, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 11, 1987 

 

1697 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, 

and to other members of the Assembly, a young student from 

Paris, France, whose name is Karine Boneau. Karine is in the 

young people’s exchange program called Nacel, which are 

students from all over the world, actually, Mr. Speaker, from 

France, Canada, the United States, Ireland, Germany, Mexico, 

and Spain, and it’s a program that’s organized and run by 

teachers. There’s some 15,000 students in this program, and in 

Saskatchewan we have approximately 40-plus students this 

summer. 

 

I would like to welcome Karine to the legislature and say a few 

words to her. 

 

Mademoiselle, nous sommes très heureux de faire votre 

connaissance, et nous espérons que votre visite ici en 

Saskatchewan sera très intérressante et mémorable. C’est aussi 

notre espoir que vous aurez une très bonne expérience dans ce 

programme de Nacel, et quand vous rentrez en France, que vous 

garderez de très bons souvenirs de Régina. Alora, bienvenue a 

Régina, bienvenue en Saskatchewan, et bonne chance. Merci. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you, and to the members of this Assembly, a 

fellow from Cudworth who came along with me, Paul Sisetski; 

he’s seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

Paul was born with a sickness called cerebral palsy. Up till 10 

years ago Paul though he had a severe handicap of his sickness 

and felt uncomfortable. But 10 years ago the Lions of Cudworth 

sent him to Norway to a handicapped youth camp, where 

handicapped people from all over the world met together. When 

he came back from this camp, he found he got so motivated by 

some of the other colleagues he met there but had a worse 

handicap than he did. 

 

I take one, for example, a young fellow from Israel, who was 

born . . . had polio and was told he never was supposed to walk, 

but through self-motivation and self-therapy he became a pilot 

when he was at this youth camp. He motivated Paul so well that 

when he came back he went to Saskatoon he went to Kelsey, 

and soon he became a librarian . . . He worked as a librarian in 

Cudworth for a while, and now he’s a fourth-year student of 

fine arts in Saskatoon, and he’s very, very well qualified of 

doing arts. Yesterday, he sat in here and he was drawing some 

pictures, and I hope in the future you can see some. 

 

He’s got a real fantasy of life. That trip changed his outlook of 

life. I think it’s just a fine example of what people can make out 

of themselves. Would you please help me welcome Paul 

Sisetski. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you, and through you to others members of the 

Assembly, a noted Saskatchewan novelist, poet, writer, and 

playwright, who lives in the city of Regina, and who’s just 

returned from a year’s teaching experience in the country, the 

People’s Republic of China. May I introduce to you, Mr. Ken 

Mitchell. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Bankruptcy of Principal Group 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker; my question is to the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, it was certainly with a sickening sense of 

déjà vu that Saskatchewan people heard the news, late 

yesterday, of the bankruptcy of the Principal Group of 

companies, one of which . . . subsidiary is the Principal Savings 

& Trust Company, operating here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Only two years ago Saskatchewan people witnessed the 

collapse of Pioneer Trust, the biggest business failure in our 

history. And my question to you is this: how many 

Saskatchewan people have uninsured deposits in Principal 

Savings & Trust and how much money is at risk as a result of 

this latest trust company collapse? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the government is attempting 

to get the information through the people appointed by the 

Alberta government to maintain the assets and preserve the 

assets of the trust company as to how many people in 

Saskatchewan are affected. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Subsidiary. The bankruptcy of the Principal 

Group of companies is also . . . Subsidiary to the Minister of 

Finance, I suppose, since the Premier is not answering the 

questions. The bankruptcy of the Principal Group of companies 

is also a blow to the thousands of Saskatchewan people who 

had invested their savings in the two Principal Group 

subsidiaries which failed in late June. Their last hope for getting 

their money back was to launch a civil action against the 

Principal Group of companies. 

 

Now that the parent firm has declared bankruptcy, my question 

is: what is your government prepared to do to assist these 

people, many of whom had invested their life savings in these 

failed companies? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the proposed court 

action by those investors and depositors is quite frankly up in 

the air. The lawyers have made comments that they are not sure 

of the legal position because of the bankruptcy of the Principal 

Group, so I can’t comment on what position they are taking. 

They will have to make their assessment as to what course of 

action that they will  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1698 

 

be taking. 

 

Ms. Smart: — This is a new question, again to the Minister of 

Finance. One of the leaders of the investors in the failed 

companies is quoted in the Sask Report magazine of August 

1987 as saying: 

 

We have lost total confidence in the western provinces to 

regulate trust companies. We will never put our money in 

a western Canadian trust company again. 

 

That is certainly a great boost for western diversification and 

western investment, isn’t’ it? Your government’s regulatory 

negligence has contributed to the losses of these investors. 

Aren’t you aware that they believe they were secure because 

these companies were licensed by your government to do 

business in Saskatchewan? You failed to protect Saskatchewan 

consumers. Why won’t you now accept responsibility for these 

failures, support the investors, and stop running this province 

only through the law of the jungle? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Only an NDP would take some pleasure in 

the fact that western financial institutions have financial 

difficulty. Mr. Speaker, I remind the hon. member that trust 

companies have gone bankrupt in the province of Ontario, Mr. 

Speaker, that this is not a phenomenon limited to western 

Canada, no matter how you wish to colour it. 

 

I suggest to the hon. member that the Government of 

Saskatchewan is looking at what options that will be of realistic 

assistance to the depositors and investors. Today the Securities 

Commission did issue a crease trading order for those Principal 

Group that are in business in Saskatchewan. 

 

We are advised by the individuals appointed by the province of 

Alberta to preserve the assets, that Clarkson Gordon now has 

control of the assets of the Principal Savings & Trust in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve been further advised today, by the Canada Deposit 

Insurance Corporation, that they will be making an application, 

probably early next week, under their provisions of deposit 

insurance, and they have indicated to us that for the depositors 

up to the insured level, that there may be payments within the 

next two or three weeks. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — A question to the Minister of Finance, or 

whoever is answering for the Minister of Consumer and 

Corporate Affairs. On July 17 in the legislature, the Minister of 

Consumer and Corporate Affairs said, and I quote: 

 

At this time my department is also reviewing the status of 

Principal Trust. 

 

Outside the Assembly she told reporters that the Superintendent 

of Insurance would review the licence of Principal Trust to see 

if it was complying with regulations. My question is: what did 

that review uncover, and why  

did it fail to anticipate the total collapse of Principal Trust? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think the hon. member should be 

circumspect in which company he is talking about, because the 

Principal Savings & Trust, to the best of our information would 

be subject . . . My understanding is that CDIC (Canada Deposit 

Insurance Corporation) will be making an application for a 

winding-up order as opposed to any receivership or bankruptcy 

order. 

 

So I suggest to the hon. member, the advice that we had was 

that the Principal Savings & Trust was liquid, and that the 

bankruptcy proceedings apply to the Principal Group, and we 

do have to be specific when we’re dealing with the various 

subsidiaries of the Principal Group of companies. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In reviewing 

the licence of Principal Trust to do business in Saskatchewan 

under The Trust and Loan Corporations Act, the government 

has wide powers to demand full financial information and, in 

light of that information, has power to do certain things. 

 

My question is: what financial information did the government 

demand from the trust company when it renewed its licence this 

year, and when it undertook the special review of its licence that 

the minister was referring to, and why didn’t that information 

set off alarm bells with the authorities responsible? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, Mr. Speaker, and I’m attempting to 

be precise for the hon. member, that the Principal Savings & 

Trust Company . . . The government was advised by officials in 

the federal Superintendent of Insurance office that that company 

was liquid, and that I gather the best information that we had 

was that savings and trust company of itself was a liquid and 

viable company. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. It seems to be a 

very complex and a very confusing situation, Mr. Minister, and 

I noted with interest your quote in today’s press to the effect 

that the government may now have to consider a full public 

inquiry into the whole story, and I think its’ about time that 

happened. And my question is . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — My question is, Mr. Minister, can you 

confirm that your government will finally agree to a public 

inquiry which will investigate how the Principal Group’s 

various subsidiaries conducted business in this province; and 

secondly, how Saskatchewan’s regulatory agencies failed to 

protect the Saskatchewan consumers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think it is premature to indicate, as I 

answered earlier, with regard to any losses with depositors in 

Principal Savings & Trust . . . As I indicated  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1699 

 

earlier, Mr. Speaker, the CDIC, the Canada Deposit Insurance 

Corporation, has indicated to us today that they expect to 

receive an order within the . . . or will be making an application 

for an order within the next few days, and that they should be 

perhaps making payments to the insured amount within the next 

two or three weeks. 

 

So it’s obviously too early to determine losses or the extent of 

the number of losses and the amount of losses, if any. To 

suggest to the hon. member, when we have advice from Canada 

Deposit Insurance company that the Principal Savings & Trust 

is a liquid company, I think we’re entitled to . . . I’m sorry, the 

Superintendent of Insurance, we’re entitled to rely on that. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, we should put the question of an inquiry 

in its proper context. An inquiry could not obviously go beyond 

the power . . . the borders of the province of Saskatchewan, and 

the hon. member nods his head in recognition of that fact. That 

probably will do little to assist any depositors or investors. 

 

The government is looking at all options at this time to take the 

most realistic and effective action, Mr. Speaker, to do what we 

can to assist Saskatchewan investors and depositors, but I very 

carefully said “realistic and effective action.” 

 

Excess Space in Government Offices 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the minister responsible for the property management 

corporation. Yesterday you confirmed that you are paying a rent 

of $12,000 a month for a full floor of office space in Regina 

where only three people are working. That’s $144,000 a year, or 

$48,000 per employee. 

 

Mr. Minister, how much excess space does your government 

currently have under lease, and how much is this excess space 

costing taxpayers each month? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I answered yesterday, and 

I’ll repeat it again, that certainly we had the fifth floor of the 

Credit Union Central leased - had been leased since 1976 for 

housing of the Department of Co-ops. We have down-sized 

government, and therefore we will have excess space. There are 

three people there because they run the computers, and as soon 

as the computers can be set up to move to another area, it’ll be 

completely vacated at that point in time. 

 

We’re in discussions with Credit Union Central. They may take 

over the space, and we will be out of the lease. And if we’re 

not, we will probably move another area of government into 

that space. 

 

Now as to know how much space this government has at this 

point in time, and how much is vacant, there’ll be estimates of 

my department coming up, and I’d be glad to answer those 

questions. I don’t think it is realistic of the members opposite 

that where we have leases all around this province, and in the 

city of Regina, that one could be required to know exactly at 

any date how much vacant space there is. It’s interesting, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I think the minister has 

answered the question. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the 

same minister. I asked you a straightforward question, and I 

think the people of Saskatchewan deserve a straightforward 

answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Are taxpayers in Saskatchewan paying 

$100,000 a month for excess space; are they paying half a 

million dollars a month; or are they paying $1 million a month, 

Mr. Minister? What is it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it seems evident from the 

questions of the members opposite that they are not in favour of 

down-sizing government; that we should direct government by 

the amount of space we have. Obviously his rationale seems to 

be, his rationale - if you have empty space, hire more people to 

fill the space because that’s what you direct government. I don’t 

happen to agree with that, nor does this side of the House. And 

we will down-size and become more efficient, and if we do that, 

there will be excess space. That’s only logical. 

 

Now as to the amount that exists today, I can tell you we have 

instituted a property management corporation - something that 

you never did. And I do not know today how much excess 

space there is in the province of Saskatchewan. But as I told 

you previously, when it comes to my estimates, I would be 

more than glad to discuss each and every property with you in 

that forum. But to ask that question today of how much excess 

space does this government have in this province, I think is 

ridiculous. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister refuses to answer a 

straightforward question. 

 

I have a new question for the minister. When the creation of the 

property management corporation was announced in the March 

1986 budget, the Minister of Finance said, and I quote: 

 

For the first time in the history of Saskatchewan, 

government managers will be held accountable for the 

efficient use of space. 

 

That’s right in the budget speech, page 17 to be exact. Minister, 

are you still trying to tell Saskatchewan taxpayers that you have 

no idea how much they are shelling out each month for empty 

or underutilized government office space? And if you don’t 

know the answer, how are you going to hold these managers 

accountable? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well it shows, Mr. Chairman, the 

complete misunderstanding of the member opposite. Certainly 

we have been in a down-sizing mode in government. There 

have been early retirements.  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1700 

 

Everybody in Saskatchewan knows this - a number of people. 

There has been a deletion of people by attrition. And in each 

case, that creates excess space. It’s an ongoing situation. 

 

And I think, as I listen to the members opposite, once again I 

must repeat that I believe their idea of running a government is 

to lease this much space and fill it up. I don’t agree with that. I 

agree that you should provide the service the most efficient 

way, and in doing that, that may mean that you have excess 

space. You either stay with the leases you have, or you 

negotiate out of those leases. And that’s what we’re exactly 

doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cuts in Social Assistance 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Minister of Social Services, Mr. Speaker, and 

it deals with the unfair double standard practised by this 

government in dealing with people in need, the poor of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It seems, Mr. Speaker, that the government, not only does it not 

know how much it’s wasting on unused rental of government 

office space, it doesn’t even seem to care. But when it comes to 

dealing with the poor of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it seems 

that the words we hear repeatedly are restraint, restraint, 

restraint. 

 

And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: in light of the 

waste and extravagance that’s going on elsewhere in your 

government, how do you justify yet further cuts to the poor 

people of Saskatchewan, those who are living on assistance? 

How do you justify that in the name of restraint? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure exactly what 

the question was. There was some reference to office space. I 

know that my department would like to consolidate into more 

convenient locations, and possibly that will be a factor of the 

result of space that’s now available. 

 

But with respect to the poor, we have a very adequate welfare 

system in Saskatchewan. Next to Alberta, it pays the highest 

rates. And I have a problem. I live on the eastern side of 

Saskatchewan, and I’m getting some instances of people 

moving from Manitoba into Saskatchewan and are going on 

welfare because we pay higher rates. 

 

So it’s quite a problem. We try to help people as much as we 

can, but we wouldn’t want to be taken advantage of by people 

from other provinces. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — A further question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. 

And I would ask that he listen to the question carefully . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order, 

please. There seem to be two question periods going on at the 

same time. Let’s allow the member from  

Moose Jaw North to ask the question. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the minister to listen 

carefully to the question so he can provide this House an 

intelligible answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you and I both know that effective 

August 1 you were planning a series of cuts to those who are 

living on assistance, a series of cuts which can only be 

described as vicious. One of those decision, Mr. Minister, is to 

cut, to eliminate completely - to use your word, “terminate” - 

transportation allowances for people on social assistance, 

allowances equivalent to bus passes so that people can go to job 

interviews and to training programs. 

 

If you want people to work their way off of welfare, Mr. 

Minister, why are you throwing up these additional 

road-blocks? And if your justification is restraint, why don’t 

you do something about the $12,000 a month of wasted rental 

office space before you cut the $25 a month for transportation 

allowance, so people can go to work and earn a good training? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, today is August 10. And 

the member opposite is referring to August 1. So either he’s 

talking about hypothetical things or history that didn’t happen. 

We’re not certain exactly. 

 

But I have indicated earlier that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order! Order. 

The minister from Melville. 

 

Order, please. The member from Regina Rosemont is getting a 

little bit too active in his seat, and I would ask him to please 

restrain himself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a discrepancy in 

the transportation allowance as it’s now paid. The welfare 

system is very complicated. We’re trying to simplify it and 

consolidate the payments into one payment based on need. But 

people in rural Saskatchewan are not paid a transportation 

allowance, nor have they been paid a transportation allowance, 

under the former government or under this government. It 

seems that people in cities are paid a transportation allowance. 

It seems to me that the people in rural Saskatchewan have a 

longer way to transport themselves than the people in urban 

Saskatchewan. And so while it may be possible to walk to look 

for a job in Regina, it is not in rural Saskatchewan. We’re going 

to try to balance off the discrepancies in the system and 

equalize the system to make it simpler. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, another question to the same 

minister. For your information it . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. Is 

the member asking a new question or a supplementary? New 

question. 

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1701 

 

Mr. Hagel: — For your information, Mr. Minister, today is 

August 11, and I would ask you to move into the present with 

those of us on this side of the House, would you please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — You know that another of your Draconian cuts 

that you’re intending to put in place, Mr. Minister, deals with 

the fall education allowance. This is an allowance to help poor 

families purchase books and other school supplies for their 

children. 

 

And I ask, Mr. Minister, why would you choose to cut back in 

the name of restraint, on the children of this province? Why 

would you cut back the $25 a month education allowance that 

would apply to a kindergarten child who lives in the family that 

is poor and living on social assistance - all of this in the name of 

restraint. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, why does your government not cut 

back on the literally hundreds of thousands of dollars your 

government is wasting every month in the interests of restraint, 

instead of making those cut-backs on the children of this 

province? Will you justify for me, Mr. Minister, and for the 

people of Saskatchewan, how that is just and fair? Will you tell 

me that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the 

member opposite asked that question, and I hope that the 

members opposite will listen closely to the answer, because I 

have with me a draft press release that we are going to issue in a 

day or two, but now that he has asked the question, I’m answer 

it in the House. And I’ll try not to read it, but I’ll try to answer 

the question. 

 

First of all, with respect to educational allowances, we will be 

standardizing the educational allowance for students in 

Saskatchewan whose parents happen to be on welfare, or the 

students that are supported by the state, and there are 

approximately 18,000 children in this province that are SAP 

(Saskatchewan assistance plan) recipients through their 

families. 

 

There will be a standardized rate paid in September with their 

cheque that comes out in September, as the fall cost of starting 

school, a few extra books - not many have to be bought in this 

province, but there are a few notebooks, gym equipment, things 

of that nature - and the children that are welfare recipients will 

be receiving a standard allowance, the same for everyone in 

Saskatchewan. No longer will there be any decision made by 

workers as to what the costs are in Regina, or what they are in 

Melville, or what they are in small town Saskatchewan. 

 

A standard rate, which we believe is fair compared to what 

other people are spending in September to buy books and 

things, is $100 for high school students, $60 for elementary 

school students, and $25 for kindergarten children. And I can 

speak from experience - my son is starting kindergarten this 

fall, and I believe that $25 will be enough to buy his supplies. 

And I expect that these rates, standard across the province, 

should be fair, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the same 

minister. Mr. Minister, by your own words there are literally 

thousands of children in this family living in poverty in families 

dependent upon social assistance. I ask you again to justify for 

this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan, fair-minded 

people of Saskatchewan, how you justify cut-backs to those 

who . . . the poorest of the province, when you won’t cut back 

on the waste of government space, the hundreds of thousands of 

dollars of empty government space in this province. Will you 

justify that for the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, there is more information 

with regard to changes in the welfare system. And yes, it is true 

there are 18,000 children in this province who receive 

assistance from the taxpayers and from us as parents, from all 

of us. And we think it’s fair to standardize their rates so that 

they have a standard amount this fall. It makes it very simple 

for the administration. 

 

In addition, contrary to the leaks that you may have heard about 

that may or may not be accurate, in this case we are making a 

further change in that we are increasing the training allowance. 

This is for adults on social services who are in training. And 

this year we have budgeted for 2,500 welfare clients to receive 

training through the Saskatchewan skill development program. 

And they will have an increase of $20 per month . . . or from 

$20 per month to $30 a month as a special training allowance to 

help them travel to their training and yet receive this training. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 30 - An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Land Titles Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 31 - An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 

to amend The Local Government Election Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Failure of Provincial Government to Influence Federal 

Government Regarding Agriculture Concerns 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1702 

 

presentation of this resolution I’d like to dispel a myth, a myth 

put forth by the provincial government and their federal 

counterparts. That myth is that the governments are staunch 

defenders of agriculture and rural Saskatchewan. This myth has 

been perpetuated through a couple of avenues, unfortunately 

consisting primarily of rhetoric. 

 

First, there was a great deal of fanfare about a national 

agriculture policy, an endeavour which the Premier of 

Saskatchewan personally advocated. This proposal was to put 

agriculture at the top of the national agenda and provide an 

example of federal-provincial consultation. So far what have we 

seen, Mr. Speaker? We’ve seen idle talk and no action. 

 

More recently, whenever a problem in agriculture arises, the 

Progressive Conservatives’ standard reply is that the Prime 

Minister, or the Premier, intends to raise the subject at some 

private meeting or other with some officials. It has become a 

convenient defence mechanism. 

 

This has been the case with the farm subsidy issue. Obviously 

the elimination of export subsidies such as these, which both the 

U.S. and the European economic community have been using 

with reckless abandon and undercutting world prices, can’t end 

soon enough. This would restore some kind of trading balance. 

But such an agreement is a long way down the road, years down 

the road, and in the interim Saskatchewan farm families need 

immediate action. What is required are pragmatic, common 

sense policies which can be adopted domestically to alleviate 

the crisis. 

 

Governor Sinner of North Dakota says our premier lacks reality 

when dealing with the subsidy issues - unrealistic initiatives by 

a Premier controlled by the Prime Minister of this country and 

Ronald Reagan. 

 

In recent months, government at federal and provincial levels 

have had the opportunity to initiate such measures in their 

budgets, are extending the crop years or variable freight rates. 

Unfortunately, that kind of action, Mr. Speaker, flies in the face 

of several basic Tory policies and objectives, one being 

financial restraint, and the second being a market-oriented 

agricultural industry. 

 

Consequently, despite statements to the contrary, we have seen 

limited, very limited action. And the result of this lack of 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan has been rural 

Saskatchewan has been made to suffer in a number of areas. 

Variable freight rates are now a reality because of insufficient 

opposition, no opposition, by the government of Saskatchewan 

or the federal government. Variable rates will accelerate the 

reduction in the country elevator system - even more local 

elevators will be marginalized and closed. 

 

Moreover, the closing of elevators points puts a large social and 

economic cost in the rural communities in this province. 

 

In Saskatchewan, rural community viability depends a large 

part on a grain collection system as we know it. The closing of 

these elevators starts a process which is depressingly 

predictable: delivery of grain to other  

centres, transfer of banking, shopping, repair businesses; 

business begins to suffer and dwindle, and the community 

slowly withers and dies. 

 

And what’s the theory - what’s the theory proposed by the 

Premier, our Minister of Agriculture? He sticks a straw in his 

teeth, and puts a cowboy hat on, and waves his arms in the air, 

and says, follow me; this is the way of the future. How crass! 

 

However, a good number of small rural communities have been 

sacrificed in the interests of business and profit. Communities 

in the vicinities of the Saskatchewan delivery points designated 

for variable rates will now be threatened. 

 

The potential negative impact of variable rates as seen in 

Montana and North Dakota, a rapid destruction of communities, 

and now Montana was close to a core railway system - that 

means no - no branch lines. I will not stand idly by and see the 

federal and provincial governments reduce the population of 

this province to half of what we have today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Western Canadian agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is, 

and should remain, based on the structure of family farms 

supporting rural community services and centres. Our parents, 

our grandparents, worked very hard and long to establish some 

order in this country. They transformed it from a virtual 

wilderness into a vibrant, productive society, and the American 

experience cannot be duplicated in our province. 

 

In this process there are relatively few winners except CPR, 

CNR, Cargill Grain, and other private grain companies . . . 

those organizations who have never consistently advocated that 

it is imperative that the costs, the cost of grain shipment from 

the farm to the ship be minimized, and that producers should 

have a voice in the structure of our grain collection system. 

 

This is the government of large corporations, Mr. Speaker, and 

multinationals, the powerful bodies in agribusiness who are 

controlling the Prime Minister and our Premier and Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

The Saskatchewan government has failed to persuade the 

federal government to have the Farm Credit Corporation 

re-establish its moratorium on farm foreclosures, or roll back 

the interest rate of one and one-half per cent. 

 

Under the current conditions, any government committed to 

farm families would not have introduced such measures. The 

financial stress that agriculture producers are undergoing is only 

too evident. Grain prices have fallen 20 per cent in two years 

. . . and fallen in the past five years. Stats Canada estimates the 

value of farm capital in 1986 at $27 billion - down 20 per cent. 

The value of Saskatchewan farm land and buildings declined 23 

per cent. Canada has lost over 2,500 farmers since 1981. And 

what does our Premier and Minister of Agriculture do: takes a 

straw in his teeth and a cowboy hat on and says, follow me, this 

is the way of the future. 

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1703 

 

How sad. These figures illustrate how rapidly farm assets have 

fallen since 1982. And farm assets are a major factor in 

determining the equity and the farmer’s ability to obtain or 

repay loans. And these figures show why many producers who 

were once, a short time ago, sound financially, they are now 

overextended in their lines of credit. 

 

Currently, the Farm Credit Corporation owns 210,000 acres of 

farm land. Arrears increased during the year from 245 to $344 

million, while the number of accounts in arrears increased to 

14,723. And with a lift to the moratorium we can expect 12 to 

1,300 more producers will be in a foreclosure position. 

 

Despite these sobering statistics, the Saskatchewan government 

did not see fit even to protest the moratorium lifting or to 

protest the 1.5 per cent increase in farm credit rates. While 

farmers are enduring hardships to make payments with lower 

rates, how can they justify a government defending farmers 

against higher rates? How can they justify that? 

 

There was even more lack of support shown with the failure of 

this government to convey the message to the federal 

government to extend the 1986-87 crop year. The result is the 

farmers have a lot of grain carry-over - 18.2 million tonnes this 

year compared to 13.4 last year. And although this additional 

grain still goes into the system, Mr. Speaker, it goes in at a 20 

per cent reduction in price. Surely during a period of depressed 

prices, both federal and provincial governments should be 

insuring that farmers get maximum returns. Failure to act will 

simply mean farmers will have less income at a time when they 

are already economically depressed. 

 

This tag team, provincially and federally, have failed miserably. 

The so-called defenders of the Saskatchewan family farm are 

now taking legal action again the 191 farmers who haven’t 

made payments under their production loan program. How does 

the minister react? A straw in the teeth and a cowboy hat, 

follow me, this is the way of the future. I think we can clearly 

see what the future lies in store. 

 

Obviously the provincial government wants to join other 

financial institutions who have collectively owned more than a 

million acres of Canadian farm land. This government has been 

more than willing to provide millions of dollars in loan 

guarantees to out-of-province corporations, yet show little effort 

- gives little effort - to family farmers in financial distress. 

Agricultural producers and rural people should challenge a 

common assumption that they suffer fewer of the provincial 

government’s deficit-reducing measures, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Cut-backs, handed directly, affect rural communities hurting 

producers on both social level, through the decreased funding to 

help an education, and on a production level through cuts to 

agricultural programs. The key is the budget’s cancellation of 

the five-year-old farm purchase program. This leaves our 

province without any programs helping farmers to start or take 

over their parents’ farm. In other words, no measure insuring 

the preservation of the family farm. Nothing to insure the 

family farm, and the Minister of Agriculture, riding under  

his cowboy hat, says, this is the way of the future. What kind of 

attitude is that? Given the average age of Saskatchewan farmers 

at about 57 years, how do they retire, Mr. Speaker? And how do 

they . . . what’s provided for intergenerational transfers? 

 

There are other cuts which seriously hurt farmers, and I’ll just 

run through some of them very quickly. The RM’s were 

receiving 1 per cent less in revenue sharing. The result will be 

poorer roads, poorer maintenance in construction, higher costs 

to the local people. School operating grants will be dropped. 

This hurts rural schools that already face declining enrolments. 

Hospital cuts will hurt rural hospitals accelerating the trend in 

which smaller hospitals are becoming little more than 

stabilization and transfer units. Travel grants and clinical 

operating grants for veterinaries cancelled - further costs to 

rural people. Funds for perennial weed control and rat control 

programs - gone. Who’s going to pick up that cost? It’s going to 

come out of the pockets of rural people. Grants supporting feed 

testing labs are gone. Grants . . . The prairie agriculture 

machinery institute cut by 10 per cent, and they say they’re 

going to eliminate them at the end of this year. What kind of 

support is that for the rural people of this province? Provincial 

funding for agricultural affairs, Mr. Speaker, some place where 

people can go and relax, will be phased out in over the next four 

years and our Premier sticks a straw in his teeth and puts his 

cowboy hat on and says, this is the way of the future. 

 

At the federal level a number of policies are also adversely 

affecting the rural communities and family farms. Agriculture 

Canada has moved toward charging more for a base for all of its 

services - very inappropriate move. They have cut the 

departments and cut research spending. Federal government 

proposes to implement plant breeders’ rights. Plant breeders’ 

rights, or gene patent, will place control of our food supply in 

the hand of a few multinational corporations. And there has 

been no response to the export enhancement program, a subsidy 

of sales through the multinationals of United States to our 

traditional trading countries. This will greatly, drastically 

reduce our share. 

 

Our Premier has propagated a myth, Mr. Speaker. Rural and 

urban people alike, now are seeing the reality - the myth of 

protecting family farms while the underlying strategy is to 

reduce the number of people in this province, to the benefit of 

large corporations. 

 

We now see the true colours of this government. Out of one 

side of his mouth, he’s saying . . . He’s tricking . . . trying to 

trick the people of rural Saskatchewan by saying my vision is 

for you. Out of the other side of his mouth, he’s talking to the 

multinationals, saying, you’re the guys that are going to benefit. 

 

(1445) 

 

With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to move 

this, seconded by the member from Quill Lakes: 

 

That this Assembly regrets that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has failed to persuade the federal  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1704 

 

government to extend the 1986-87 crop year, to disallow 

CN’s variable freight rate scheme, to have the Farm Credit 

Corporation re-establish its moratorium on farm 

foreclosures, and to have the Farm Credit Corporation roll 

back recent interest rate increases; and further, that this 

Assembly regrets that the policies of the federal and 

provincial governments are primarily benefiting the 

railways, the private grain companies, and the 

multinational corporations, to the disadvantage of rural 

communities and Saskatchewan farm families. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 

outset, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that if one takes a look at the 

agricultural situation in western Canada, but more particularly 

here in Saskatchewan, that one can only . . . it can only be 

described that we have a crisis on our hands. 

 

And I want to look at some of the symptoms which indicate the 

crisis that we are in in agriculture. Obviously you will know, 

Mr. Speaker, that grain prices have fallen 20 per cent in two 

successive years. In fact, it’s the fifth consecutive year that 

grain prices have fallen. And you can take reports where 

farmers say, farmer wonders, is barley . . . is a dollar a barley 

worth delivering? And that’s the situation that the farmers find 

themselves here in Saskatchewan and in western Canada. 

 

So the grain prices have fallen drastically. And as it’s been 

indicated, Statistics Canada estimates that in 1986 the value of 

farm capital will have dropped to $27.17 billion, or down by 

18.6 per cent since 1982. We find also, Mr. Speaker, that the 

value of Saskatchewan farm lands has declined in value 23 per 

cent during that same period of time. 

 

We take a look at the debt load in respect to the . . . what the 

farmer is carrying. And I don’t think anyone on the other side 

will laugh at the seriousness of the magnitude of how the debt 

has increased over the last number of years. There is in excess 

of $5 billion owing by Saskatchewan farmers. The wheat pool 

has done a survey of the agricultural situation here in 

Saskatchewan, and they indicated that 20 to 22 per cent of the 

farmers are in very serious financial crisis. 

 

This is the situation that is being confronted by the farming 

community of Saskatchewan. And in a nutshell, Mr. Speaker, 

the root cause, the problem that is being confronted by the 

farming community, is that the prices of commodities are far 

too low. And as I’ve indicated, barley at $1 a bushel is hardly 

worth selling. In fact, at the present price of commodities, 

farmers are not able to get back the cost of production, and 

that’s the crisis in the background in agriculture. 

 

Now if we take a look in the last couple of years, two or three 

years, in the last two in particular that the farmers are facing 

this major crisis, we can acknowledge that the federal 

government provided some assistance in the drought area of the 

south-west of this province to the cattlemen, per head; also in 

providing some assistance in transporting of fodder to the cattle. 

 

But also they gave, and I want to acknowledge, a $1  

billion deficiency payment. But the problem here, Mr. Minister, 

Mr. Speaker, is that a $1 billion deficiency payment is not a part 

and parcel of any overall approach to addressing the problem of 

agriculture. Because if you look at the deficiency payment when 

was it paid? It was paid when the Premier, the Minister of 

Agriculture, was on his hands and knees pleading with Ottawa 

to save him in a provincial election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — And that was the reason we got the deficiency 

payment. And I say to you that it certainly is in fact the truth, 

because let’s take a look at some of the basic actions of the 

federal government since paying that deficiency payment, and I 

ask you to consider whether they’re really working for the 

farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let’s take a look first of all at the variable rates. They had an 

opportunity to overrule the decision that was received by the 

CN. But did they? No, of course they didn’t. Because you know 

who’s benefiting from it? Multinational grain corporations. Not 

the wheat pool, not the farmers, but the Cargills of the world. 

 

And they allowed the variable rates to be instituted when they 

had the opportunity and the power to revoke that order. So are 

they working for the farmers and introducing variable rates? I 

say not. I say, in respect to variable rates, how could a 

government allow the application by CN where in fact you 

could set up a few centres throughout the province which would 

give some benefit in reduction of the cost of transportation of 

grain, but at the very same time, anyone that was not within the 

range of the point that was designated for variable rates would 

have to pay more. How is that fair to the farmer who are not at a 

point that they can deliver at that variable rate designated point. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at a couple more of 

the actions of the federal government during the past year to see 

whether the federal government and the Premier of this 

province are really working for the people, the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. I’ve mentioned variable rates. What happened in 

respect to the moratorium in the Farm Credit Corporation? 

Gone. Did the Premier of this province stand up and fight? Did 

you hear him echo one word on behalf of the farmers of this 

province? I’ll tell you, there was not a word made public. 

 

Also I ask you . . . recently the Farm Credit Corporation 

increased their interest rates on the loans provided to farmers - 

they increased it 1.5 per cent to 11.5 per cent. I ask you: is that 

a policy by the federal government which is of a benefit to the 

farmers of Saskatchewan? And I ask you: did anyone here hear 

the Premier standing up, loud and clear, and saying, Mr. Prime 

Minister, you can’t tack on more interest rate because our 

farmers can’t afford to pay more? Not a word. 

 

I’ll tell you what we moved here and in the question period . . . 

and asked the Premier if you’d intervene with the federal 

government to get an extension of the crop year. Well, is there 

any extension in the crop year? No help. But the Premier 

pretends to be the defender of the farmers. 

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1705 

 

I want to look at some of the things that have happened on the 

provincial scene, Mr. Speaker. Remember when this 

government opposite came into power with a lot of rhetoric and 

a lot of fanfare? And they said, we’re going to give a farm 

purchase program to the farmers of this province. Do you know 

what has happened to that program? Scrapped. 

 

Production loan program. Well, it was going into the election in 

‘86 . . . they wanted to go in the spring of ‘86. And you know 

what the Premier did? He went out and he said, I’ll give you 

some production loans, $25 an acre. But I’ll ask the Premier, 

and I’ll ask the farmers of Saskatchewan, if a production loan 

was needed in 1985, the fall of 1985, delivered in 1986, if it 

was valid that we came forward with a billion dollars at that 

time, I say it s more legitimate . . . and if the Premier was 

serious he would, in fact, have some program in place to help 

the farmers, not just the election program to attempt to get him 

elected. 

 

Take a look at the fuel rebate program which was going to be 

handed out to the farmers before the last provincial election. 

And I ask you: where is the farm fuel rebate program? It’s gone, 

gone with the other programs that they put in. 

 

I want to turn for a minute here. We have the Premier going 

around the province trying to indicate that he is . . . trying to say 

that he has a national agricultural program. Well I have an 

article here where it says that the PM gets little credit for 

agriculture. And I want to just quote from the article of the 

person that did the analysis. And he says: 

 

There has been a lot of noise about the national 

agricultural policy, a particular fancy of Premier Grant 

Devine. This was to be the apex of federal-provincial 

co-operation. So far, it’s been all talk and no money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Skolstad is even less charitable in that: 

 

The alleged policy (he goes on to say) is not only all talk, 

but much of it is double talk. 

 

And that’s what the farmers of Saskatchewan have been getting 

from the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I heard a couple of 

comments earlier about the opposition talking about doing away 

with a myth. And while they were attempting to do away with a 

myth I think they proved a fact, and that fact is that the NDP 

know nothing about agriculture and do not have a policy in 

agriculture. The only policy they ever had on agriculture was 

the land bank, Mr. Speaker. We’ve discussed the land bank a lot 

of times in this House. 

 

The members opposite wish we would talk about something 

else . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh yes, the member from 

Quill Lakes talks from his seat again. 

The problem is that when we have to compare agriculture 

policies, the only agriculture policy of the NDP was the land 

bank. Hard to compare anything to that. The land bank, Mr. 

Speaker, was a scheme by the opposition, by the NDP, to turn 

Saskatchewan into the great socialist state that they want it to 

become. They claimed it was to address the problem of 

intergenerational transfers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but that was 

not the case. They should have been pursuing negotiations with 

the federal government and making it part of the national 

agriculture strategy. But oh no, they didn’t do that. 

 

Now the proof of the pudding, Mr. Speaker, is in members 

opposite. The leader of this government did negotiate with the 

federal government, and did get results. We have a lifetime 

exemption now, Mr. Speaker, from the capital gains tax, which 

was not there under the NDP. 

 

And that addresses a whole series of problems. The land bank 

did not facilitate children inheriting the land of their parents. It 

did the opposite. It was even worse than the old death taxes of 

the NDP. The government owned what families had spent years 

building up, and that was a terrible thing, Mr. Speaker. It 

robbed the children of their chance to inherit a family’s lifetime 

of work. 

 

And it was posed as a great thing that was going to help 

everyone. Turn your land into the land bank, and five years you 

can buy it back. But you had to wait five years. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, in five years the value of land went up so rapidly that 

the people who were unable to purchase it in 1972 were equally 

unable to purchase it in 1977. So the plan failed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when the shredders got through in the 

building in 1982 after the NDP lost the election, they missed a 

few pieces of interesting reports. And I happen to have a couple 

of those, and it dealt with alternatives to the land bank. Even the 

NDP recognized that the land bank wasn’t working, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Anyhow, we had interest rate problems, Mr. Speaker, under the 

NDP. We’ve addressed the interest rate problem - 8 per cent 

money to help young farmers buy their land; 6 per cent money 

on a production loan. The NDP, when they were in power, said, 

well interest rates really aren’t the provincial responsibility. 

And the member from Riversdale, who’s so fond of talking 

from his seat, who is a good friend of the then minister, Mr. 

Chrétien, Trudeau’s lieutenant, had an opportunity to speak 

with him on a number of occasions, and was quoted as saying 

Chrétien was not unsympathetic to the West. Did nothing. Why 

didn’t he phone Mr. Chrétien and say, Jean, we’ve got a 

problem. We have high interest rates - 24 per cent - that’s 

killing our farmers, and we’ve got to protect our farm families. 

But did he do that? Oh, no, he didn’t do that. 

 

The member from Humboldt talks about walking around with 

cowboy hats and straws in one’s teeth. Well, that’s the closest 

the member from Riversdale will ever come to agriculture. He 

didn’t care, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t care. 

 

We needed leadership, we didn’t have it. And that’s why in 

April ’82 they elected a Progressive Conservative  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1706 

 

government, people wanted new ideas. People needed new 

ideas, and we gave them those things. 

 

(1500) 

 

Do you want to hear some more about what the outgoing 

Leader of the Opposition had to say back then? Well, if you 

want to hear people talking about progressive ideas and how to 

reshape society, don’t bother going to an NDP or a union 

meeting; go down to a Catholic parish meeting. 

 

Who said that? Well, it was the Leader of the Opposition in the 

book, Canada, What’s Left, and it’s from page 37. 

 

They like to play games, Mr. Speaker. They like to play games 

with words. But their own leader says the NDP have no new 

policies. He says, go to a parish meeting; you’ll get better ideas. 

And I have no doubt of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, the member for Regina 

Elphinstone, said of his party, “What the party intends to do is 

to take a lot of its old policies and rework them for the 1980s”. 

And that’s a direct quote - that’s the Leader-Post, November 

23, 1983. 

 

Well if they’re going to rework old policies, Mr. Speaker, I 

suggest that we’re going to get more land bank. We heard no 

new policies from them today, none whatsoever. And I contend 

that that’s exactly what will continue. They try to tell us today 

that they have policies for agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and I really 

doubt that - I really doubt that. 

 

And they’re fond of comparing us in Saskatchewan to 

Manitoba. Well, let’s see. The member for Regina Lakeview on 

July 13, I believe, was criticizing the government because of the 

Human Rights Commission and the staffing in Saskatchewan 

compared with that of Manitoba. And they’re very fond of 

using Manitoba as a guide. So I’d like to give them another 

example from Manitoba. Manitoba is an interesting province so 

long as it suits their purposes, Mr. Speaker. And I think I’ve 

touched a nerve because they’re getting a little rowdy. 

 

Well let’s talk about Manitoba. The March edition of Grainews 

had a headline that read, “Manitoba farm budget dwarfed by 

Saskatchewan and Alberta”. And it’s true. 

 

The story opens: 

 

Manitoba NDP minister of Agriculture, Bill Uruski, talks a 

good line about how much he’s helping farmers, and 

generally he fools most of the people most of the time. But 

figures obtained by Grainews show agriculture’s almost a 

forgotten entity in the Manitoba budget compared to 

support farmers are provided by Saskatchewan and 

Alberta. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a very relative statement - 

relevant statement, very relevant, considering the motion that 

we have at hand. 

 

And I’d like to amend that motion if I could, Mr. Speaker,  

by putting forth the following: 

 

That the motion pursuant to rule 16 be amended by 

deleting all the words after the word “Assembly”, in the 

first line, and substitute the words: 

 

commend the government for the manner in which it has 

led the fight for the Saskatchewan farmer, despite poor 

world economic conditions, and after years of neglect by 

the previous government. 

 

And it’s seconded by the Member from Morse. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

debate the motion put forward by the member from Humboldt 

and the amendment put forward by the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion deals with agriculture. It deals with 

agriculture and rural communities, Saskatchewan farm families, 

priorities with this Progressive Conservative government 

unknown to the members opposite. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is quite obvious to everyone in this 

Assembly that the NDP did not capture the rural vote in the last 

two elections. They did not capture the rural vote for several 

reasons, Mr. Speaker, but their main reason is their limited view 

in agriculture. And I just want to quote from a paper that is very 

familiar to them. It says here, Commonwealth, July 1, 1987: 

 

More input from rural constituencies and rural people in 

formulating rural policy that we will have in place well 

before the next election, instead of policies simply going 

out from Regina to the rural areas, Mr. Lingenfelter said. I 

thought we ran a very excellent campaign in both rural and 

urban constituencies, but I think what our campaign lacked 

was a vision for the rebuilding of rural Saskatchewan for 

the future. 

 

That’s what the former member from Shaunavon said. I’m just 

going to make another couple of comments here on the 

Star-Phoenix that reads like this; Star-Phoenix, November 1, 

1986: 

 

Lingenfelter said, we were making strides prior to the 

deficiency payment announced. I don’t think we need 

major surgery in our agriculture policy. 

 

And that’s in my opinion a negative statement. This is going on 

from there: 

 

Unlike Devine’s agriculture package which has involved 

discussions at the national level, NDP leader Allan 

Blakeney did not put forward a focused and cohesive 

agriculture policy. 

 

And this was stated . . . another comment was stated by Chris 

Dunn, a University of Saskatchewan political scientist: 

 

The fact that the Premier personally took over the  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1707 

 

agriculture portfolio and tried to get a national strategy 

was evidence of various concerns for agriculture. The 

NDP strategy on agriculture tended to be more single shots 

like increased acreage payments and the extension of the 

production loan program. I was waiting all along for the 

NDP to do something new. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why they are sitting over there and we 

are over here. And it relates to the number of the things that I 

am planning on discussing as we go through this discussion 

here today on this motion. 

 

We can only assume then, Mr. Speaker, that this motion was 

put forward by the members opposite because they decided it 

might be wise to learn something about agriculture. And of 

course, Mr. Speaker, they want to learn from the best, so I 

suggest the members opposite remain a little quiet and try and 

learn something and pay attention; then they’ll be more 

informed in the debate later on. 

 

To begin, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to refer to the topic of variable 

rates. Variable rates are not the problem the members opposite 

would have us believe; apathy, misinformation, a lack of 

foresight are. Discussions and planning, taking appropriate 

action, is what this government and Saskatchewan farm families 

are known for. The co-operation and open lines of 

communication established through hard work, frequent town 

hall meetings, and on one-on-one discussions with government 

members - this has helped to isolate the problems in agriculture 

and work toward some solutions. 

 

The solution, Mr. Speaker, is not to stand and fight with 

everyone. The solution is recognizing the need to shift gears in 

the rural evolution of things, and things that will benefit all the 

people of Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan people deserve a bright 

future, and our Premier has the vision to ensure that through 

co-operation and communication, that future will provide 

protection and opportunities for this generation and generations 

to follow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are principles and this foresight displayed by 

the Premier are evident in the many agriculture assistance 

programs introduced to Saskatchewan, indeed to Canada, 

through this government. For the 1986 crop year, Mr. Speaker, 

many Saskatchewan farmers received financial assistance 

through Saskatchewan government production loan program. 

Under this program, farmers were eligible to receive loans of 

$25 per acre, as listed in their ‘86 Canadian Wheat Board 

permit book. The interest rate, Mr. Speaker, is at 6 per cent, and 

loans are repayable over the three-year period. 

 

Earlier this year the Progressive Conservative government 

decided to defer these payments for one year, and the only 

required payment for the ‘87 farm family who took advantage 

of the program were the interest payments. This government is 

aware of the tough economic times faced by those in agriculture 

and other areas, and we are committed to making responsible 

assistance available to those who need it most. 

Mr. Speaker, we saw the result of our Premier’s effort to raise 

the issue of agriculture to the national level. The Premier 

pushed because he believes in the importance of agriculture to 

Saskatchewan and to Canada. Never before, Mr. Speaker, has 

Saskatchewan agriculture seen more benefits from good 

provincial-federal relations as we have seen in recent years with 

our Progressive Conservative Premier leading the provincial 

government. 

 

I challenge the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, to produce 

examples of support in agriculture such as we have seen from 

groups and individuals in farming or regional co-ordinators, 

from examples as the letter that I’m going to quote from, from 

the National Farmers Union. I’d like to quote from a letter, Mr. 

Speaker, that is a clear example of the confidence Saskatchewan 

and Canada’s agriculture community has in our leader and our 

Premier, the member from Estevan. I quote. This is from the 

National Farmers Union: 

 

I want to commend you for pushing your fellow premiers 

for a commitment to Canadian farmers at the Humboldt 

meeting of western premiers. With continued leadership 

from you, I am sure that Canadian farmers can count on 

some much needed assistance from either the federal or 

provincial governments, or a combination of both. Thank 

you again for your efforts on behalf of Canadian farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the letter sent to the Premier I’m quoting is from 

Gil Pedersen, region 6 co-ordinator, National Farmers’ Union. 

And, Mr. Speaker, our Premier’s efforts are recognized at a 

national level, and through excellent provincial and federal 

relations Canadian farmers have benefited during the financial 

crisis. 

 

Some of the examples of the federal government agriculture 

assistance programs, Mr. Speaker, are these: the western grains 

stabilization, an ongoing program to stabilize grain income to 

farmers. For example, when in 1980 when the people of 

Saskatchewan were crying for assistance in delivery of interest 

rebate programs, energy reduction costs, what did the members 

opposite do? Absolutely nothing. They were in contact with the 

federal government, and they did absolutely nothing in order to 

reduce the kinds of things that were needed to the farmer. They 

did not even initiate with their counterparts in Ottawa, the 

Liberal party there, their responsibility in dealing with how to 

pay out the stabilization payments, and how to address that so 

that farmers would be able to utilize the grain stabilization 

program. They didn’t do that. 

 

What happened when we had the billion dollar deficiency 

payment for 1986 crop production year? Did they ever do that? 

No, Mr. Speaker. I farmed in this province for a long time, and I 

farmed it through Liberal eras, and NDP eras, and 

Conservatives. And we have had tough times, and we have 

delivered programs in tough times. And what happened with the 

Premier of Saskatchewan decided to phone at 5 o’clock in the 

morning? Mr. Premier, the Prime Minister identified a billion 

dollars for agriculture in Canada. 

 

The rebate of federal sales tax on fuels - Mr. Speaker, I  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1708 

 

can vividly recall in Halifax when the Premier was talking at 

the Premiers’ conference there that the Premier told the Prime 

Minister, and he said, Mr. Prime Minister, it is very, very 

difficult for the people in Saskatchewan to recognize that there 

is an importance in your collecting a tax on fuel and they go 

around their field, and they don’t really want to have to pay 

that. And you know what, Mr. Speaker, the Prime Minister put 

into place a rebate on fuel, on the tax that he was collecting. 

And that opportunity was not available under the NDP except, 

Mr. Speaker, before elections and during elections. And that is 

where we are different, Mr. Speaker, mention was made before 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to address the 

original motion as put forward by my colleague from the 

member of . . . the member from Humboldt. 

 

Before I do that though, I do want to take issue with some 

remarks given to us this afternoon by the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. And I think if the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena continues to live in the past, farmers in this 

province really are in serious difficulty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people 

of this province are sick and tired of nothing coming forward 

from those benches but what the NDP did 10 years ago, 15 

years ago, or 20 years ago. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, agriculture in this province is beyond the 

crisis stages. It’s now in an emergency stage. And we have 

nothing but rhetoric. We have nothing but bad news from the 

members opposite. And they continue to talk about what the 

NDP did 20 years ago. And I think the farmers of this province 

don’t care about what the NDP did 20 years ago. What they 

now care about is what the members opposite are going to do 

today, here and now. 

 

(1515) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this resolution, I 

also want to take issue with the provincial government, 

particularly the Minister of Agriculture, the Premier of 

Saskatchewan. The Premier, during the last five years has set 

himself up as the defender of the farm family. His rhetoric on 

farm issues has become commonplace. 

 

During the fall election, we caught captions of the Premier 

riding horseback throughout southern Saskatchewan. We saw 

snippets of the Premier shaking hands at country picnics. We 

also saw him listening intently as farmers discussed farm issues 

and told their stories. It was wonderful imagery, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. A good old country boy who just happened to become 

Premier of this province, a Premier who could get agriculture 

on the national agenda, a Premier who would defend the 

interests of farm families at the national and international scene. 

Well I can assure the members opposite, and I can assure the 

Premier, there are numerous people in this province who can 

ride horseback. There are numerous people in this province that 

can shake hands and glad-hand at country picnics. Most of us 

can do that just as well as the Premier opposite. 

 

But the real question is, the real question is: what is the Premier 

doing to protect the farm family on the family farm? There’s 

been a lot of imagery, Mr. Deputy Speaker; there’s been a lot of 

talk; there’s been a lot of rhetoric, but the real test of a 

government’s leadership is: what have they done, and what are 

they doing? As my father would say - watch the doughnut, not 

the hole. 

 

Well what have they done, what have they done, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to oppose variable freight rates? Did they exert any 

kind of pressure on Ottawa? Did they exert any kind of pressure 

on the federal Mulroney government? Did they go to bat for the 

farmer in this province? 

 

We heard one little murmur, but we saw no real fighting 

pressure, not one bit of real fighting pressure. And the farmers 

in this province want us to go to bat for them. They don’t want 

a press release; they don’t want the Premier flying off to Japan. 

We’ve got an economic crisis in Saskatchewan; we’ve got a 

farm crisis in Saskatchewan, and we think the talk is over, and 

the time is now for action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s face it. Farm 

families aren’t the winners in this situation with variable freight 

rates. The winners in this situation is the CPR, the CNR, 

Cargill, and all the other grain companies in this province. 

 

These organizations have traditionally and consistently 

advocated that they’ve had to maximize their profits. They’ve 

had to maximize their profits and rip off farmers. They’re not 

interested in minimizing costs for farm families, and they 

certainly aren’t interested in giving the farmer a voice in the 

grain handling transportation system in this province. They’re 

interested in having farmers leave their communities to haul 

their grains to larger centres. They’re interested in having fewer 

delivery points in this province. They want rail lines abandoned 

in this province, and they want local elevators closed. And farm 

families in this province don’t want that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Those grain companies and those railroads 

want to consolidate their business interests into a few 

communities. That’s what they call streamlining and operation. 

That’s what they call maximizing efficiency. And consequently, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what they call high profits. 

 

And I know the members opposite are talking about going back 

to the past in terms of the remarks that I’m making, but I want 

you to know that there are people in this province who don’t 

want to drive hundreds of miles to deliver their grain, and if 

what I have to say is going back  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1709 

 

to the past, so be it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — But, Mr. Speaker, what about those farm 

costs? And what about those rural communities? The closure of 

elevator points and the abandonment of railroad lines exacts a 

tremendous social and economic cost to our rural communities. 

The viability of any small Saskatchewan community is 

dependent upon grain - and the members opposite should know 

that - and where the grain goes. When the shipment of grain 

starts bypassing our small rural towns and villages, so goes the 

shopping, the banking, the school, the post office, and other 

services that are important to Saskatchewan farm families. They 

all leave the community, Mr. Speaker. Is that what you people 

want? 

 

Bigger isn’t always better, members opposite. Farm families 

want to preserve their way of life, but it’s impossible if we 

don’t have political leaders, if we don’t have the political 

leadership, that leadership that prepared to fight along with 

them to preserve the family farm, to preserve farm families, and 

to preserve and protect rural communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s appalling that a government that displays all 

the rhetoric of the day, and all of the imagery of the day, is 

refusing to stand up for farm families in this province. They 

won’t do it. 

 

I recall when my colleague, the member from Humboldt, 

introduced an emergency resolution in this legislature 

requesting unanimous consent to debate an emergency 

resolution on variable rates. That motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

called on Ottawa to reverse a recent ruling that allows variable 

freight rates on grain shipments. 

 

And I recall reading in the paper that the Deputy House Leader, 

the government House Leader, the member from 

Souris-Cannington, I remember what he had to say. And he said 

we were playing politics, that we were playing politics with 

farm families. Well I think it’s clear who’s playing politics in 

this situation. We have a whole lot of glad-handing. We have a 

whole lot of press releases from the members opposite about 

their concern for agriculture. We have a whole lot of 

grandstanding on the international scene at these international 

meetings, but they won’t even support an emergency resolution 

in this legislature to oppose variable freight rates. That’s the 

kind of leadership we have coming from over there. They won’t 

even oppose an emergency . . . or they won’t even support an 

emergency resolution that would reverse the decision that 

allows variable freight rates in this province. How ironic. 

 

How ironic it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the government 

won’t even utter more than a murmur when farm income in this 

province has plummeted by 18 per cent, when the federal 

government has lifted its moratorium on Farm Credit 

Corporation foreclosures. They can now start foreclosing on 

thousands of farm families across this country. The Farm Credit 

Corporation is a federal institution. It’s run by our federal 

government - a PC federal government. 

How ironic it is that we have a provincial government that’s 

foreclosing and taking 191 farmers to court because of arrears 

in payments under the Saskatchewan production loan program, 

a program that they hailed as saving the family farm. And now 

they’re going to do in 191 farm families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how ironic it is that we have here in Saskatchewan 

dozens of rural mental health clinics closing because the 

members opposite won’t fund our health care system. We have 

a situation where farmers are under the greatest stress they’ve 

ever been in in this province since the ’30s. And the members 

opposite are closing part-time rural mental health clinics. How 

ironic. 

 

How ironic it is that I hear daily that there are no longer public 

health nurses in rural communities to give pre-natal and 

post-natal courses to farm families because these people won’t 

fund public health nurses in Saskatchewan. And how ironic it is 

that we have public health inspectors that are no longer . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with pleasure today that 

I rise to address the original motion put forward by the member 

from Humboldt. And as well, I want to indicate that I’m pleased 

to discuss through that motion some of the farm problems that 

our farmers in Saskatchewan face. I want to say that I note this 

government spends an awful lot of time patting itself on the 

back and talking about its efforts on behalf of the Saskatchewan 

people. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to as well say that 

people are starting to understand and realize it’s nothing but 

lip-service and it’s becoming the trademark of this government. 

 

We’ve heard a lot of rumbling about a national agricultural 

policy, and it appears that the Premier along with his good 

buddy, the Prime Minister, Mr. Mulroney, want to form a little 

bit of a team and do all the good things. Well I want to say to 

you that the farmers out there don’t believe that it’s going to 

happen. And one of the reasons they don’t believe it’s going to 

happen because they’ve seen nothing but inaction from the 

Premier and from the Prime Minister. 

 

It’s a laugh when we hear the Premier of this province stand up 

and indicate how he’s going to beat the United States and the 

European Economic Community into line. It’s a joke. It’s 

unrealistic, and it’s irresponsible. And I say to you that the 

people of province no longer believe it. 

 

He doesn’t understand simple, fundamental problems with the 

world economy and why the subsidies are there. He doesn’t 

understand what’s happened to the Europeans over the last few 

decades and the fact that they’re afraid of the free market 

system and that they feel that they’ve got to have some 

protection for their people and their farmers. 

 

It’s not going to be a solution that he is going to be able to  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1710 

 

pull out of a hat in a year, or in two years. It’s a long-term 

solution, and what we need in Saskatchewan, and what we need 

in Canada right now, is some short-term help. The farmers in 

Saskatchewan need help both from the Canadian government 

and from this government, and it’s clear by their actions they’re 

not going to get it. 

 

I want to talk about variable rates, and I want to speak about 

where this Premier was in 1982 as he was out campaigning. He 

was telling the farmers - I know in my area - that the 

Progressive Conservative Party, “Protectors of variable rates.” 

Well some five-and-a-half years later, the people across this 

province have found out just exactly where he was in terms of 

variable rates, or rather, where he wasn’t, and the same with the 

Crow rate. 

 

When the federal government was moving to implement 

variable freight rates throughout this country, not a peep did 

you hear from this Premier - not a sound. He was hiding. Where 

is he now? His members today are chirping about feeling good 

about closing down the elevators in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And I ask them: how are you going to go back to your small 

towns . . . How are you, member from Morse, going to go back 

to your small towns and explain to them that, because of your 

Premier’s inaction, that their elevator is going to go; and 

because their elevator is going to go, their small stores are 

going to go, their post office, and that they’re going to have to 

start hauling their grain further? 

 

In times when farmers can’t afford another penny, this member 

stands up in this House and has got the gall to indicate that he 

figures it’s a good move. I tell you, it’s not acceptable, it’s not 

proper, and that’s a riding that is going to show you one day. 

 

But I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, as well, why I think, and 

why the people of this province think, that there isn’t any 

support for those kinds of things from that side of the House. 

We’re all pretty clear that the Premier, in his previous life, was 

a Ph.D. in agricultural economics, and he was known for his 

pronouncements on Saskatchewan farms and Saskatchewan 

farming. And one of his pronouncement s- and I want to remind 

the members on the other side - was that he felt that 80 per cent 

of the small farms in Saskatchewan were unviable and that they 

should be sold out. 

 

Well that’s exactly what he’s doing. And I’m telling you that 

the members of this party, and the members on this side of the 

House, are going to have a platform and policy in place when 

the next election comes - and you’ll find out when - that’s going 

to be acceptable, because the people, and 80 per cent of the 

farmers in this province, are going to understand very clearly 

that you’re not the government that wants to keep them on the 

farm. 

 

I want to tell you, though, why you . . . I want to tell you why 

you support variable rates - because of your buddies from 

Cargill. And let me tell you a little about your buddies from 

Cargill and what good corporate citizens they are in this 

country. They get a subsidy, a reduction of $1.50 a tonne. And 

these benevolent people, this benevolent multinational 

corporation that you people love and are endeared to, says 

listen, we’re going  

to share with the farming community. A buck and a half relates 

to six quarters. Well we’re willing to share with the farmers. 

We’ll give you one, and we’ll pocket five. Twenty-five cents 

out of the dollar and a half that they’re going to save goes into 

Cargill’s pocket, which inevitably goes to the American states. 

 

(1530) 

 

And what’s left for the people of this province, and what’s left 

for the people of Saskatchewan? You tell me. You stand up and 

explain to your farming constituents why Cargill grain 

company, that will get a buck and a half a tonne, is only willing 

to give them two bits. You explain that. And you tell them why 

you support variable rates and why your support the 

multinational Cargill. You go home and explain that, and I’ll 

tell you what - you’re better than what I think you are, because I 

don’t think you can explain the unexplainable, and that’s 

exactly what it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — You, the protectors of the family farm - 

headlines: “Province is taking 191 farmers to court.” A small 

farmer up by my area, just a few miles out of Prince Albert: 

 

I had no crop last year. I was hailed out and had little 

insurance, so $1,450 was all I could afford to pay on a $3,500 

interest loan. 

 

And you guys are going to foreclose on this farmer. He came up 

with almost half of the interest, which in these times is fairly 

good, and you guys want him off the farm. But you know why 

you want him off? Because he is not one of the doctors, or the 

lawyers, or one of your rich money mongers that have money to 

come out and buy the little farms. That’s who you’re 

supporting. You don’t support a little farmer like this. But I tell 

you, members on this side do, and we’ll continue to support 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Where was the Premier when we asked 

for an emergency debate to call for an extension to the crop 

year? Where was the Premier? I’ll tell you where he was. He 

was down in the States talking to the Americans. And I want to 

tell you what the Americans have to say about him when he 

came back. “Devine’s agriculture push called unrealistic by 

North Dakota Governor.” Governor Sinner of North Dakota, 

has some words to say about the Premier’s position regarding 

agriculture. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What did he say, Eldon? 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: I’ll tell you what he said. He said the 

Premier’s a dreamer. He said the Premier’s being unrealistic. 

He said that his approach won’t be accepted. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people of this 

province are becoming rapidly clear - it’s becoming rapidly 

clear to them that we’ve got a Premier without any substance, 

his hype is wearing thin, and he’s becoming very unbelievable, 

just as the Governor of North Dakota  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1711 

 

doesn’t believe him any longer. 

 

He can partner and buddy with his friend, Brian Mulroney, who 

has got no credibility in western Canada any longer. And if he 

wants to tie himself to a fellow that’s as unbelievable and 

unaccepted and unpredictable as Brian Mulroney, well then he 

should. But I’ll tell you where he’s going to be. He’ll be back in 

the private sector expounding his theories, his agricultural 

economic theories again, and working with the Fraser Institute, 

maybe, to try and see that 80 per cent of our Saskatchewan 

farmers aren’t around. 

 

Because I’ll tell you that the people aren’t going to accept his 

kind of politics any longer. They want a government that’s 

going to deliver some substance; they want a government that’s 

going to come to the aid of farmers. You can talk all you want 

about your party being the ones - the spokesmen for agriculture. 

But I tell you what - it’s not there. You look at the polls that 

have been coming out lately, and they’re starting to realize that 

you’re not the government of the people. 

 

You’re not the government of the farmers. The farming 

community is starting to laugh at you. And I tell you, it’s more 

than just the price of grain. When they see that they’ve got to 

haul their kids a hundred miles to find a dentist who will be too 

booked to get them in, they’re going to be cursing Grant 

Devine. And I tell you . . . I tell you, when they start looking at 

paying the costs of the drug prescription plan . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gerich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure 

to stand this afternoon and to debate this motion under Rule 16. 

And I say that with sincerity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I see that the NDP this afternoon, to debate on this motion, have 

obviously led with their chin. And yet that’s precisely what 

they’re doing today. It’s quite rather a funny situation were it 

not for the fact that agriculture in this province is facing a 

number - a number of challenging positions and challenges, 

period, that we have to deal with. 

 

It seems that the members opposite have realized that they’d 

better say something about agriculture today. Soon. Or else 

they’re going to lose their rural support they had altogether. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their reluctance to debate the agriculture issues 

stems from two sources. They know that this Progressive 

Conservative government has done more in agriculture in this 

province than any other previous government, including those 

headed by now Leader of the Opposition has ever done. And 

that intimidates them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what really is stopping them from bringing the topic of 

agriculture is a fact that the NDP do not have an agriculture 

policy. It doesn’t even exist. It hasn’t existed for years, and it 

certainly wasn’t there during the last  

election, and farmers can see through that, Mr. Speaker. And 

they let the NDP know with their votes. And just ask the new 

NDP party president, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Dwain Lingenfelter. He 

can tell you about the lack of the NDP farm policy. It cost him 

his seat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the NDP to bring a motion like this - it smacks 

of hypocrisy. Where were they when the farmers were paying 

20-plus interest rates back in 1981 and ‘82? Where were they? 

They can hop and heckle right now, but they weren’t around. 

They sure weren’t around to lower the interest rate costs then. 

 

Did they provide farmers with low interest rate operating loans 

like we did? Not on your life. No, Mr. Speaker, they put their 

money into buying potash mines, and these mines were already 

there. When the farmers asked for help, the NDP said, look, 

we’ve got these beautiful potash mines. They’re going to help 

us. They’re going to take us a long way. They spent over $1 

billion on those mines, Mr. Speaker, while they ignored the 

farmers and the home owners who really and actually needed 

the help in Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that our Progressive 

Conservative government has shown, and will continue to 

show, a solid commitment to agriculture, and whenever we are 

able to, we have intervened on behalf of the Saskatchewan 

farmers. Now whether that meant providing emergency drought 

aid back in ‘84-85, relief legislation to protect the farmers from 

foreclosure, our government has been there for the 

Saskatchewan farmer. 

 

We’ve also been there on behalf of the farmers when dealing 

with the federal government. Mr. Speaker, our Premier has 

worked closely with the Prime Minister and his ministers on 

many challenges that face agriculture. And I’ll say this, Mr. 

Speaker, no premier in Saskatchewan’s history has ever 

achieved so much in the way of success in dealing with the 

federal government as has our Premier. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, our Premier made phone calls at night. Yes, 

he did wake up the Premier in the morning . . . or the Prime 

Minister. But our Premier got results. He got a $1 billion 

deficiency payment for our farmers of Saskatchewan who 

shared in $415 million coming directly into this province. And 

that’s just one example of the co-operation we’ve received from 

the provincial . . . or the Progressive Conservative federal 

government under Prime Minister Brian Mulroney. 

 

And we’ve seen hundreds of millions of dollars put into 

Saskatchewan’s agricultural economy through the co-operation 

between ourselves and the federal government through 

stabilization payments, drought assistance, fuel tax rebates, 

removal of the capital gains tax. What is our co-operation with 

the federal government? It’s accomplished programs such as 

this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite comparisons to the situation back in the 

late 1970s and early ’80s. Did the government of the day 

co-operate in order to get the best results for the farmers of 

Saskatchewan? Not a chance. They used the farmers as a 

weapon against Ottawa, farmers who were just used as the 

bargaining chip against the Liberals. So  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1712 

 

when there was a drought that hit this part - different and 

various parts of the province in ‘80 and ‘81 - what kind of aid 

did they get from the federal government? Very little, and a lot 

of times too late, all because the NDP in the meantime were 

using the farmers as their pawns in the battle with Ottawa. 

 

Now I challenge the members opposite who back then sat on 

the front benches on this side, to come forward and tell us how 

their constitutional struggles benefited the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now what did the farmers gain, Mr. Speaker? What did they 

gain from being used as pawns? For the same members to bring 

forward a resolution such as this shows that their concerns for 

the producers of Saskatchewan is very hollow indeed. They 

have no agricultural policy. They’ve been reduced to the point 

of spouting old, tired, socialist rhetoric. 

 

Where are their proposals, Mr. Speaker? Where are the new 

NDP ideas? They haven’t got any. They’re bankrupt of 

initiative, and it shows. What is their solution to the problem of 

the international grain trade war? Well they’re so busy attacking 

the United States that they don’t even have time to have a 

suggestion or suggest one. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, our Premier and our Prime Minister are 

working to find a solution, and one that’s work. And that’s 

something that won’t happen overnight. The international 

situation is complex and is not given to overnight changes. Our 

government realizes this. And now we must protect our 

producers in the meantime. 

 

And that’s why our Premier, along with other western premiers, 

has called for a deficiency payment for 1987 in the range of 

$1.6 billion. And that’s also why our government is looking at 

new ways of farm financing and agricultural development and 

diversification. Our Progressive Conservative government 

remains committed to the producers of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. And it will continue to do the best for them, wherever 

possible. And that’s why I’m voting again the motion, and for 

the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too am 

glad to get involved in this debate, and I would like to give 

notice that I will be opposed to the motion, and I will certainly 

be supporting the amendment. 

 

Now while listening to the members opposite speaking, I could 

not but notice that many of them were talking about the good 

old times. And I find it kind of humorous, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

to hear them talking about the past, to hear them talking about 

the so-called good old times. And it just makes me wonder the 

depth of their understanding of the agricultural problems, 

because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m thinking about the saying 

that the winds of change were sweeping across our province, 

and indeed across our nation during the so-called good times. 

 

The 1980s were upon us, and it was clear to everyone involved 

in agriculture at that time that there was a shift coming and that 

the smart policy makers in the industry  

were advising to diversify. They were saying that Saskatchewan 

farm families should be too cautious about putting their whole 

future in one basket. Don’t put all your eggs in one basket, we 

were being advised. 

 

There were warnings, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the NDP 

government in 1980 had ample warning, but they did not heed. 

And what did they advise farm families back in those days, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? The NDP minister of Agriculture, one Gordon 

MacMurchy, in the Financial Post of February 12, 1980 stated, 

and I quote: 

 

If Saskatchewan farmers hope to cash in on a growing 

profitable world grain market, the changeover to straight 

grain is necessary. The Saskatchewan economy is 

diversified enough to take the strain of a large crop failure. 

 

That was the minister of Agriculture speaking, the minister of 

Agriculture, one Gordon MacMurchy. My goodness, Mr. 

Speaker, listen to those words. He advised farm families not to 

diversify. The Saskatchewan economy is diversified enough, is 

what he said. For our farmers the straight change-over to grain 

is necessary, he said. To grain only. 

 

What a travesty of government policy. What a shameful lack of 

vision, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What an appalling inability to 

understand what is happening before one’s very eyes. It is just 

simply mind-boggling, and it is unacceptable. It is totally 

unacceptable. 

 

(1545) 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what is scary about the NDP when it 

comes to their lack of understanding - when it comes to their 

lack of understanding of the agricultural economy. And that’s 

what worries us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s what worries the 

farmers of Saskatchewan should the members opposite form the 

government some time in the future. And that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is what worries the people of Saskatchewan should the 

members opposite form the government some time in the 

future. 

 

What is they were returned? With that vision of the future, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I submit that the people of Saskatchewan 

would not be well served by the members of opposite, if this is 

the direction in which they would be leading the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why I submit that with the 

leader that we have in our Premier, with his vision for the 

future, with the direction in which he has been leading the 

province not only in agriculture but in various diversification 

measure, that is why I submit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will be 

here not just for the duration of this term, but for four years 

after and for four years thereafter, because the people of this 

province . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — The people of this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, on October 20, 1986, said we like the direction in 

which you’re going, we like what you’re doing for agriculture, 

and certainly we want you to continue. And  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1713 

 

that is what I am suggesting to you is exactly what we’re doing. 

And that is what I’m suggesting to you and to the people of 

Saskatchewan, is exactly what the members opposite would not 

be doing should they be returned to office. 

 

And it is in that vein of mind that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am 

totally against the motion as it was made by the hon. member 

across, and in support of the amendment as it was made, that we 

in this province must continue to diversify, not to put all our 

eggs in one basket, as the members of opposite are trying to 

indicate to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I would say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it would be a 

travesty for this province, it would be a shame for this province, 

would we return to that type of mentality, to that type of 

mentality that was largely responsible for the many problems 

that the farmers of Saskatchewan are facing today, be it the land 

bank, or be it any of the other situations that we find ourselves 

in. 

 

And I suggest to your, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in their heart of 

hearts, when the farmers of Saskatchewan were facing a 

decision back on October 20, they said to themselves, what are 

we going to be doing in the future? Are we going to be lending 

our support to the Progressive Conservative Government of 

Saskatchewan led by the Premier, Grant Devine, and are we 

going to follow . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ve asked members 

not to use other members’ names. Refer to members of the 

legislature by their position or by their seat. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I do well 

know that rule, and I apologize for you. But I’m sure that the 

members of the House can appreciate the fact that when I do 

think of the member of the . . . Minister of Agriculture, I get 

kind of enthusiastic and get carried away at times, so please 

accept my apologies for that. 

 

Now to get back to my train of thought that I was following, 

that on October 20, 1986, the people of Saskatchewan were 

being put into a position where they were going to have to make 

a decision. They were going to have to make a decision, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, for their future. And they assessed . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I must remind members 

the 75-minute debate has elapsed. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 15 - National Agriculture Strategy 

 

Mr. Martens: — At the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. 

Speaker, today, I’m going to move a motion: 

 

That this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan 

support and compliment the efforts of the Premier in 

successfully raising the topic of agriculture to national and 

international stature, culminating at the recent first 

ministers’ conference with the creation of a national 

agriculture strategy. 

I want to begin by saying, Mr. Speaker, that I’m proud to rise in 

the Assembly and put this motion forward. The motion 

recognizes that our Premier is a man who strives for the 

betterment of this province, its people, and the country as a 

whole. 

 

The achievement we are complimenting today, Mr. Speaker, 

deals with the topic of agriculture and our Premier’s successful 

endeavour in raising it to national and international stature, 

culminating at the first ministers’ conference with the creation 

of a national agricultural strategy. Of course, Mr. Speaker, that 

strategy is imperative to the survival of the provinces that make 

up this country. Agriculture is a big dollar value - $20 billion 

industry - an important source of employment, and a major 

contributor to Canada’s balance of trade. 

 

With the obvious difficulties facing farmers in recent years, 

input and co-operation between the provinces and the federal 

government are now more essential than ever before. It has 

been said, Mr. Speaker, that a wise farmer puts as much thought 

into seeding as he does into reaping. And what governments are 

doing in Germany, France, the Soviet Union, China, and other 

parts, directly impact in agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through co-operation, the federal government has 

risen to the challenges facing this country’s agriculture sector. 

The federal government has strengthened existing programs and 

developed innovative responses to changing needs, with 

emphasis put on co-operation with provincial governments, the 

agri-food industry, Mr. Speaker. These programs include 

immediate assistance to cushion the effect of production and 

sales fluctuations, and assistance to improve the long-term 

competitiveness of this sector. 

 

I feel it is important, Mr. Speaker, to point out some of the 

programs available to the agriculture sector, programs the 

Government of Canada is committed to. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

former minister of Agriculture, the member from Weyburn and 

now the Minister of Education, put it into context when he said 

in many of the speeches that he made that these are safety-net 

programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Agriculture Stabilization Act, for example, is 

funded by the federal government, the provincial government, 

and participating producers. The Western Grain Stabilization 

Act, Mr. Speaker, participating producers received about 859 

million in pay-outs in the ‘86-87 crop year. This represented 

about $5.10 in benefits for every dollar a farmer paid into the 

program between January 1 of ‘83 and July 31 of 1986. 

 

The dairy policy, Mr. Speaker, gives efficient producers of milk 

and cream the opportunity to get a fair return for their labour 

and investment, and to supply consumers with a continuous and 

adequate supply of high quality dairy products. The federal 

government has set aside about $1.4 billion for the five-year 

period, ‘86 to ‘91. And, Mr. Speaker, the agricultural products 

board provides producers with marketing support when they are 

receiving low prices because their agricultural commodities are 

in over-abundant supply. 

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1714 

 

Assistance by the federal government through the board - 

buying, storing or processing surplus commodities and then 

selling or exporting them when market prices have improved - 

this increases the financial return to the producers when they are 

ready to sell their commodities even though a market may not 

exist at that time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative Government of 

Canada provides relief in the area of financing, assistance, and 

tax measures. I just want to go through, and I will list some of 

them as I have had a chance to observe them. I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that instrumental in dealing with one of the major 

concerns of agriculture producers in my constituency and 

throughout the province is the exemption on capital gains tax 

that was given to the farmers’ of Saskatchewan and the rest of 

Canada, and particularly to those we want to deal with in 

Saskatchewan. These are recognized as opportunities that were 

non-existent prior to this. We have farm financing measures 

assisting farmers who are financially strapped. We have farm 

debt review panels. The Farm Credit Corporation has provided 

commodity-based mortgages. 

 

I indicated earlier today that my observations during the 

discussions at the first ministers’ conference a number of years 

ago in Halifax when the Premier told the Prime Minister in a 

very firm way . . . He said, when the people drive around the 

fields in the province of Saskatchewan and you put on an extra 

tax, they feel that, and they don’t like that. And you know what 

the Prime Minister did? The Prime Minister said, we’ll take it 

off. And he did. And that’s a fuel tax rebate that is available to 

producers in Saskatchewan. My neighbours and the neighbours 

of many of the back-benchers and ministers in this government 

on this side, and the members opposite, will recognize that it is 

an excellent way to deal with the problem. 

 

Then we have . . . the federal government recognized that there 

was going to be a difficulty in agriculture. And it’s difficult all 

over, nobody wants to deny that. Canadian Rural Transition 

Program is another opportunity that was made available to help 

assist producers who were not able to meet the requirements of 

their financial commitments and they were allowed to use that. 

The FCC has also given an opportunity for a shared-risk 

mortgage program; ;1984 and 1985 were very similar to the 

years of 1960-62; 1969-71, in that area. 

 

There were a lot of people who were in serious financial 

difficulty because of drought. And in 1984 and 1985 the Prime 

Minister, together with the Premier, initiated a response for the 

drought. There was a drought assistance for grain producers and 

it affected my whole constituency. It affected the south-west 

part of the province, and it was an asset to the people there. And 

that was a value, Mr. Speaker, of about $150 million to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Livestock drought assistance, another area that we needed help 

in in moving feed to the cattle producers. In 1984, $48 million 

and $16 million was given by the provincial government. And 

then in 1985, I believe it was, $30 million was delivered to the 

producers in the southern part of Saskatchewan. I’m still talking 

about a  

federal-provincial interface with the Premier leading the 

initiative. 

 

And we have heard today over and over again that this is just 

plain rhetoric. It has no real meaning. We were told over and 

over again just prior to this debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are real. These are real figures when it comes to the 

producers in my constituency, and they’re real in the producers 

in this province, and they deal very pointedly with the things 

that are necessary. The advance payment for producers who 

harvest their crops was increased. The ceiling was raised so 

people will be able to take a bigger advance on their production. 

 

It was done in recent years by the Prime Minister who is there 

today. It wasn’t done by the former Liberal administration 

which was the partners of progress that the former NDP had to 

work with. Cash advances for unharvested grain was another 

initiative that was put into place as a part of a way of pulling 

together the problems in agriculture that they had last year. 

 

Interim payments for grain on the stabilization Act. And since 

1984, Mr. Speaker, many of these things have been initiated. 

And why? It’s because the Premier of Saskatchewan has 

initiated this discussion with the Prime Minister of Canada and 

his colleagues in cabinet. 

 

(1600) 

 

We have another thing that really impacted in my seat, and that 

was the tariff that was imposed on the meat coming in from the 

EEC. I recall very distinctly in the middle ’70s and prior to that 

when the producers in western Canada were receiving 35 cents 

a pound for their calves when they marketed them and when 

they went through the tough times in the middle ‘70s. What 

happened to that? Quebec put on a special extra fund. They put 

on another 35 cents. British Columbia did exactly the same 

thing. 

 

What was the problem? It was the EEC movement of beef into 

this country. And the NDP-Liberal coalition didn’t do anything 

to stop it. No, they said it’s okay because the consumer will be 

the beneficiary. And what, Mr. Speaker, happened? The 

producers were not able to compete with that and therefore they 

had a reduction in stock. And that’s why through the 1980s to 

the time we are in today, we’ve had a reduction in the volume 

of reproductive stock, and not only in the cattle business, but 

also in the pork. And that’s one of the reasons why that 

happened. 

 

And many of the people in my constituency will verify that 

because they are just like I am, and they’re beef producers and 

grain producers, and they know that that’s what happened. 

 

That tariff was never introduced by the formal Liberal federal 

government. It was introduced through the initiative of the 

Canadian Cattlemen’s Association, through the Saskatchewan 

Stockgrowers, and their provincial agencies in providing a 

termination of . . . or an implementation of that tariff in 

European beef coming in. 

 

These, Mr. Speaker, are a list of programs offered between  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1715 

 

the federal and the provincial government, and the Premier has 

been working. Why? And that’s basically to ensure that 

agriculture survives. We’re probably living in the most difficult 

period of agriculture history since 1930. And it’s not been 

initiated by government. It’s been initiated by the tremendous 

. . . not this government, nor the federal government, but it’s 

been initiated by largely the whole international subsidy on 

developing their own strategy in relation to the agriculture 

production. And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly why our Premier 

is very precise in dealing with the things that he is in relation - 

as the members opposite criticized before - going to United 

States and talking. 

 

They have a reason to believe that they don’t want to talk to us. 

They don’t want to talk to us about a lot of things. The 

members opposite have raised on a number of occasions, potash 

as an example, in trade. What do we do with potash? They’re 

planning on setting up very restrictive forces in dealing with 

potash. How is that gong to impact in Saskatchewan? How is it 

going to impact in the red meat business in Saskatchewan, 

because we have not initiated discussions through the years in 

developing an opportunity for us to continue to do that. Why? 

They are afraid of the competition that we will provide. 

Because we have through the years, Mr. Speaker, the farmers in 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, Manitoba, and British Columbia and 

including Ontario have operated on the basis of production and 

cost-effectiveness that have reduced . . . the farmers in the 

provinces. And then the provinces have gone down in the new 

numbers. Why? It was because they’ve had to compete with 

those large treasuries in the United States, the large treasuries in 

the EEC (European Economic Community), and later in my 

discussions I will prove to you that they are there. In fact, they 

are in such large deficits that, Mr. Speaker, it is almost more 

than they can carry. 

 

I want to go on to some other things here that I think are 

important. The record in development programs that have been 

offered for Canadians in agriculture is one to be proud of. I 

want to discuss a little bit about the inspection and regulation 

programs insuring quality that is recognized around the world. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you go anywhere in China, south-east 

Asia, Europe, anywhere you want to go, it will be always 

recognized that the Canadian Grain Commission and the 

Canadian Wheat Board have a reputation that is well 

established. And they sell on the basis of quality, quantity, and 

value. And what happens when you have a decline in a market? 

And what happens when you have quality, Mr. Speaker? It 

happened this year. We’re almost going to reach record 

movement of grain in a year when it wasn’t expected. And the 

reason that we’re moving that is because of the quality of the 

products that we, as producers, are moving as initiated by the 

Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

We need not to stop there. We need to go on. Our scientific 

research and development policies must keep Canadian 

agriculture at the forefront with new developments. Agriculture 

development agreements, Mr. Speaker, provide a 

federal-provincial initiative to ensure the sector continues to 

advance. 

The PFRA, Mr. Speaker, the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration needs no explanation. It’s a program respected 

in every farm household. And if you go into the south-west part 

of the province, you’ll find that that’s accurate. They have dealt 

fairly with people through the years. They have dealt 

reasonably and rationally, and the people there respect them; 

and of course, Mr. Speaker, special assistance measures by our 

Canadian government, with a reaffirmed commitment shown to 

agriculture, such as the special grains program, drought 

assistance, and the Canadian rural transportation program which 

I mentioned earlier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that through co-operation with the 

provinces and the federal government that the agriculture will 

be expressed very pointedly and precisely by our Premier. And 

I think that that is excellent. Mr. Speaker, the knowledge that 

our Premier has, himself being a farmer and an agricultural 

economist, has been instrumental in the success of the 

assistance available to Saskatchewan farmers - I just wanted to 

make note of one very important thing. There has been 

occasionally remarks made by members opposite that the 

Premier is the farmer from South Albert. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that is a significant attitude on those people that are on 

the other side. And what it really does, Mr. Speaker, is reflects 

more on the kind of people they are than on what we are. And I 

believe that that speaks for itself. 

 

The western Canadian premiers’ conference established some 

priorities in agriculture, and I just want to deal with some of 

them as we go through this. They’re general farm issues. Mr. 

Speaker, farm debt was discussed at the western premiers’ 

conference at Humboldt, and the premiers agreed that the 

federal government must be more aggressive in cattle programs, 

as well as in traditional means of agriculture financing, such as 

operating loan guarantees. 

 

Stabilization, Mr. Speaker, the premiers called for assurance to 

the grain stabilization programs fairly across all regions of 

Canada, and referring to the eastern Canadian stabilization fund, 

or stabilization Act which sets the eastern Canadian producers 

in a separate category, we in western Canada . . . And the 

premiers agreed to that, from western Canada, that we ought to 

have it uniformly across Canada, and I believe that that is right, 

Mr. Speaker, and we need to have more of that. 

 

In dealing with some of the things that producers are going to 

have to deal with in the future, we need research in the cost of 

production so that we can learn how to lower those costs, and, 

Mr. Speaker, that is extremely, extremely important. That was 

just one area of the discussions they had. 

 

I want to raise a few more. One was deficiency payments. The 

premiers were encouraged by the real progress being made by 

Canada at the international level and urged the federal 

government to press on to achieve an international resolution of 

the problems. And the discussions at various places, at Tokyo, 

Cairns, and Paris, I just want to make some notes here. 

 

When we were discussing agriculture in the previous 

legislature, it was ridiculed from that side of the House  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1716 

 

against our Premier that he would never, ever get it raised at the 

summit in Tokyo. Never, never. And that we heard that over 

and over from the benches on the other side, from the desks on 

the other side. And was it? Yes, Mr. Speaker, it was. It was 

raised over there, it was raised in each of the places that it has 

systematically been done. And who has initiated it? It has been 

initiated by the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and 

the Prime Minister of Canada. And I think that it is extremely 

important for us to recognize that, because it deals very fairly 

with what has been going on. 

 

Another observation the premiers made in the western 

premiers’ conference in Humboldt was that they call on the 

Government of Canada to make an early announcement, in ‘87, 

for an increase in substantial deficiency payments, due to the 

continuing decline in prices and incomes. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that that is what the people of Saskatchewan would like 

to see, and all the people of western Canada, because it is 

absolutely necessary, and it was confirmed by the premiers who 

met in Humboldt. 

 

The premiers also called upon Canada to direct aid to other 

countries in a similar fashion to what Saskatchewan did in 

providing wheat supplies to the African continent, and the 

premiers endorsed an opportunity that be made available by the 

Canadian government to do that. 

 

Finally, the premiers reiterated their interest in seeing the 

subsidization distortions removed from the world agriculture 

trade and production, both of developing and non-developed 

parts of the world. And, Mr. Speaker, that is extremely, 

extremely important, because we are dealing Saskatchewan 

with very, very limited financial resources. The producers here 

are very . . . are subsidized at a very low level compared to any 

of the other producers. And that is extremely important. 

 

The premiers in Humboldt also said something else about the 

relationship that Canada ought to have with the United States. 

Premiers specified that a comprehensive Canadian-United 

States trade agreement must include new jointly established 

rules governing trade in goods and services, and a jointly 

managed dispute settlement mechanism to resolve trade 

disputes. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely necessary. It hasn’t 

been in place. It isn’t in place today. And what we have, 

because of the American way of doing it, we have a block of 

products that go down there that they are beginning to put 

tariffs on. And we . . . They’re closing their borders to us. And I 

think it’s extremely important that we go down there to visit 

them and tell them that they’re only hurting themselves in the 

long run. 

 

The premiers reminded the Canadian and United States 

government of the constitutional responsibility that the 

provinces have here regarding their resources. And I think that 

that’s also an important part of what our Premier has to provide 

as a member of the executive of this province. 

 

The premiers continue to support to the Uruguay round of 

multilateral trade negotiations under GATT (General 

Agreement on Tariffs and Trade). They endorsed Canada’s 

initiative to include agriculture as one of the  

items on trade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is probably the first time that if we get it that 

far, and it looks like it will be coming that way with the 

President of the United States, having agreed to it, and the 

Prime Minister, that it will be, for the first time, a part of the 

negotiations that will be made available to benefit the producers 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Why is this significant to us, Mr. Speaker? Why? And that’s 

because that over 50 per cent of the arable land available for 

farm production is in Saskatchewan. That’s why it’s important 

to us. And that’s why it’s important to Canada, and that’s why 

our Premier has to initiate that response, through the federal 

government, to the United States, to the international scene. 

And that’s why I think it’s important. 

 

I’m going to go on and list some of the things that I believe are 

important as it relates to the provincial initiatives that we have 

initiated in Saskatchewan. I’m going to list some of them. And 

the reason that I’m going to list them, Mr. Speaker, is the 

sarcasm by which we were treated earlier in the discussion 

today on resolution no. 16. 

 

They said, Mr. Speaker, that we on this side of the House were 

living in the past. That is false, Mr. Speaker. They said that we 

were living in the past because we didn’t have any new 

initiatives and we didn’t have anything that was there for today 

and for the present. Well I want to tell you something, Mr. 

Speaker. Today we have a livestock cash advance. It wasn’t 

there. I can recall in 1975 and 1974 that they did have some sort 

of a mechanism for doing that, but is was so limited, and all it 

did was made the people get further and further into debt. 

 

And I remember that very distinctly because I participated in 

that and I saw it happen to other people. I saw it happen to other 

people who were my neighbours, who said, from then on, I’m 

never going to be in the cattle business again. They did that. 

And we have to be very careful how we initiate this response to 

what the people want to have. They have to be capable of 

making the decisions themselves to initiate that on their own. 

 

(1615) 

 

Livestock cash advance, irrigation assistance. Now there’s a 

whole bunch of scorn heaped on this side of the government for 

the irrigation assistance that we have. And, Mr. Speaker, I can 

very vividly recall going to the other side of the 

Saskatchewan/Alberta borders where they have thousands and 

thousands, hundreds of thousands of acres of irrigated land. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that production is exactly the diversification 

that we need in this province. And that’s forward looking; that’s 

not looking back. 

 

Our production loan program. They said we had cancelled it. 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, we have said that it’s not going to continue 

on. But all of those people who are enrolled today are going to 

be enrolled tomorrow until that’s concluded. And they, Mr. 

Speaker, never did anything when the interest was 21 and 22 

per cent - not a thing. They didn’t do it for farmers. They didn’t 

do it for home owners either. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why 

they  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1717 

 

lost in ’82. 

 

What about the things that respond to the agriculture scene that 

relate to the drought assistance that we gave - moving feed into 

the southern part of the province from those in the North? Was 

that positive? Was that responding to need? Was that 

responding to demand? Yes, Mr. Speaker, it was. 

 

What are we doing for the future? We’re building, Mr. Speaker, 

I believe, some very important things. We’re building things 

like livestock investment tax credits, livestock facilities tax 

credits - excellent opportunities for investments in this 

province. And I believe that there are a lot of those. 

 

I could go on and talk about a whole lot of them because they 

impact directly into my constituency. Mr. Speaker, there are a 

lot of those things that impact, and I just want to give you a 

value. All of the things that I have listed plus a number of 

others, have an impact through the period of their existence of 

over $2 billion. And that has been made as an investment in the 

people of Saskatchewan, the agricultural production. 

 

I want to go to another thing that we have done, and that is 

relevant to today - the agriculture development fund. Two 

hundred million dollars put into place by the member from 

Weyburn, a member who has taken agriculture and moved it 

forward. The $200 million is going to put into place some very 

positive things in the province. These things, Mr. Speaker, were 

done by the Progressive Conservative government. They were 

done by this Premier - they were done by this Premier in 

relation to the federal government. And I think that that’s very 

important. 

 

There’s another aspect to this that is of a very critical nature. 

And why are we in a situation as we are today? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tory government. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have not 

listened very carefully or they would have understood that it’s 

not the Tory government. The Tory government has provided a 

safety net for the people of Saskatchewan. And I’m glad that 

. . . I’m very happy that the members opposite raised this, 

because I’m going to read something from the Prime Minister 

of Australia in a moment . . . from the Prime Minister of 

Australia who is himself a professed socialist, which I doubt 

because of his attitude towards international trade. 

 

And what does he say about it? And listen . . . The members 

opposite need to listen very carefully, because he has some very 

pointed things to say about how to respond. As a matter of fact, 

if you go back, you’ll find that he laid off 3,000 people in the 

civil service after he got elected. So he’s one step worse than 

we are if you were going to gauge that according to what we 

have done. And that was on a national scene too. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, going back to agriculture, and I want to . . . I 

would just want to comment on some of the things that Prime 

Minister Hawke raised from Australia: 

The world agriculture crisis is placing serious stress on 

international economic and political relationships. 

 

And this is a very pointed statement. What does it mean? 

 

World agriculture has not been in a worse position since 

the Great Depression. Commodity prices have been 

plummeting, seriously eroding, and often ruining the 

financial position of farmers in many countries. 

 

And that’s not only in Saskatchewan, that’s in the EEC, 

United States, Australia, New Zealand, all over.  

 

The cost of farm programs have soared, imposing great 

financial burden (on who?) on taxpayers. At the same 

time, consumers in some advanced countries have been 

required to pay highly inflated food prices. 

 

So not only were some countries going after the tax dollars to 

subsidize the producer, some of those countries were requiring 

that the food be raised in price in order to pay the producer. 

 

And what it causes in Saskatchewan, and in Canada where we 

have very little of that, thank goodness, is that it has caused the 

people in Saskatchewan to fade away. The volumes have been 

reduced. And these people think it’s a simplistic answer - throw 

more money at the problem. Well we did throw money at the 

problem, and we threw billions of dollars at the problem. And, 

Mr. Speaker, has it gone away? No, because the international 

situation is far more serious out there than it is right here. 

 

Important indicators of the crisis are . . . 

 

What are some of the indicators . . . in rationalizing this out, 

what are some of the indicators that I’m referring to? 

 

World wheat prices have fallen 50 per cent; stocks have 

risen by more than 70 per cent (that’s one of the points 

that he makes). Butter prices have fallen 50 per cent and 

stocks have increased 1.7 million metric tonnes. 

 

Now that’s a whole pile of butter, and lots of that is in 

mountains in the EEC. 

 

EEC stocks of beef have risen to over 600,000 tonnes, 

about three times their usual level. 

 

And what are they doing? Are they curtailing their investment 

by the people, the taxpayers of the EEC? No, they’re not. That’s 

a part of the problem, Mr. Speaker. It isn’t isolated to the people 

of Saskatchewan. It’s all over the world. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we can’t deal with it in an 

isolation. And that’s why it’s important, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

why I’m taking you through this scene, to identify the fact that 

our Premier and our Prime Minister are required to deal with it. 

And you know why we have a problem? Because it wasn’t 

identified and dealt with in 1979, 1976, 1978, and those years. 

That’s when we  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1718 

 

could have deal with it in a very serious way. 

 

And I can recall, Mr. Speaker, through that period of time, 

talking about an international agreement on grain. And what 

would have happened if we would have had an international 

agreement on grain? We would probably have been able to deal 

with a crisis as it relates to the EEC producing and marketing 

internationally, or Argentina, or the other countries. That’s the 

part of the reason why we are in a position where we are today. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I’ve raised this motion as a very 

important one because the Premier of Saskatchewan, the Prime 

Minister, and the people who are working in the governments 

on the Canadian basis have to realize that it is very, very 

important for producers in Saskatchewan to be dealt with fairly. 

 

Mr. Hawke goes on, and he has some very pointed things to 

say: 

 

Causes of the world crisis. Factors on both the demand 

side and the supply side of the current huge surplus of 

farm products in the decade ending 1982. 

 

So that’s when this whole thing really was fixed. 

 

The volume of world trade in agricultural commodities 

grew by 35 per cent. Most of this growth came from 

developing countries. The early 1980s saw the period of 

buoyant world trade and economic growth come to an end. 

Developing country demanded . . . stagnated, both because 

of slow international economic growth and because of the 

effectiveness of their own agricultural development 

programs. 

 

Countries like China, and many countries in the EEC who were 

traditional purchasers of our grain had their doors closed to the 

opportunity to market grain from Saskatchewan because they 

were growing it themselves, not because they could do it better 

than anywhere else, but because they were paid to do it. 

 

And Mr. Hawke goes on to deal with that in a paper he 

presented to the United States, and it’s very important that we 

realize that it’s not just a provincial kind of a matter. We have 

to deal with it on a broader base, and our Premier is doing it, 

and he’s trying to focus the attention of people on doing on an 

international way and that’s very important. 

 

Another place where it develops into importance, Mr. Speaker, 

is the groups that are meeting. The Cairns’ Group is an example 

of the things that are happening in Canada and other parts of the 

world. People who are part of that are Australia, New Zealand, 

Hungary, Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, Argentine, Brazil, 

and Chile. These are countries that are absolutely . . . it’s 

absolutely necessary to involve them in discussions that we 

have. 

 

Some of the responses that have been happening through the 

last period of time . . . and I want to read some of these into the 

record, Mr. Speaker. Secretary Schultz has indicated that it’s 

time that agriculture be put into the  

world stage. He complimented the Prime Minister of Canada 

for putting it into the discussions in Venice. And President 

Reagan also said that there is going to have to be a phase-down, 

a tapering off of the amount of involvement that we have in 

putting agriculture on a firm footing not based on traditional 

subsidies, and gaining access to a world market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s another area that I want to say that needs to 

be developed. And I’m trying to hurry here so that other 

members have time to speak on the subject, too. But there is an 

important point here that has to be mentioned. We have the 

European Economic Community in a very unique situation as it 

relates to the people in agriculture. Prime Minister Thatcher, in 

the EEC discussions, blocked the relationship that they had, so 

that they could reassess what they were going to pay as it 

relates to the subsidy on food in the EEC. 

 

And why? Because their anticipated deficit in this year will be 

$6 billion. That’s their anticipated deficit. I believe their overall 

deficit is something like $40 billion. And they are very, very 

close to being bankrupt themselves, and the interest, Mr. 

Speaker, is in the billions of dollars. 

 

And that’s why we have a problem internationally. And that’s 

why our Premier must talk about it. And that’s why our Prime 

Minister must talk about it. Each one of them must, in a very 

distinct and precise way, relate that as an international . . . in a 

relationship of international importance. And that, Mr. Speaker, 

I believe is why I think that we should all in this House support 

this kind of a motion because that gives us an indication of the 

importance that it is to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to conclude by making some . . . I notice the members 

opposite are cheering but I want to just close by saying some 

things that are very important. And July 16, 1987, Mr. Speaker, 

in the Viewpoints in the Leader-Post it says: “Potash debt 

write-off lets PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) do its 

job.” 

 

Recent news from the cut-throat international commodity 

markets provides a glimmer of hope amid much of the 

gloom that has (over) shadowed this province of late. 

 

Last week, there was word from the London-based 

International Wheat Council that despite the sharp drop in 

prices for wheat caused by U.S. and EEC (European 

Economic Community) subsidies, Canada’s share of the 

world wheat market is actually growing. 

 

Why? Is it because our Prime Minister is out there marketing it? 

Is it because our Premier is out there marketing it? And, Mr. 

Speaker, is it because we are staying competitive in the 

international market? Those are all answers, yes. And is it 

because we have quality product? Yes it is. Is it because we 

have not short-shifted on any of the arrangements we have 

made through the Canadian Wheat Board? Yes it is. 

 

(1630) 

 

I’m just going to go on to another one here that talks about  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1719 

 

the conference in Venice, and it’s a report in the Leader-Post, 

June 12: 

 

Full marks to Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney. This week 

in Venice, Mulroney and the Canadian delegation 

managed to maintain the momentum toward the 

re-emergence of some form of common sense in the 

international grain trade. 

 

That’s what we’re here for. That’s what the Premier is doing. 

That’s what he’s talking to the federal government for. That’s 

why he phones him at 5 o’clock in the morning. That’s why we 

do these kinds of things and discuss the rationale for him going 

to the United States. That’s why it’s important. They just 

ridicule it. All they do is stand in the way. When he goes to 

Tokyo or he goes to Japan, what’s he doing? He’s marketing 

the products that we produce in Saskatchewan. 

 

And why is it that they buy and increase the volume of sales? 

It’s because he’s going around and telling them we’ve got the 

best wheat in the world, and the Prime Minister is doing exactly 

the same thing, and that’s why it’s necessary to be done. 

 

Mulroney also restrained himself from making some form of 

Chamberlain excuse statement about peace for our time and was 

satisfied with saying the agreement doesn’t represent a quick 

fix. However, the agreement in Venice . . . there wasn’t an 

agreement in Venice, but progress is on the way. It is, however, 

a funny kind of progress. In effect, the agreement, no matter 

what the words seem to say, is an agreement not to make the 

situation worse. 

 

And I’m going to go one point further. Why was the President 

of France in Saskatchewan? Why did he come to 

Saskatchewan? Did he come to see . . . Did he go to see the 

Premier of Alberta? No. Did he go see the Premier of British 

Columbia . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Perhaps, maybe. But 

where did he come? Right to Regina to talk to the guy that 

knows agriculture probably better than any premier in Canada, 

and he knows agriculture better than any person in the federal 

government. That’s why he can go there and tell them, look 

people, this is the way it’s going to be, and that’s the way it 

ought to be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I am very 

proud to move a motion in this Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan 

support and compliment the efforts of the Premier in 

successfully raising the topic of agriculture to national and 

international stature, culminating at the recent first 

ministers’ conference with the creation of a national 

agriculture strategy. 

 

And it gives me a great deal of pleasure to do this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 

be able to get up today to let the people of  

Saskatchewan know that the rhetoric we have heard from this 

government today and in other past days in agriculture is just to 

the point where we can’t take it any longer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — We have heard the rhetoric come out about all 

the programs and how great we are over there. And I talk to 

farmers every day who call me and say, what am I going to do? 

What am I going to do? I am losing my farm. 

 

And these fellows over here one at a time religiously get up to 

. . . line up behind a Premier who tries to let the people of this 

province know - tries, I say - that he is the guy to do it. And 

they know better. They know the policy isn’t there. They know 

we’re losing a thousand farmers a year in this province. And 

they religiously get up behind him and talk about all the 

programs we have in place for agriculture and our beef and 

poultry and hogs and everything else. 

 

Let me tell you something about some of these programs. Let’s 

talk about some of the tax incentive programs to the people of 

rural Saskatchewan - many, and more and more all the time, 

who aren’t paying taxes. Are they getting benefit from these 

great programs? This government stands up and says, but here, 

you know, you got a tax write-off. 

 

Let’s take beef, for example. We have venture capital - venture 

capital meaning you can put money into the beef industry and 

get a 30 per cent write-off right off the top; put it into a 

self-administered RRSP, get another 30 per cent right off the 

top. Is it the guy that’s going under going to be investing 

$10,000 into venture capital? Who is it going to be? It’s going 

to be George Hill, the patronage appointment. It’s going to be 

the Emburys and the Schoenhals. And these are the people who 

are going to be taking advantage of any profit to be made in the 

beef industry. 

 

And let me tell you who is not going to be able to take 

advantage. Who is not going to be able to take advantage of it is 

the guy that’s down the road with a hundred head beef herd 

who has to make a dollar profit on every animal that he sells, or 

he’s out of business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — But the George Hills supported by this 

government can sit back and take their tax credits, and lose 

money on every animal, and still be money ahead. That’s the 

type of programs that this government has. 

 

We’ve seen them lead us down the garden path since 1982. 

We’ve seen them lead us down the garden path in education and 

health, but they were still the defenders of agriculture. We’ve 

seen them lead us down the garden path with the dental nurses. 

We’ve seen them lead us down the garden path with the 

patronage, and they still thought that they were the big boys in 

agriculture. 

 

But now we see the garden path in agriculture ending abruptly. 

We see them out there with programs, such as  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1720 

 

the hog stabilization . . . hog stabilization which paid the 

farmers of this province enough to get them by. What did they 

do? They went out in the country . . . and I was at a meeting in 

Humboldt where they were out in the country, and they said, 

well, this is what you wanted, isn’t it? And everybody said, no, 

it’s not what we wanted. But yes, you said it was what you 

wanted; it’s what you’re getting. This great consultation with 

the rural people in this province. Copping out of provincial 

commitment, just to reduce the dollars that they need to put into 

a program, hopefully supported by the federal government, and 

at the same time reducing the support from the hog producers. 

 

The same thing with beef tripartite. They’re losing credibility 

with the people because they say, we’re going into a beef 

tripartite program. And whose telling them to go into the beef 

tripartite program? It’s not the majority of the people in 

Saskatchewan that’s telling them. It’s a few individual 

producers, who think that they’re going to make a killing on the 

beef industry. 

 

They’re going into a tripartite system that is going to reduce the 

stability to the beef producer. It’s going to reduce it because 

they will no longer have a cost of production formula. They’re 

going to go on an average. And so the average goes down, the 

price goes down. Nothing related to cost of production to keep 

the family farms in Saskatchewan on the land - absolutely 

nothing. 

 

Let’s talk about supply management. We have a situation here 

in this province where we have implemented in the past years a 

supply management in eggs and poultry and dairy, and a 

Canadian Wheat Board marketing program. And what are these 

boys going to do about it? They’re talking free trade. Open the 

border. 

 

Let’s talk some more about supply management, where two 

mid-sized producers of turkeys in the United States can supply 

the whole Canadian market. And you guys are saying: oh well, 

we’ll still have our poultry producers, our turkey producers. 

Where’s the reality in that? Where’s the reality in that type of 

logic - illogic? 

 

And the other thing: free trade is going to undermine, as I said, 

all these programs that were built up. But no, these people on 

this side of the House say that that’s what we have to do; that’s 

the future; open the markets; level playing field; everybody’s 

going to be . . . we’re going to have access to a huge American 

market in our agricultural programs; we’re going to have access 

to a market whereby they can produce, down in the southern 

states, poultry and beef and eggs with no overhead costs as far 

as heating goes, with no . . . They can raise cattle 20 . . . or 12 

months of the year. We’re going to compete against that? What 

kind of dumb rhetoric can it be? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — We’re going to have free trade with the 

Americans, and they are saying: well, you’ve got to cut some of 

your programs like, well maybe some of the little ones, the 

Canadian Wheat Board; I mean, we’ve got to have this level 

playing field. 

 

The farmers of the province know what the Canadian Wheat 

Board has done for them over the years, Mr.  

Speaker. These guys want to scrap it. They want Cargill to be 

the guy putting out the grain over the . . . throughout the world 

market. They want Cargill to be in control of the grain produced 

by the people of this province. And who’s going to profit? The 

Best Interests of the Producer in Mind, by Cargill Grain. I’ll be 

a short book, let me tell you. 

 

This type of rhetoric, this type of nonsense that comes across 

the floor, I cannot tolerate. Because the people of Saskatchewan 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — The people of Saskatchewan are faced with a 

situation whereby they now have very, very little money. Their 

banker says, well, you know, I don’t know if we can have your 

loans extended this year for your . . . to put your crop in. And 

they say, well what am I going to do? And these guys say, well, 

if you’re in a little bit of trouble, we’ll through out a $25 

production loan on them. And yea, everybody applauds. 

 

And a year later, what are they doing? They say, you don’t pay 

that production loan, we’re taking your land. What type of 

production policy does this government have when they 

recklessly throw out money to the people of this province and 

say, trust us, and a year later they’re coming back and pulling 

the land out from under them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — The same way they did it, Mr. Speaker, when 

they put foreclosure action on those people who were lands 

branch people - pulled the rug out from under them. And why? 

Why are they doing that? Because the theory, the policy behind 

this government is to ensure that there are fewer farmers so that 

the multinational, the large corporation, the people with the 

money to invest and rake off tax credits, can prosper. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Those people prosper. Those people prosper, 

and who is being hurt? Who is being affected? 

 

An Hon. Member: — The family farms. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Not just the family farms. Although they are 

the ones that start the process, they are the front-line boys who 

come up and say, well and you’ve battered them so badly now 

that they’re going down easy. They’re saying, well look it, if I 

can get out of this, I’ll sign anything just to get out of it. That’s 

the mentality that’s out there, propagated by that government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — And after that one farm goes, another one goes 

and another goes, as we’ve seen in the past - about 1,000 a year. 

 

And what’s happening in our rural communities? How many 

teachers have been lost in rural communities since 1982? With 

the population going down, we don’t need as many teachers; 

population going down, we don’t need as many nurses in rural 

Saskatchewan; population going  

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1721 

 

down, we don’t need as many dentists or storekeepers or 

machinery dealers. How many machinery dealers have we lost? 

You guys know the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Dozens. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — . . . the numbers and numbers who have gone. 

And why? Because they’ve hammered down the people of this 

province, the rural community, all the time spouting they’re 

going to save us, and the underlying plan is to get rid of those 

poor - get rid of those people who are bad managers. They’re 

the bad managers; the good ones’ll survive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — That’s their plan. And this plan, Mr. Speaker, 

is the demise of this province, and we’ve seen it since 1982 in 

every sector that’s going. And we’re seeing it increase now. 

 

The guys over there who are saying it - big thing, variable rates. 

No big deal. I’ve been hollering variable rates are going to 

come since I started in this business, and we’ve seen it happen 

now. And again, who’s going to benefit? Are we going to 

benefit? Am I going to benefit when I have to haul 30 miles 

instead of 15; when I have to buy a bigger truck; when I have to 

pay more fuel; and when I possibly have to hire somebody to do 

it because I’ve got other things to do? Am I going to benefit? 

 

A $1.50 a tonne, Mr. Speaker, won’t even come close. And as 

we see, we won’t even be getting that $1.50 per tonne. 

 

(1645) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — This is the type of programs that this 

government is putting forward to help us - to help the people of 

this province? 

 

They are in bed with the big-business people of this country 

simply for their own gain. We have a rural society, a rural 

system, built up by our forefathers, and many of those - of our 

forefathers - will be rolling over right about now, let me tell 

you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they knew. They had a vision. They knew what 

this province could be. They built this province up to what it 

was in 1982, and since then we’ve seen nothing but rhetoric, 

bad management, betrayal, undercutting of the social fabric of 

this province by that government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — And they continue - and they continue to tell 

the people of this province that this is the way of the future. 

This is what Saskatchewan needs. And we have seen - we have 

seen what this province of Saskatchewan was. We have seen, 

Mr. Speaker, how this province of Saskatchewan has been 

pulled down in medicare. We have seen how it’s been pulled 

down in all the social programs, as I say, from medicare 

education down to the social service network that we have, the 

poor people who  

can’t afford legal aid. They’ve pulled it right down to the point 

where I wonder how much farther it’s going to go down before 

the people of this province revolt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — And it all comes from half truths and false 

perceptions. I’ll just give you a little example of what I’m 

talking about. We have had a situation where, on August 5, the 

member for Weyburn, when talking about agriculture says, I 

quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

I would ask: where have the NDP been on agricultural 

issues? Forty-three days into this legislature before we 

even had the question of agriculture raised. 

 

That’s what the member for Weyburn said. Mr. Speaker, that is 

totally untrue. And I’ll tell you why it’s untrue in a minute. But 

before I do, that is the way that this government treats the 

people of this province. They tell them one thing, and they try 

to sucker them into the game by a little bit of the carrot on the 

stick, with some incentives and some money here and some 

money there, and get the old adrenaline rushing, that, yeah, 

we’re going to do it. They say one thing and they do another. 

They are not telling the honest truth. 

 

And I’ll tell you, day five . . . These are the days in which this 

caucus raised agriculture. The minister said 43 days into the 

session. Day five, deficiency payments for farmers - drop in net 

income for Saskatchewan. Okay? That wasn’t quite true, 43 

days then, was it? 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about the farmer from Albert 

South; where was he at the time? 

 

Mr. Upshall: — The farmer from Albert South was on a junket 

somewhere. And why was he there? Because he was going to 

do something for Saskatchewan agriculture. Well the people of 

Saskatchewan cannot even afford the little luxuries that they’ve 

been afforded all their lives, because this government is not 

supporting them. 

 

Day six, deficiency payments to farmers - day six. The Minister 

of Education from Weyburn said 43 days we didn’t raise 

anything in this House. Was that the truth, Mr. Speaker? Do I 

dare use the word “lie”? Well I wish . . . I call it as I see it, but I 

won’t use it. 

 

Day 11, post office closures. Does that not deal with rural 

Saskatchewan? This is part of the agricultural fabric of rural 

Saskatchewan. Day 14, Mr. Speaker, policy concerning 

Department of Agriculture leases. The members opposite 

should remember that. That’s when they decided that they were 

going to pull the rug out from the numbers of land branch leases 

that were slightly in arrears. They said, oh yeah, these guys 

aren’t . . . they’re poor operators. they can’t operate this land. 

They’re so much in arrears. And many of them as little as $300 

in arrears, Mr. Speaker, and they were going to foreclose on 

them. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where was the farmer from Albert 

South? 

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1722 

 

Mr. Upshall: — The farmer from Albert South was on another 

junket down talking to Ronald Reagan. 

 

That same day we were talking about variable rates, 

introduction of variable rates by CNR. Is that not agricultural? 

And the minister said 43 days. This is the kind of garbage that 

we’re getting from the other side of the House - total untruths. 

 

Day 15, policy concerning Department of Agriculture leases 

again. We’re the guys that don’t bring up agriculture. 

Forty-three days the man says. But no. Again we’re worried 

about agriculture leases. We’re worried about agriculture leases 

because we know that those people leasing lands branch land 

are not bad operators for the most part; they’re not incompetent. 

But they are in a situation whereby that the price of their 

product and the input costs do not match. That’s why they’re in 

that. And these guys are saying they’re not good, these guys. 

Get rid of them. That’s the concern this government has. 

 

Day 19, service cut-backs in rural Saskatchewan. The farmers 

of this province saw their social systems eroding. They saw the 

dental therapists going. And what do they have to do now? 

They have to take a day off before the kids go to school. They 

pull them in the school. The cavities went down from five 

cavities per student to half a cavity per student. But no, now 

we’ve got to take a day off the farm, off of our work. If 

someone happens to be working off the farm, they have to take 

an additional cut in their income. They have to pack the kids up 

and take them to wherever they have to go to see a dentist. They 

have to . . . you know, they’re burning gas, and besides that 

they are waiting a long time to get these appointments. That’s 

the kind of support these guys are giving rural Saskatchewan. 

 

It is not logical for this government to continue this process. 

Let’s carry on. 

 

Day 19. I did that one. 

 

Day 24 and 25. Rumoured sale of STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company). Rumoured sale of STC - not only 

affecting farmers who get parts in on the bus regularly; 

affecting people who have no other means of transportation to 

get out of the rural communities, to do whatever business they 

may do that they couldn’t normally do in rural communities. 

 

And 43 days, he’s trying to tell the people that this caucus over 

here didn’t raise agriculture. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where’s the farmer from Albert Street 

South? 

 

Mr. Upshall: — On another junket. 

 

Day 29, Variable grain freight rates. Here we go again. My 

point, Mr. Speaker, is this: when these people, on the other side 

of the House, get up on their feet, it is obvious to me, to the 

caucus on this side, and to the people in Saskatchewan, that you 

cannot believe them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Upshall: — So these people, who get up time after time 

after time - and I just might add, normally, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a situation where the motions come up, as we have seen 

today - they come up and they’re usually concerning something 

commending the government, patting themselves on the back 

for a program, or a major project increasing employment, or 

some other job-creation program - usually that’s the type of 

thing that we have seen. But this, what we see here today, is 

what I call “fluff”. 

 

This is what - that we commend the Premier for successfully 

raising the topic of agriculture. I mean, they sit there patting 

themselves on the back. The Premier running around the world 

saying that I’m the guy that’s going to defend agriculture in 

Saskatchewan. He’s talking to Brian Mulroney and to Ronald 

Reagan. 

 

And what’s happening at home? Who’s minding the store? 

What’s happening here when the rhetoric of the Premier 

running around the world to do - supposedly help the people. 

Nothing’s happening here for the farmers of Saskatchewan 

except despair, stress, and a situation that they can no longer 

tolerate. That’s what’s happening. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — And let me tell you something else. In his 

junkets around the world, is he going for an International Grains 

Agreement that could keep the price of grain up? No, he’s not. 

 

And why not? Because this government and this Premier 

succumb to the powers of multinationals like Cargill and 

Bunge, who want to control the world grain trade, who want to 

control the world food supply. 

 

And if they couldn’t control it, then the exorbitant profits from 

the produce of people in Saskatchewan couldn’t be realized by 

those multinationals. And those are the people who, I think, this 

Premier and this government should be standing up to - should 

show some intestinal fortitude and say, look, you are not going 

to run the world food supply; you’re not going to tell the people 

in Saskatchewan when they’re going to . . . how much they’re 

going to get for their grain. And he doesn’t do that. Not a 

mention of an International Grains Agreement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — But they say, but they say . . . The defence 

they have is, well, any time we start about agriculture . . . well, 

the premiers and the Prime Minister are going to have a little 

secret meeting with somebody maybe from - maybe with 

George Schultz, as the member over here just said, or maybe 

with the New England governors, or maybe with the mayor of 

Minot, or maybe with Governor Sinner. 

 

The people that he’s talking to down there, I’m afraid, and I’m 

sorry to say because it bothers me because he’s from the 

province of Saskatchewan, the people down there think he has 

no credibility because . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

August 11, 1987 

1723 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Governor Sinner said his policies have no 

reality in them. Okay, Mr. Speaker, I would just like . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What do the polls say? 

 

Mr. Upshall: — You want to talk about the polls? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tell them about the polls. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Okay. Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where 

we’re $52 billion in debt in Saskatchewan. And the farmers out 

there are crying out for help. They’re crying out for somebody 

to talk straight talk to them, for somebody to put some stability 

under them. And how are they showing that? How do we know 

this? I mean, we can stand up here and say, well the farmers are 

behind me. And the Premier can say, so the farmers are behind 

me. 

 

But how do we know what’s happening out there? Look at the 

polls, my friends. Look at the polls, my friends. The polls are 

the indicator and show us that the people of this province have 

had it with this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Poll after poll comes in, day after day. And 

which way is this Tory government going with all the support in 

Saskatchewan? Downhill. And which way is the party going 

that these members over opposite say that have no idea is 

going? They’re going up. 

 

This is what the people of this province are telling us. This is 

what the people of this province are telling us. And you can sit 

over there and tell me how good your policy is? You can tell the 

people how good your policy is and how good you’re doing for 

them? They do not listen because they know better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for all those reasons and many, many more 

reasons from which the people of Saskatchewan will be telling 

this government, I therefore now beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 

 


