













































August 10, 1987  Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 10, 1987 

 

1671 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We left off, Mr. 

Minister, Mr. Chairman, this afternoon, doing an analysis of 

whether or not there has been serious cut-backs in the 

educational system. And I think in your own words that you 

have indicated that there has been. You set up a development 

fund which you said was going to be over five years. Of course, 

that was before the election - a great, big fund, you know, 

before the election. I doubt if you ever, every really had the 

money or budgeted for it. And as soon as the election is over, 

that five-year development fund suddenly becomes a 10-year 

program, I see. And you come in here and then have the 

audacity to start blaming it onto the division boards. Because 

you’ve deceived the educational system again. You didn’t have 

the money. You’ve run this province into the massiveness of 

debt that it’s now a have-not province, and previously, when we 

left office, it was a have province. So what you have done is 

with the development fund, you have staggered that over 10 

years. 

 

The second thing that you have done is imposed the gas tax, 

which is another burden on the school divisions, the E&H tax. 

 

You admit yourself that there’s been funding cut-backs in the 

operating grants to the school divisions. You’ve cut out a 

regional office, and you said it was done not by yourself but by 

someone else. You start blaming someone else, even though the 

trustees from the central divisions indicate to you that they 

weren’t consulted and that they want their regional office. 

 

Also what you have done is, during the course of the year, there 

was something like $83 million in property improvement grants 

to help alleviate the taxation to the people throughout this 

province. Well it didn’t take you long - $83 million of property 

improvement grants was wiped out. And what you have done 

now is to continue to pass on the burden of education to the 

local school boards. 

 

And so I want to turn to one other matter, Mr. Minister, and that 

is in respect to your capital funds. And I want to ask you 

specifically whether you have any contact from the Humboldt 

School Division board, the town of Lake Lenore, and whether 

or not they have asked you whether or not you would approve 

the construction of an elementary school in the village . . . town 

of Lake Lenore. And I want to ask you whether or not, after all 

of the information that has been tendered to you by the board 

chairman, Mr. Own Hopfner, from Lake Lenore, I wonder 

whether or not you have made a decision in respect to the 

capital expenditure for a school in the village of Lake Lenore. 

Could you provide me with an answer. 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As relates to Lake Lenore, we have 

received their request for a $1.4 million school project, and it’s 

been approved and it’s in the planning stages, I’m led to 

believe. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to just be perfectly sure. Have you in 

fact, have you in fact, indicated to the division board and to the 

chairman of Lake Lenore that there has been an approval, and 

could you indicate, if that is the case, when is construction 

intended to proceed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, they’ve been advised. And in so 

far as the schedule, as I said, there are some plans to be drawn, 

etc., etc., and the time frame revolves somewhat around the 

board. But we would expect that they would be starting yet later 

this year. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Can you indicate, Mr. Minister, the date on 

which you advised them that there would be an approval of the 

structure - of the construction of a school? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t have the exact date that they 

were notified. Our best guess was that it was probably in late 

June somewhere. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — The reason I’m pushing for this is it’s very 

important, because you probably know the concern that they 

have at Lake Lenore. And I have a copy of the letter here. And 

I’m surprised that you’re into your sixth year and we had this 

situation brought to your attention not just recently, but before 

that - a year ago at least - to the department, and nothing was 

done. 

 

But I want to impress upon you, Mr. Minister, the absolute 

necessity of proceeding with this. And accordingly, I want to, 

for the records, to indicate to you a part of the letter by the 

chairman of the board. He said: 

 

On March 4, 1987, Doug Sanders, the fire inspector out of 

Saskatoon, inspected our elementary school and 

condemned the building. He said there is only one school 

in all of Saskatchewan that is worse, and it is being closed 

down. 

 

Last night we had a board meeting with the teachers that 

are working at the school. They are really scared. There 

are no fire escapes on the second level. There are no fire 

doors, and the building is completely constructed of 

flammable materials. The fire inspector said that if his kids 

were going to that school he would have the doors closed 

next day. 

 

Would you please make a decision on our school as soon 

as possible about our building project and let us know. The 

parents and teachers in our community are very concerned 

about the situation as it is now. No one realized how bad 

the building was until last week. Now we have a real 

problem. 

 

So that was the situation, Mr. Minister, and I want to say that 

I’m pleased to hear that you have in fact given a  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1672 

 

commitment, because it is absolutely critical that that school be 

replaced and rebuilt. And while I . . . I think it takes a good 

MLA to get action, and that’s why, that’s why we’re getting 

results. And it was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. I 

got the communications, by the way, in respect to any 

communications that went to you. 

 

So I say, Mr. Minister, I want that to be perfectly sure that it 

proceeds, and I don’t want you to start putting it on the board’s 

back now, that they’re the delaying ones. I want your full and 

total commitment that the money is available because it’s 

absolutely for the safety of the children necessary that it be 

replaced. And I commend you for proceeding with it. And I will 

be checking to see what nature of your commitment, because 

sometimes it’s not as exact as what one would like. I’m very 

surprised that you wouldn’t be able to pull correspondence with 

the board indicating the date of the commitment. 

 

What I want to say to you in conclusion of this here aspect, Mr. 

Minister, is that there is a great deal of concern about your 

credibility in rural Saskatchewan as Minister of Education. And 

part of it is that you came into office here indicating that you 

were going to do a lot of consulting with people, and I think 

that to some extent, initially, that was carried out. But I think as 

your government continues in office, what we’re finding is less 

and less consultation. And I think that the basic presence of lack 

of consultation was in respect to the closure of the regional 

office in Yorkton. I can’t believe that a minister wouldn’t have 

at least had some contact with the local school boards in that 

area. 

 

And so what I ask you the, Mr. Minister, is to take the grin off 

your face and start realizing that there is concern out there. I 

have indicated to you, I have indicated to you the massiveness 

of the cuts in one school division; I’ve indicated to you the 

concern with the regional office. I’ve indicated to you the 

concern in respect to the lack of funding, or a decrease and 

cut-back in funding. 

 

And so I say to you, Mr. Minister, while I am pleased that you 

okayed the construction of the school in Yorkton, I would ask 

you to reconsider, reconsider closing of the regional office in 

Yorkton. I would appreciate if you would take a look at that 

because, as I have indicated to you in the correspondence that 

you have received, these people feel very, very strongly about 

it, and I would ask you to reconsider that. Would you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the rationale for the regional 

office configuration, I think I explained earlier to this House 

and to this member earlier on today, Mr. Chairman, it was done 

in consultation. And the services will be provided, albeit from a 

different location, and I think the people there have nothing to 

worry about. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 

was kind of anxious to get into the Education estimates, and I 

am pleased to do so tonight. 

 

The last few days, as I’ve watched the minister perform on the 

other side of the House, has indicated clearly to me why they 

are as low in the polls as they are in this province. They’ve lost 

their credibility; they’ve lost their  

believability; and that minister is an example of why that’s 

happened. 

 

I’ve listened to his rhetoric as he’s talked about members on 

this side clinging to the past, sticking heads in the sand, no 

vision of the future. And he portrays himself and his 

government as having this vision. He talks about the year 2001, 

but what we’re seeing from 1987-88 and for 1990 is precious 

little in terms of education and the future of our kids. 

 

The problem that his government has been creating has been 

shown that that government is becoming weird, weary, worn, 

and tired after only five years in government. No consultation 

Same old speeches whether he delivers one on agriculture or 

whether it’s on education. It’s the same old stuff, the same 

half-truths, and indicates that he’s lost contact with the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And it’s clear why they’re angry and why they feel betrayed 

and why they’re disappointed with this government. It’s clear 

that they’ve lost touch not only with the people of this province 

but with their own political party. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Ask some questions. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I intend to ask some questions. 

 

They’ve been scrapping local autonomy. And I want to talk 

tonight a little bit about the community college in Prince Albert 

and the kind of callous treatment that that board has received 

from this particular minister. And I’m going to ask the minister 

tonight if he’ll not reconsider his decision to force that board 

into a position where they felt they had nothing to do but to 

resign. 

 

I want to go back to 1982. The minister may not be aware of it 

but I want . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s in the past. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, it’s in the past but it’s in your 

present, the time that you’ve been governing. 

 

And I want to talk about the former member from Prince 

Albert-Duck Lake when he was questioned at a chamber of 

commerce board of directors meeting as to what there’s going 

to be in Prince Albert to replace the 200 jobs that they pulled 

out of that community shortly after their election. And what he 

said was, it’s a matter of consultation and we need time; we 

need time to get our feet and to get ourselves together. And I 

want to tell you it was the same kind of consultation when we 

lost those 200 jobs as what you did with the community college 

board. 

 

Mr. Minister, the former president of the community college 

board has indicated clearly what he feels of your government. 

He said your government is deaf and dumb and blind, and 

you’re bent on a misguided course of destruction. And he also 

threatens that the people of Prince Albert are going to fight to 

get local autonomy for that community college again. 

 

(1915) 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1673 

 

And I ask you tonight, Mr. Minister, will you reconsider your 

decision? Will you now go back and consult with the people 

who are interested in post-secondary education in Prince 

Albert? And will you again consult with those people, bring 

back that locally elected board so that we can get on with 

having that school run in a fair and efficient fashion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — A good indication of why you’re as low 

as you are in the polls, Mr. Minister. 

 

I would like to know why you’re not going to go back and 

consult with those people that you’ve treated so callously. What 

is it that you think you know about running of a community 

college that the people who’ve been involved, some of them for 

20 years in Prince Albert, know? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 

raises the question about consultation and who we met with, 

and I quite frankly have answered this question probably half a 

dozen times, if not a dozen times, in this legislature, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

The NDP questioning is getting very repetitive. We’ve gone 

over the issue of Prince Albert and the community college 

board on more than one occasion with more than one of those 

members. And now again the attempt to present the façade - 

and quite wrongly - that somehow what we did, we did in 

isolation, cooked up this scheme underneath the dome here in 

Regina. And nothing could be further from the truth. Because 

the truth is this, Mr. Chairman, I personally, and/or along with 

my Legislative Secretary, the hon. member for Regina Wascana 

- and a very good Legislative Secretary, I might add - had some 

20 meetings this past winter with something like 550 

associations and individual across the spectrum, if you like, and 

across this province. 

 

And we heard a number of things, and that became the blueprint 

that we’ve talked about in this House before, Preparing For the 

Year 2000, as it relates to adult education. And now he 

somehow is trying to suggest that we never consulted. 

 

I can tell him that on March 18, I was in his own town, Prince 

Albert, and met with an invitation list and a meeting list here 

that goes on for some several pages; the Prince Albert Indian 

and Métis Friendship Centre was there; the Saskatchewan 

Indian Technical Institute; Bernice Hammersmith; President of 

the Association of West Central Native Women; Association of 

Métis and Non-Status Indians; the YWCA; Prince Albert and 

District Learning Centre; Prince Albert Community Services 

Centre; Saskatchewan Adult Basic Education Association - I 

mean the list goes on and on and on - the Prince Albert 

Comprehensive High School Board. I mean there are just pages 

of people who were there. 

 

I would ask the hon. member who seems to have some kind of 

monopoly on sanctimoniousness when it comes to consultation, 

I would ask him how many meetings did he or his party hold 

across this province this past winter as it relates to adult basic 

education. And the answer is for  

the most part, zero, Mr. Chairman, because they do not have a 

blueprint when it comes to adult basic education. That is the 

reality, Mr. Chairman. We have put together a blueprint and we 

stand by it. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, let’s get firstly one thing 

straight here. This side of the House will ask the questions and 

it’s your job to be answering them. 

 

I want to, as well, mention to you why we keep asking of you 

why you didn’t consult with them. You have not in this House 

stood up one time and indicated that you consulted with the 

community college board. You haven’t said that yet in this 

House. You’ve avoided and skirted the question every time 

you’ve been asked, and that’s why we’ll keep asking that 

question, Mr. Minister. 

 

You talk about speaking to the people associated with the 

community college in Prince Albert. Can you tell me then why 

none of those community college board members feel that your 

department has treated them fairly and that your department or 

yourself has been consulting with them? Can you explain to me 

why they feel one way and why you say another thing in this 

House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the facts are these. At the March 

18 meeting I referred to, there were two people there from the 

community college. So it’s not as though in terms of putting 

together this very large group that dealt with community 

colleges, institutes, universities, adult basic education, that they 

weren’t somehow a part of it, point number one. 

 

Point number two, I can tell you as minister, I met with that 

board and/or parts of that board much more than I met with any 

other board across this province. And the reason I did is I 

wanted to walk the extra mile. I recognized that Prince Albert 

had been unique, and I wanted to walk the extra mile to make 

sure they were treated fairly and that all of their options were 

given a fair hearing, and that we did. And over and above that, 

my officials walked an extra 10 miles with them to try and 

address the circumstances that they felt were unique and 

peculiar to Prince Albert and area. 

 

So any suggestion that we somehow did not bend over 

backwards to deal with that board would be totally erroneous - 

absolutely and totally erroneous. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, then am I to understand 

that you’re telling this legislature and the people of this 

province that that community college board has dealt unfairly 

with your ministry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the community college board up 

there, unfortunately, and to my disappointment, made the 

decision to resign of their own volition. I was quite happy to 

continue working with them in good faith and reaching a 

consensus, as we had done in three of the other institute 

locations. In three out of four locations it went, for the most 

part, smoothly. Not as though there aren’t glitches and problems 

to solve, but the dialogue has been good, the effort has been 

sincere with all parties involved. 

 

And somehow what you’re trying to have me believe, and  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1674 

 

the rest of the public believe, is that the process that worked 

well in the other three centres couldn’t work well in Prince 

Albert, and I don’t buy that. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, clearly you would 

understand that that board felt you were putting them in a 

position to be your hatchet man. That was the feeling of that 

board, Mr. Minister. I’ve met with those board members, and I 

know how they’re feeling regarding the way you’ve treated that 

community college board. 

 

I ask you again: given the fact that the community college in 

Prince Albert - and you’ve admitted that - was one of the most 

advanced educational facilities there are in this province in 

terms of that kind of educational delivery system, a board that 

was able to turn a $50,000 grant into a $7 million budget and 

educate hundreds and dozens of people, you are telling me that 

in this province that was the only board that you couldn’t get 

along with, and that you couldn’t come to some kind of an 

agreement with? I ask you again: are you saying that that board 

was dealing unfairly with you? 

 

Or do you perhaps think that there was something special in 

Prince Albert, a special situation that you weren’t willing to 

address, and that you weren’t willing to allow function because 

you wanted to grab control of the community college boards 

through another super board here in Regina - a place where you 

could appoint a bunch of political hacks to do your bidding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, the answer is no to everything. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me about the 

make-up of your new super board? Can you tell me that there’s 

going to be regionalized representation? Can you tell me that 

there’s going to be some input from some of the students? Can 

you tell me exactly how you’re going to build that board, what 

type of people you’re going to man it with, and how it’s going 

to function? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m going to go farther than that 

because the hon. member hasn’t been paying attention through 

probably 20 or 25 hours of our estimates. But I’m prepared to 

take the time and read into the record again, as I’ve perhaps 

done for I don’t know how many members opposite. 

 

When they try to suggest, Mr. Chairman, that we somehow 

weren’t prepared to recognize the uniqueness of the Prince 

Albert situation, when we were, and that we somehow weren’t 

prepared to walk the extra mile in good faith with that board, 

because on June 4th I sent then a letter to the board chairperson, 

Murdine McCreath, and I said in that letter: “First, I propose 

. . .” 

 

Now this is for a minister who . . . I signed this letter. Now he’s 

trying to tell the world that I was somehow on some kind of 

power grab, trying to force this board to resign, and all the other 

ill-conceived notions he purports that I subscribe to. What did I 

say in this letter? And I quote: 

 

First, I propose that the current board of the community 

college remain in place for a period of up to 18 months . . . 

Now, does that sound like some minister who’s trying to kick a 

board out of the way, Mr. Chairman? Would reasonable people 

listening to this debate tonight buy your line or buy what I said 

in the letter of June 4? And I repeat: 

 

. . . I propose that the current board of the community 

college remain in place for a period of up to 18 months . . . 

 

Why, Mr. Chairman? For this reason: 

 

. . . to provide for continuity of programming in Prince 

Albert while the new institute becomes operational. 

 

Point number one. Point number two. 

 

Once the 18 month phase-in period is completed (I went 

on to say in my letter further) I propose that we establish a 

Regional Advisory Board for Prince Albert and region . . . 

The board will have the following powers: 

 

(to) . . . advise the Board of Directors of the new institute 

on the appropriate array of programs and services 

provided in Prince Albert (and) region. 

 

It will offer guidance and community input to the Institute 

board with respect to local concerns and interests. 

 

And get this, Mr. Chairman, a member of the regional advisory 

board will be appointed to the board of directors of the institute, 

the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, 

and he’s just called the existing board, those appointments, 

somehow government hacks, and government flacks. I mean, 

he’s totally inconsistent in his observations. 

 

The people that have been served on that board, whether they 

were elected or appointed, have served this province well. And 

I’ve said it in this House on many occasions and I say it again, 

that that board, it’s not that we’re changing it because of 

somehow they’ve failed in the past, because clearly that is not 

the issue. Clearly, that is not the issue. And I’ve told them all of 

this on August the 5th. And if one wants to check Hansard, it 

would be page 1556. And the hon. member is using up the 

House’s time, but I will finish the detail. And because I 

recognize the uniqueness of the Prince Albert board in so far as 

the tradition and practice of electing some board members, you 

know what I further said in my June 4 letter, Mr. Chairman? I 

said: 

 

The practice of electing community representatives to the 

college board will be continued for the advisory board if 

this is desired. 

 

Now does that not seem to be the words of a department and a 

ministry that’s prepared to walk the extra mile, prepared to 

recognize their uniqueness, prepared to recognize all that they 

have done in the past, prepared to recognize that continuity of 

programming must go on and that we want their expertise, not 

only in a regional advisory capacity, but also to have somebody 

sit on that  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1675 

 

new institute board? 

 

Now how does the hon. member square all of this with his 

overblown rhetoric that he himself doesn’t even believe? They 

don’t have a plan when it comes to post-secondary education. 

And I’ll tell you what, the two things that they never mention in 

this House when it comes to Prince Albert Regional 

Community College are these two things, Mr. Chairman. And 

that shows you how misguided they are when it comes to 

priorities. 

 

Why did this government undertake this restructuring, starting 

back in about May, Mr. Chairman? Why did we do that? The 

reason we did that is there are two considerations here that are 

of prime importance. Number one, come this fall we want that 

new institute up and running for the students, for the young 

adult learners in this province. And that’s why we’ve been 

doing it and started this May because we want to be up and 

running for this fall. 

 

And the second point he never raised, Mr. Chairman, is in all 

this amalgamation, why did we want Prince Albert community 

college board to be tucked into the process and work with us? 

It’s because we were interested in making sure that their staff 

and their faculty had a fair shake at the jobs in the new institute. 

That’s why. Students and faculty come first, number one and 

two. And they can argue and harangue about administration 

process this versus that. I clearly wanted to accommodate these 

people as best we could. 

 

They chose not to work with us. They chose; not us, Mr. 

Chairman. They chose to resign. And if they chose to resign, I 

can’t help that. And the hon. member from Saskatoon 

University says I forced them. And, Peter, you clearly know 

that that is not true. 

 

Sorry, Mr. Chairman, I meant to say the hon. member from 

Saskatoon University clearly knows that is not true, and he is an 

honourable gentleman. And I would like to know how he 

squares, saying from his seat that that’s not true and that I 

forced them, when clearly I made the offer that they could stay 

in place for 18 months if they so wished. Now I’d like him to 

stand up and tell me how I forced them, when those are clearly 

the facts, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, again you talk about 

walking the extra mile. I’m telling you that you may feel you’ve 

got credibility in Prince Albert, but I’m here speaking for the 

people who tell me that you’ve got none. You’ve got no 

credibility with the students; you’ve got no credibility with the 

teachers or the board or the public at large. Mr. Minister, your 

actions were a wash-out, and you’re going to pay the political 

price. 

 

(1930) 

 

I’d like to move on to another item that we might want to have 

a look at tonight, Mr. Minister. I would like to know from you 

when the decision was made to go ahead and when the okay 

was made, or if the school board in Prince Albert got any 

indication from your department that there would be a $2.6 

million renovation at Riverside school. Can you give me the 

information please? 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, while my officials are 

getting that specific piece of information for me, I want to pick 

up on a couple of comments the hon. member made about the 

Prince Albert Regional Community College. 

 

Once again he says that this restructuring and the refocusing 

and the changes that we’re making in adult education in this 

province, that we have no support for it. Well let’s remind him. 

He says the students do not support us, the faculty and staff do 

not support us. Well let’s remind him what his own party is 

saying - the young people of his own party. What was their 

resolution at this past convention, this year, Mr. Chairman, of 

the NDP? What was the NDP youth wing’s resolution when it 

came to technical institutes? They recommended one institute, 

Mr. Chairman, one institute. 

 

I would suggest to the hon. member that it’s he who is out of 

touch, not we who are out of touch. He is lagging behind the 

youth wing of their own party. They know there has to be a new 

agenda; it’s just that the NDP opposite do not know there has to 

be a new agenda. 

 

And I shouldn’t be surprised that the NDP are so totally 

unhooked from things, Mr. Chairman. I refer to an article in the 

Battleford Telegraph, July 8, 1987. And we’ve got the NDP 

running around the province holding employment workshops. 

And you know what the headline says on this one, Mr. 

Chairman? It says, “No one shows up for employment 

seminar.” That’s what the people of this province think of the 

NDP and their idea of how post-secondary education, 

manpower, and training needs should be in this province. They 

are out of touch to the point that there’s not even a . . . There’s 

no sense even showing up for what they’re putting on out there. 

The people recognize it, their own youth recognize it - they’re 

out of touch. This is characteristic of the NDP in 19 . . . 

pre-1982, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, you may be well advised 

not to worry too much about what the Saskatchewan young 

New Democrats are feeling; you might be well advised to keep 

an eye on what your own party is saying about decentralizing 

government; you might be well advised to have a look at what 

the former chairman of that Prince Albert community college 

board told you about the kind of government that you’re 

delivering; you might be well advised to talk with your party 

people who he spoke to. That’s what you might be well advised 

to do. 

 

Have you got the answer in terms of when that information was 

provided to the Prince Albert school board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the Riverside project is 

yet to receive formal approval. Obviously there was some . . . 

There has been discussion both in ‘86 and in ’87, I believe, 

relative to that capital project. They’ve been given the 

indication that it’s a very high priority, and as soon as it can go 

forward, it will. I don’t know what more I can say about that. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, there seems to be some  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1676 

 

conflict here with the director of education, Dennis Hockley, 

and I want to quote to you from the May 15 issue of the Prince 

Albert Daily Herald. It says here: 

 

Hockley said the decision to scrap the work came as a 

shock to the board which had already received written 

approval for the project. 

 

I ask you again, Mr. Minister: did that board receive written 

approval or did they not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — About all I can reiterate is that (a) the 

project has not had all and formal approval; (b) we recognize 

it’s a high priority; (c) it has not been scrapped, at least unless 

the board has scrapped it. But like 50 or 100 or even 150 

projects every year, some of them get deferred because of lower 

priorization until funds are available, or based on further 

examination. So I think for you to use the word “scrap” would 

be inaccurate because we haven’t scrapped it unless they have 

scrapped it. Just to give you the whole process here, because 

perhaps the hon. member, being a new member here, doesn’t 

understand how it works . . . You do understand how it works? 

Okay. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, if that hasn’t been 

approved, could you explain to this House and to the people of 

Prince Albert why it hasn’t been approved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well that was what I was going to 

attempt to do. Every year, the minister of Education as I 

understand it gets anywheres up to about 200 capital project 

requests per year. And that’s not just not a phenomenon that’s 

happened this year or last year, or the year before. It’s been a 

trend throughout history almost, if you like. And every year, 

based on appropriation and the budget . . . And all those 

projects are priorized, I might add. They’re put in different 

priority categories and they’re all priorized and in any given 

year, if there’s 200 projects and they represent a stack that deep, 

and you’ve got money to cover that many, that’s what you 

build. If you got money to cover that many, that’s what you 

build. And the list goes on and on and on based on as funding 

comes available. 

 

And the way that projects are prioritized - or priorized, 

whichever word Webster allows these days - is that there are 

valuation teams that go out and assess these projects, just as in 

the case of the Lake Lenore project. Some very, very critical 

factors entered into the priorization there, not only from a 

student enrolment pressure but because of the physical 

conditions of the building. And hence, based on things like that, 

projects get moved up higher or lower on the list. And it’s a 

process that I would suggest has served this province well for 

many years. 

 

This project at Riverside, I suspect, is one of probably a couple 

of hundred that we received last year. I don’t know what was 

built - probably 50 projects, which is not abnormal. And they 

weren’t high enough on the list, if you like. I have every belief 

that, all things being equal, that project will come to completion 

- in which year I can’t say, but as funding permits. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I am still having a great  

deal of difficulty. Mr. Hockley indicates in this issue of the 

Prince Albert Daily Herald that they had received written 

approval for this project. They had it in their budget and they 

had it ready to go. And I’m just having a great deal of difficulty 

understanding why there would be this misinformation or 

miscommunication between your department and that particular 

school board. And I would like you to explain to this House, 

perhaps, if you have some information as to why he would feel 

he had written approval and you indicate he doesn’t. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I think the hon. member would 

do well to probably talk to Mr. Hockley himself and not use the 

Prince Albert Daily Herald as your research source. 

 

As far as I’m aware, and I’m advised by my officials, is the 

letter that that board would receive in ‘86, relative of probably 

around budget time, would be yes, we’re aware of your project; 

it’s a high priority; it may well be that funds will permit in ‘87, 

but they do not permit for this year. And certainly that isn’t 

formal approval, if you like. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, let me be very clear about 

this. I talked with Mr. Hockley, it’ll be a week ago tomorrow. 

All right? Can you explain - and you still haven’t explained - 

why Mr. Hockley should feel that he had written go-ahead, and 

he had a written approval, and you indicate to this House that he 

doesn’t. Can you perhaps clarify that for me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m not going to try and second-guess 

what his interpretation may or may not be. All I can give you is 

the facts as I know them, and that is as I laid out to you in my 

earlier statement. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, if you have any written 

correspondence, would you be prepared to table it today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I don’t have any correspondence 

with us. You know, what my officials bring are brief-cases, not 

filing cabinets. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Ask your officials to go back to their 

office, find any written correspondence, bring it to this House, 

and table it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I’ll have my staff go and see 

what we have in the files, and if there is something of some use 

to you, I’ll bring it to the House. I suspect if you’ve talked to 

Mr. Hockley, maybe there is some reason to believe there is 

some commitment. I thought you would have already had that. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, your job is to provide 

information to this House; it’s my job to ask for the 

information, and I think we’ve gone through that again. But I 

want to say to you this, Mr. Minister./ The reason you’ve got no 

credibility is simply the kind of performance you’re putting on 

in this legislature tonight, and I’ll rest my case. 

 

I have just one other question of you. And I would ask you 

about the Northern Institute of Technology, if you have any 

numbers in terms of the number of class-room instructors that 

are in place at that facility, the number of  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1677 

 

people who are involved in management in that particular 

facility - if you could give us those numbers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well it will take us a few minutes to 

dig that out but we’ll send it over to you as soon as we can get 

it. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — A couple of informational items I’d like to 

ask the minister about. First of all, Mr. Minister, could you 

indicate to us which subvote the special ed funding is under, 

and also, how much money has been allocated to the special ed 

under that subvote for ‘87-88. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — There would be two votes that would 

recognize expenditures relative to special education. I refer you 

to your copy of Estimates ‘87-88, page 28, Education, vote 5, 

item 14. And that would recognize the administrative 

component, if you like, of special education. And it’s something 

in the order of $20 million would be in the base operating grant, 

but not identified other than the global number of some $330 

million. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Is there any way of telling how much of the 

EDF (educational development fund) money was spent or was 

allocated this year by school boards to special education? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well we don’t have the EDF broke 

down that way. We could. It’s a fairly exhaustive procedure, I 

think you can well imagine. There has been a number of 

projects. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Would it be possible to get a listing of the 

capital funding that has been approved this year for the school 

boards along with the amount of money per project? Would it 

be possible to get that within, say, by Wednesday? And would it 

be possible also, along with that, to get a list of those proposed 

projects that may be in the chute, say, for the next year, if 

possible? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What we can do is give you a list of 

capital projects approved. I think we can have that for you by 

Wednesday. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 

hadn’t intended to become involved in these estimates. I know 

we’re under the pressure of time to complete our review of 

departments. 

 

Even as I listen to the minister muddle through on his 

explanation of taxes, property taxes, I restrained myself from 

becoming involved. But as I listened to the minister’s sterile, 

technocractic, centralist vision for Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Chairman, the opportunity to participate is very clearly there. 

 

The minister seems to have a vision that’s based on an 

assumption that only he and his officials are the ones that know 

all the problems, know all the challenges, know all of the 

solutions that confront Saskatchewan people. 

 

Citizen involvement. Citizen involvement seems to be to ask 

people to submit their ideas to central authorities.  

Citizen involvement seems to be limited to central boards 

appointed by the government. Citizen involvements seems to be 

limited to advisory boards. But citizen involvement does not 

seem to really take into account the very real strengths that 

Saskatchewan people have, strengths that have been 

demonstrated over the years. And that is that reasonable men 

and women in their own communities, when elected, will make 

the right decisions for their community, will make the right 

decisions for this province. 

 

And that seems to be something that is entirely lacking in your 

vision for Saskatchewan. And I think sadly so, because it means 

that we’re going to have a Saskatchewan that’s planned by your 

and your officials, does not involve Saskatchewan people to any 

meaningful extent. You do not trust Saskatchewan people. You 

seem to trust only your own technocratic solutions, your own 

sterile solutions for Saskatchewan and its future. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I have a different vision for this future and 

a different vision for Saskatchewan - a vision that says that 

Saskatchewan people are intelligent, that Saskatchewan people 

are co-operative, and Saskatchewan people are sensitive to the 

conditions and to the challenges around them, sensitive to the 

challenges of adult education, sensitive to the challenges of 

advanced education, sensitive to the challenges that our young 

people face. 

 

But the minister seems to take a position that only he and his 

officials, that only he and technocractic clique, are the ones that 

really know all the problems, really know all the answers to 

what ails Saskatchewan. And I wish the minister would 

recognize that there are real strengths in this province, strengths 

that are based on citizen involvement in education, citizen 

involvement in local government, a strength that is a strong 

tradition in this province, and that you would do well to 

recognize that and take that into account as you set out to plan 

the future for education in Saskatchewan. You will do well to 

do that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have a belief that people are far better educated 

than they’ve been before and therefore better able to participate 

in the challenges that face us. Because of conditions and 

changes in the work place, people have more time to be able to 

participate in the challenges and especially to be able to 

participate in education. And let’s not forget that before 

education became a state responsibility and before it became a 

church undertaking, education was a responsibility of the 

family. And as the family has more time to become involved, I 

think it’s only reasonable that we would throw those challenges 

to families, that we would throw those challenges to 

communities, and invite them to become more involved rather 

than less involved in advancing education in this province. 

 

We should also recognize that far more than ever before people 

enjoy conditions, enjoy an environment where they can become 

informed about the problems that face them, about the potential 

solutions that are around them. 

 

Mr. Minister, I submit to you that as in our past, and perhaps 

more so than in our past, Saskatchewan people  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1678 

 

are better able, better equipped to deal with the problems of 

education in that they need to become involved, that they 

should become involved. And I think that for the health of 

education, that they must become involved in a real sense in 

order to advance education in this province. 

 

If we can look back to the strengths of school boards, why 

cannot you look forward to a future that sees a real possibility 

for democratically elected people to become involved in 

handling education and in advancing education in this 

province? 

 

Again, Mr. Minister, you have a sterile vision, a technocratic 

vision of what our future should hold and how it should unfold, 

as opposed to a future that recognizes that conditions are 

changing, that people are far better able to participate in our 

future. Yet you won’t allow them; you won’t let them. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just have one question for you: will you look at 

the plans that you and your department have come up with and 

see if there’s opportunity to get people far more involved than 

you propose, in a democratically elected way, in involvement in 

adult education and advanced education as it now the case with 

school boards in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member, using some very 

high-powered eight-cylinder words amongst which was 

“technocratic”, etc., etc., tried to suggest that - not unlike the 

member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake - that we didn’t consult 

with anybody in putting this blueprint together, that we 

designed it in the still of night in some back corner of some 

smoke-filled political back room. Nothing could be farther from 

the truth. And the stark contrast here, Mr. Chairman, is that they 

have no blueprint. That’s why they’re so ouchy about our 

blueprint. 

 

Well let’s go through the invitation list, and this may take a 

while, but let’s go through it. And the hon. member is shaking 

his head because he doesn’t want to hear it. Their party . . . It 

was not a feature of their party to consult, Mr. Chairman. It’s a 

recipe that’s worked well for us. It’s a recipe that’s worked well 

for us, and I’m going to take the time in the House to read in the 

invitation list for the consultation meetings that were held this 

past winter, Mr. Chairman. 

 

In Regina: Provincial Apprenticeship Board, Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business, Hotels Association of 

Saskatchewan, Canadian Petroleum Association, Independent 

Petroleum Association, Prairie Implement Manufacturers 

Association, Hotels Association of Saskatchewan, Regina 

Construction Association, Regina Real Estate Association, 

Saskatchewan Construction Association, Saskatchewan Home 

Builders’ Association, Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 

education committee, Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, 

Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, Saskatchewan Health 

Care Association, Saskatchewan Trucking Association, 

Saskatchewan pork producers, Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders 

Association, Electrical Contractors of Saskatchewan, 

Saskatchewan Mining Association, the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association,  

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, Western 

Canadian Wheat Growers Association, the stock growers, the 

canola growers. 

 

And I must say, Mr. Chairman, just when I see that one, the 

canola growers, I recall well their brief and their representative 

at that meeting - a well done brief, a well thought out brief. The 

farmer that presented it had some university teaching 

experience himself. A very thoughtful presentation on behalf of 

the canola growers. 

 

Which goes to show you, Mr. Speaker, you know, when we 

think about consulting in education, we’ve haven’t traditionally 

thought about groups like the canola growers. But they 

represent that ever-increasing group of farmers out there who 

are part of that technological era, that knowledge-based 

economy that’s so important in agriculture, as it is to other 

areas. And while I was going through the list, I was reminded of 

that very thoughtful presentation. 

 

Canadian Manufacturing Association, Saskatchewan Federation 

of Labour, an invitation, along with the Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses, and I recall the meeting they were at. The Hotel and 

Restaurant Employees Union, Construction and General 

Workers’ Union, retail workers’ and department store union, 

lifelong learning . . . sorry, Saskatchewan association of lifelong 

learning, Saskatchewan adult basic education council, home and 

school association, parent teacher associations, the Gabriel 

Dumont Institute of Native Studies and Applied Research, 

Saskatchewan advisory council on women, The Voice of the 

Handicapped, Canadian congress of learning opportunities for 

women, contemporary women’s programs, Volunteer 

Information and Training Centre, Native Employment Centre, 

guidance and career counsellors’ association, Regina Senior 

Citizens’ Centre, Saskatchewan association of pensioners and 

pioneers, Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, a number of 

professional associations, a number of them. 

 

Then you’ve got major corporations who too often we’ve 

haven’t hooked into the consultative process. Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool, Credit Union Central, SGI, Sask Power, SaskTel, 

IPSCO. The city of Regina had representatives there. The Royal 

Bank, some very thoughtful presentations from them. The Bank 

of Commerce, the Bank of Montreal, the Co-op Upgrader, the 

Co-operators, Toronto Dominion Bank, Saskoil, United Grain 

Growers, Cargill, Pioneer, students’ unions at both universities 

and technical institutes, faculty associations at both universities 

and technical institutes, staff unions, CUPE and SGEU, 

university women’s association, academic women, University 

of Regina, Association Canadienne Française de Régina, 

Association Culturelle Franco-Canadienne de la Saskatchewan, 

Multicultural Association of Saskatchewan, Regina 

Multicultural Council, Saskatchewan Council of Cultural 

Organizations; Saskatchewan Organization For Heritage 

Languages, Regina Symphony, the MacKenzie Art Gallery, 

Globe Theatre, SaskSport Incorporated, Saskatchewan Library 

Association, Saskatchewan Arts Board, the YMCA, the 

YWCA, Saskatchewan Museums Association - and I recall in 

their presentation the pitch they made about what a very large 

group of employers . . . what a very large  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1679 

 

group they represented in terms of the numbers of employees 

that they had across this province, Mr. Chairman - Mendel Art 

Gallery, Saskatoon Symphony. 

 

And as I said earlier a number of professional associations: the 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers, the 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association, Professional 

Association of Interns and Residents of Saskatchewan, 

Saskatchewan Nursing Assistants Association, the Society of 

Management Accountants of Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan 

Public Health Association, Society of Engineering Technicians 

and Technologists of Saskatchewan, Regina Personnel 

Association, Association of Consulting Engineers of 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association, the 

law society, Saskatchewan Medical Association, and some old 

friends of mine, the Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical 

Association. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, that only includes Regina. Okay? And I 

held 20 meetings, Mr. Chairman, 20; the invitation list for one. 

And the hon. member has the audacity to sit in this House and 

suggest that somehow we don’t consult. Somehow we don’t 

consult. The track record is we met with 550 . . . and sitting to 

my left, the member for Regina Wascana, my Legislative 

Secretary, and in some instances, the MLAs in the areas, the 

hon. member for Regina South and the Minister of Urban 

Affairs - a very good minister - were at these meetings, 20 of 

them across this province; 550 groups, associations, and 

individuals. And somehow you’re trying to suggest we haven’t 

consulted. 

 

(2000) 

 

Well, I’m telling you what, we consulted. We heard what the 

issues were; we published what the issues were, and we acted. 

Because, you know, if we hadn’t . . . if we had merely 

consulted, Mr. Chairman . . . Let’s take this a step further. We 

had the meetings. We heard what the issues were. Now we 

could have sat on the report for a long time and vacillated and 

delayed because it didn’t always say that what . . . or people 

didn’t always say that what we’ve been doing is totally right. In 

fact, they recommended some changes. 

 

Well we could have put in another white paper or a blue paper 

or a green paper, or said we were going to take it to cabinet and 

then put out a white paper or a green paper, or then take it back 

out to the public to see what their view is - this way or that way. 

We could have vacillated and delayed. But the bottom line is, 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, we acted. This was not a case of 

paralysis by analysis. 

 

We went out; we listened; we published what we heard so that 

everybody knew what our findings were. And then the next step 

within a month was to publish - not that we’ve got all the i’s 

dotted and t’s crossed - we published what we think can serve 

as the blueprint for the future. And more consultation will yet 

have to go on. 

 

I have talked to this House about gathering a group of 

professionals and volunteers, business and labour, to examine 

how we best wage war on illiteracy in this province. And I’ve 

talked in this House about how I want  

to consult and pull in all the professionals that have worked in 

STELLA (Saskatchewan Tele-Learning Association) or some 

of the SaskTel stuff, or even the Wheat Pool has done some 

stuff in this distance education and satellite technology. And I 

want to pull all the expertise in as it relates to distance 

education and have them give me some advice and let’s lay 

down a provincial policy. 

 

And that’s not going to be done in isolation either, Mr. 

Chairman. So, much consultation has gone on, much more will 

go on, and it’ll be for the benefit of this province, albeit that it 

means change, but not change merely for change’s sake. And 

we’re committed to moving forward, and move forward we 

shall, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the minister for 

his recitation. I just want to pint out that it’s one thing to 

involve yourself in a one way exchange in which you get all the 

information from a variety of groups flowing to you, but you, 

and only you, are the one to make decisions about what it 

means and what should be done. It’s something else entirely to 

enable people at the community level to elect from among 

themselves their own representatives who can not only seek out 

the information in the communities that they feel that they need 

to guide them, but are also in a position to act on that. 

 

And I don’t have any quarrel, Mr. Minister, with your 

department or you obtaining information from the people of 

Saskatchewan and their representative organizations about what 

should be done in terms of advanced education. I was trying to 

make the case, even if you choose to ignore it, that what you 

need to do and what you need to be sensitive to is the fact that 

we have a strong tradition in this province of allowing people at 

the community level to elect from among themselves their own 

representatives to provide direction and governance for their 

local institutions. You take the position that it’s adequate to 

simply consult and to ask for information from organizations so 

that you and your technocrats can digest that and provide what 

you think are all the appropriate answers for tomorrow. 

 

I would submit to you that you have not done enough, that 

you’re going back on a tradition in Saskatchewan in that you’re 

not making provisions for local people to become involved in a 

meaningful way, in a democratically elected way, which I 

would submit is something that will make adult education and 

advanced education all that much stronger in our future. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, again I ask you: do you have plans? Are 

there provisions? Will you at least examine the possibility of 

involving local people in a democratically elected way in 

becoming involved in administering adult education in this 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I said earlier, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, is much consultation has gone on, much more shall 

go on. It’s a recipe, quite frankly, that’s worked well for our 

government in the past and one that I’m sure will serve as well 

in the future. 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1680 

 

And just to give you an example - and I’ve read this into the 

record before but I will read it in again - about the kind of thing 

we were picking up across Saskatchewan. And this was from 

the Moose Jaw board, the community college board there, and 

they distilled the key theme for this new mandate. I mean 

everybody sensed that there needed to be a new mandate. They 

wrapped these key themes of a new mandate around what they 

called “the three R’s”, the three R’s being rationalization, 

redirection, and revitalization. 

 

And as I’ve said in this House time and time again we can argue 

about what the new mandate should look like, but until the NDP 

opposite are prepared to accept that there has to be a new 

mandate we will get nowhere. While you want to cling to the 

rhetoric of the past and the ideology of the past, and support the 

. . . almost the establishment process when often you have been 

characterized as a reform party, it’s totally inconsistent with the 

roots of your party. I say come with us, join us, and let’s move 

forward. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to first start 

by thanking the minister for responding in writing to a number 

of the questions that I sent over to him and his officials the 

other day. I also want to thank him for the invitation that he 

extended to our caucus to have a position at the post secondary 

education forum coming up in October. We appreciate that very 

much. 

 

I want to begin by asking a number of questions with respect to 

the provincial school for the deaf in Saskatoon, the R.J.D. 

Williams school for the deaf, which is in my constituency. The 

parents and students at the school for the deaf are very 

concerned about the fact that your government has put the 

future of that school in question. The home and school 

association had an opportunity to meet with one of your senior 

officials, Mr. Peter Dyck, in the late spring of this year, and at 

that point Mr. Dyck made it very clear to parents and to staff at 

the school that the provincial government would not guarantee 

the future of the school beyond June of 1988. 

 

Your official, Mr. Peter Dyck, at that time indicated that your 

government was considering a number of options, including 

handing the provincial school for the deaf over to a Saskatoon 

school board and having the dormitories at the school run by 

social services. That was one option that was indicated. 

 

A second option that Mr. Dick indicated was that your 

government was considering establishing a board of directors to 

control the governing of the school and that that board would 

continue to receive grants and funding from your department. 

At the meeting on May 15, Mr. Dyck was very evasive about 

the consequences of each of these options in terms of the future 

for the children and their education. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, as you know this school has been 

established now and operating for some 55 years, and we on 

this side of the House believe that on the whole it’s been 

operating over that period of time very effectively. And I want 

to emphasize to you the importance of this school for the 

families involved. As you know, many families travel from 

around the province and often relocate in Saskatoon just so that 

they can send their  

children to the provincial school for the deaf. 

 

In addition to that, for 36 children the school is their home. 

They live there in residence, Mr. Minister, and have probably 

more at stake in their school than most children do living 

around the province because it’s their home as well as their 

place of learning. 

 

Many students at the school face additional handicaps in 

addition to being deaf. Some are blind and are enrolled in a 

special deaf/blind program. 

 

It’s obvious that students and their families have a very large 

part of their lives wrapped up in the school, and for your 

government to put the future of the school in question without 

consulting with students and with families and with staff is, in 

our view, very insensitive, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now the parents whose children are attending the school for the 

deaf have been telling me that they are not in favour of the 

school being transferred to the public school board, especially 

given the uncertainty about future funding. They’re nervous 

about a situation in which the school for the deaf would have to 

compete for scarce dollars in the kindergarten to grade 12 

system that is already suffering from provincial underfunding. 

And they’re also nervous because the recommendation from the 

Department of Education that the school be transferred to the 

public school board has come forward without any consultation 

whatsoever with the parents, with the students, with the staff. 

 

I’m also concerned about the uncertainty that your provincial 

government is creating for the 73 staff who work at the school 

and who have a long record of excellent service to the children 

who attend the school and to the people of this province. 

 

Now my question to you is very simply this. I say to you first, 

the uncertainty created by your government for the future of the 

children and the parents at the provincial school for the deaf has 

got to stop. And I ask you: will you make a commitment to 

these families and to the members of this Assembly that you 

will not make any changes in the status of the provincial school 

for the deaf without full involvement and consultation with the 

families, specifically the parents, the students, and the staff 

involved? Will you give us your assurance of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well a number of comments I want to 

make on this point relative to the R.J.D. Williams school for the 

deaf, and I know it’s a topic that you have a great deal of 

interest in, given its location relative to the city you represent. 

 

And the first point I would want to make is that our 

commitment to programming for handicapped children such as 

are served there, our commitment there is clear and unwavering. 

I want to be very clear on that. In fact, I would go so far as to 

say we want to make sure that we’ve got the programming and 

the service available in the future in the best possible format 

and in the format that will serve them best in the future. Not 

even a question of just maintaining the status quo and resting on 

our laurels, so to speak. 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1681 

 

There is some debate, I think, though, that one would have to 

admit to in terms of the approach one uses, especially given in 

this area the new technology that has come along in the last 20 

years and relative to the whole question of integration versus 

segregation. And not that I would want to say I’ve come down 

on one side or the other on this, because I have not. In fact, I 

could go so far as to say to you have not seen any reports or 

anything on this subject. 

 

(2015) 

 

But it’s also a historical fact and a demographic fact, if you like, 

that the rubella outbreak which was the basis for many of the 

initial bolus of children, if you like, that were affected with this 

malady, that that was the cause and that that has largely moved 

through the system, the rubella outbreaks of the ‘60s. 

 

I know there has been some discussion. And I guess the request 

I would make of you, given that I state before you and before 

all members of this legislature and before all of the publics, 

including those who might have children there, that our 

commitment is clear and unequivocal to see that programming 

does continue. But little use is served if there is going to be 

some fear mongering incited. And I guess that’s what I would 

ask of you, is that we not engage in scare tactics, and that if you 

are ever asked - and I ask this in all sincerity, because it’s not 

fair to these people to frighten them. 

 

I know there was a press release put out talking about - and I 

think you referred to it now - a recommendation to transfer. 

Well I want to tell you that I have seen no report. I know that 

there has been some discussions go on, I don’t deny that. But it 

is for the better. It’s not to try and chip away or reduce the 

programming or the needs of those people. It has nothing to do 

with it. It’s to make sure we’ve got the right program for the 

next 20 years. 

 

And I know when that press release went out, my mail was 

deluged with anxious parents. And it’s not fair to them, and I 

know the hon. member does not subscribe to that kind of 

tactics. And that’s why when you’re asked, or any of your 

colleagues are asked, I would ask that you in your answer, 

however you wish to frame it, say, I raised this question in the 

House with the minister and he was clear and unequivocal in his 

commitment to programming the deaf children. And I would 

ask that you would do that because little is . . . well, no one is 

well served if we get overstated cases, and inflamed rhetoric, 

and putting reports out of context. And I think you know that. 

 

I know you as an honourable person, and I would ask for your 

assistance in terms of as we look at that school and its role for 

the next 20 years and how best we can provide for these 

children. Because you have to admit, you have to admit that we 

all recognize what a sensitive area this is. And even to address 

it, as you’ve right pointed out, I mean, can create uncertainty. 

 

But to not address it would also be to be probably a little bit 

irresponsible here for some of the historical background I laid 

out. So I ask you to ensure those who  

might contact you relative to this school, that we’re clear in our 

commitment to programming. 

 

Yes, there are discussions going on, and yes, will there be full 

involvement and consultation with those involved. And I can 

say yes there as well, because that’s the only way I think one 

can undertake even looking at this and asking questions relative 

to how can we do it better, if everyone is involved fully. 

Otherwise we get scare mongering and that kind of thing, and o 

one is well served. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I welcome the minister’s 

commitment to consultation. It’ll represent a significant change 

in the way the decision-making process is being conducted. 

Because I would point out to the minister that it is his official, 

Mr. Dyck, who created the uncertainty for parents and students 

at the school, and certainly not members on this side of the 

House. We were only approached by concerned parents after 

the uncertainty had been created by your department. 

 

But I want to make a specific proposal to the minister and ask 

for an indication of his commitment to it. And that is that we on 

this side of the House share your concern about future 

programming and improving it. And to take you at your word, I 

want to suggest to you that time has come to open up the 

decision-making process with respect to the future of the 

provincial school for the deaf and the role of the provincial 

government in operating that school. It’s time to involve 

parents, students, and staff in that decision-making process right 

from scratch. 

 

And I suggest to you that a task force should be set up by you to 

examine how educational services for deaf students at the 

school can be further strengthened. And it’s my suggestion to 

you, sir, that the task force should be made up of representatives 

from the home and school association at the provincial school 

for the deaf, representatives of senior students attending the 

school, representatives of staff at the school, and representatives 

of the larger deaf community in the province. 

 

And your government should ensure that the R.J.D. Williams 

school for the deaf is fully funded while the task force does its 

work. Would you be open to that kind of an initiative, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, yes, I would, and in fact I would 

congratulate the hon. member. I’ve said all along in this House 

that if there were constructive proposals came along, that I 

would give them serious consideration. And what you have 

suggested in so far as a task force here seems to fall exactly into 

that category as a constructive proposal in terms of dealing with 

the future of this school and its programming. So I will give that 

serious consideration. And obviously I’m not going to make a 

decision tonight on it, but in the days and weeks to come, I 

certainly will. 

 

Just for the record, I’m also informed that, you know, in terms 

of consultation and trying to keep everybody informed, the 

officials have held a number of information meetings - April 15, 

May 14, and May 15 - with the school for the deaf staff, the 

adult deaf community, and the school for the deaf home and 

school respectively on  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1682 

 

those different dates. So despite your attack on one of my 

officials, which I really consider unfortunate, there has been 

consultation, and we continue to do that, and I’ll take your 

option under consideration. 

 

And I want to be clear again, we certainly have absolutely no 

intention of terminating educational services for deaf 

youngsters, and I want to underline that. 

 

It’s worth knowing as well, of course, that for example, Regina 

public, Saskatoon public, and Moose Jaw have instituted 

programs for hard-of-hearing youngsters. So we have some . . . 

We’re not consistent in the way we handle it right now in the 

system, and perhaps that’s one of the reasons why it’s being 

looked at. 

 

And as you will know, there is some who are of the view that 

service should be provided as close to home as possible. And I 

think it addresses that issue I talked about earlier of those who 

will favour integration versus those who favour segregation. 

And I think that’s probably why you’re prepared to look at the 

issue, at least through a task force. 

 

I don’t know as we’re on a terribly different wavelength here, 

but I ask once again, and I say to you once again, I think the 

important thing is we ought not create an atmosphere of fear 

and uncertainty as we examine this, and I ask for your help and 

your consideration and your doing what you can on that part. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, we welcome your 

willingness to look at the idea of the task force that’s been 

suggested. 

 

In wrapping this up, I want to simply ask you one more 

question, and that is that I have some concern, as do other 

members on this side of the House, that your government is not 

properly advertising the services provided by the provincial 

school for the deaf. 

 

Many people have indicated to me that the families of deaf 

children are not always being advised of the existence of the 

provincial school, and that in many cases your government is 

not even sharing with the provincial school for the deaf, 

information about the number of hearing impaired children in 

Saskatchewan and their place of residence. 

 

It’s my view that enrolment at the school could be significantly 

increased if the services of the school were properly advertised. 

And I ask you: would you give the Legislative Assembly your 

undertaking that you would ensure that advertising for the 

provincial school for the deaf is significantly increased in the 

coming year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the point that you raise, I have 

some sympathy with it even as it relates to what’s available in 

terms of educational services for the deaf. But in the larger 

sense, and it’s something that I’ve been giving some 

consideration to, not even to the point where I’ve raised it with 

my officials, but I’m concerned that generally in Saskatchewan 

we don’t do as good a job as we could of making the public 

aware of what we do offer in the way of educational 

programming and educational institutions. And I’m not even 

just talking about what’s  

available through regional colleges, for example, or in this case, 

the school for the deaf, or technical institutes, and now the new 

institute, or universities - not any one, but all of them. 

 

As I sit back . . . and I made reference to this at some of my 

meetings with, oh for example, the university, the president, and 

some of his officials when we met relative to the Issues and 

Options paper that they’re into. I felt that, you know, we have 

such fine educational institutions that we almost keep them a 

secret. And I don’t think it matters which one you’re looking at. 

 

Now of course the horns of the dilemma that we find ourselves 

on as politicians, I think as you can appreciate, is the minute 

that I was to start an informational campaign out there to let 

people know about educational services available for the deaf at 

the school in Saskatoon, not you maybe, but some of your 

colleagues might accuse us of government propaganda. And so 

I think you see the difficulty we have in addressing that. 

 

And I guess I would look to your support if it happens to pass 

down the road, or if it comes to pass down the road, that if we 

get into an informational campaign that I would have your 

support, because I mean, I’m doing this in a very non-partisan 

sense. I mean, I’m doing what’s right for the people. And I 

really think they’re not being as well served as they could. We 

need to let them know about what’s available and the high 

quality that’s available out there. 

 

And I was particularly reminded of it as I watched the . . . Last 

December and through the New Year, through the holiday 

season, as you watched American television and the college ball 

was on and you’d see the college ads on there about, you know, 

we’re the best in high tech; we’re the best in this; we’re the best 

in that; send your kids here. And I thought, you know, what a 

tragedy that we’re not that proactive here. 

 

I mean, you look at the University of Saskatchewan, the seat 

that you represent. I mean, an extremely fine institution. and I 

almost think we ought to let the world know more about that. 

We’d all be better served by it. 

 

So I have some sympathy for what you’re saying, but similarly, 

I would hope that you don’t gang up on us and call it a bunch of 

propaganda, if one was to undertake that initiative. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to change the focus of 

the discussion to student loans and bursaries. And I want to say 

to the minister that one of my greatest regrets for students with 

the budget that he brought down was what I consider to be 

dramatic set-backs to the student bursary provisions that have 

long been part of the history of education in this province, and 

that have for so many years helped young people gain access to 

post-secondary education in Saskatchewan. You, sir, have 

unfortunately destroyed the student bursary program in 

Saskatchewan, and we on this side of the House believe that’s 

very unfortunate. 

 

In 1981, I would remind the minister, students in Saskatchewan 

were eligible for a bursary on an  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1683 

 

eight-month course of study if they were eligible to borrow 

$1,100 in the form of a student loan. 

 

In 1983-84 your government increased the amount that needed 

to be borrowed before a student was eligible for a bursary, to 

$2,230 for an eight-month course of study. Then in 1986-87 

you again increased that amount to $2,640. And in this year’s 

budget, sir, the amount is $5,940. That’s the amount of money 

that a student in Saskatchewan has to borrow for an 

eight-month course of study at the University of Saskatchewan, 

the University of Regina, or Saskatchewan’s technical institutes 

before they are eligible for any bursary assistance. And in fact, 

it is no longer bursary assistance. You have abolished the 

student bursary program. You’ve chosen to replace it with a 

forgivable loan program, and in taking the action that I’ve 

suggested, you have cut thousands of Saskatchewan students off 

from being eligible for bursaries in this province. 

 

I ask you: in light of all the talk in the last election about 

enhancing accessibility to post-secondary education in this 

province, and in light of all the talk about that from your side of 

the House in these estimates, how can you possibly justify the 

situation in which the students of Saskatchewan have to borrow 

$5,940 in student loans from your government and the federal 

government before they’re eligible for a penny of bursary if 

they’re pursuing an eight-month course of study? 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As relates to student aid, and this is a 

question worthy of some discussion because there’s no question 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Ought I wait or would the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale like to say something from 

his feet? Is he going to get up, Mr. Deputy Chairman . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Are you going to answer my questions, sir? 

Would you do that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, the issue, as much as some 

would like to make light of it, is a serious one. In fact, at the 

Canadian ministers’ most recent meeting that I attended, as you 

have rightly pointed out . . . The college graduate today too 

often is faced with 10, 20, 25, and perhaps even higher . . . 

25,000, perhaps even higher, in terms of loans that they’ve 

accumulated over the course of their career or of their studies. 

And my view, as I’ve said in the past on this, is that the system 

hasn’t been all that creative when it came to dealing with the 

question of student aid. 

 

Certainly we’ve made some very positive changes here in 

recent years, but the reality is that what we do still focuses 

around the student loan bursary, or what I call the student loan 

bursary mentality. And I think we need to be somewhat more 

creative. And to that end, all Canadian ministers have put 

together a committee to look into this issue for us, and perhaps 

they make some recommendations. 

 

Now when I was across the province this winter, I did hear of 

some interesting twists and turns, if you like, or some other 

options that we could pursue, some of which,  

I think, are worthy of investigation, and I’m hopeful that the 

committee that’s looking into that for the Canadian ministers 

will have something to say on those options. I expect that we 

may see some report back to the ministers yet this fall. 

 

Yes, we have made some changes relative to the programming, 

though to talk about what we’re dealing with today as opposed 

to what we might be dealing with in the future. And one of 

those examples that we don’t deny is that, yes, we’ve turned the 

bursary concept into, at least in some areas, into one of 

forgivable loans. And I don’t think any reasonable person or 

student, in fact, argues with that, once they understand the 

logic. And I don’t think it’s an unfair expectation that if you 

take your course and you pass, then it becomes a forgivable 

loan. I don’t think that’s unreasonable. Take the course, attend 

the studies, attend the classes, pass the class, and it becomes 

forgivable. That seems quite reasonable. 

 

And as well, it’s worth nothing that during our administration - 

it is this government, because we do believe assistance is 

important, because it broadens the accessibility to the system - 

we have put in place 6 per cent student loans. Single parents 

were eligible for special assistance, and I think that’s been 

particularly useful for women. And I know you and some in 

your party have criticized us for what we’ve done in adult 

education as it relates to the women in society. And I think this 

too is another one of those initiatives that speaks well for the 

special place that they enjoy in society in terms of the 

difficulties, if you like, that they face. 

 

We made some changes relative to parental assets, as you’ll 

recall. And I think that was a good change. We had some 

farmers out there, for example, who might have been . . . had a 

net worth of a million dollars, but the cash flow was virtually 

zero. And they were being penalized, or their children were 

being penalized, because of what they were worth on paper, and 

yet the money was not in the bank. 

 

Well to sum all of what we have done for students and student 

aid out there, I would give you some facts, and they are these. If 

you look at what we’ve done over the last five years, provincial 

assistance will now be eight times what it was five years ago. 

Three times as many students will get aid as did five years ago, 

and the average student receiving assistance will get more than 

twice as much as they did five years ago. 

 

To sum it up, I think then one can say is that, yes, we’ve made 

some strides forward, but yes, there are some issues there, and 

one of them being the high debt load that many are faced with. 

But certainly if you look at the numbers over the last three or 

four years when it comes to student aid, they’ve gone up 

dramatically. And I don’t have any difficulty with that because 

it’s a sign of the fact that our young people are getting into 

colleges and institutions and we ought not be ashamed of that. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I notice that you skirted 

around the question that I asked. The question, I would remind 

you, was simply: how can you explain to members of this 

Assembly that last year under your government, students had to 

borrow $2,640 for an  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1684 

 

eight-month course of study before they were eligible for a 

bursary, and this year under your government, despite all the 

claims you make about enhanced assistance for students, a 

student has to borrow $5,940 in loans for an eight-month course 

of study prior to receiving a bursary? I note you didn’t answer 

that question. I’m not surprised you didn’t answer it because I 

think you simply cannot justify that kind of an attack on the 

young people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Minister, we think that the 

forgivable loan concept is fraught with problems. And we call 

on you, on this side of the Assembly, we call on you, first of all, 

to change the student loan and student bursary provision back to 

last year’s provision at the very least, so that instead of having 

to borrow $5,940 for an eight-month course of study, students 

only have to borrow $2,600. 

 

And second, sir, we ask you to drop your notion of the 

forgivable loan program, and instead, reinstate the student 

bursary program as it’s long existed in this province. You are 

placing an additional obstacle in front of many young people 

who want to pursue a course of studies in this province by 

saying to them that, yes, they can go ahead and borrow money 

and if they manage to be eligible for a forgivable loan - and 

very few will be if they have to borrow $6,000 before they can 

get any of it forgiven - but if they do qualify for it, then you’re 

saying to them, listen, you have to pass at least 60 per cent of 

your classes before you’re eligible for any of that loan to be 

forgiven. 

 

And we on this side of the House say that the universities and 

the technical institutes of this province can do a perfectly good 

job of deciding who should return following a year of study and 

who should not - who passes and who does not. You don’t have 

to get into that business, sir, in our judgement. 

 

We think that particularly for young people who’ve been out of 

school for many years and who then decide to, say, pursue adult 

upgrading, or go back and take a technical school course, and 

have not studied for a long period of time, you’re creating an 

additional barrier - as well as the tuition increases that you’ve 

imposed, as well as the cuts to summer job programs that your 

government has brought forward, as well as cutting back on 

spaces that are available to young people at our technical 

institutes and our universities, you’ve now imposed an 

additional obstacle to young people going back to school, and 

that is that they can’t be sure when they begin their course of 

studies at the beginning of the year, whether or not they will be 

eligible for a forgivable loan because they may be uncertain 

about their ability to pass their courses. And there is no need to 

put that additional obstacle in the fact of so many young people, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I would want to say again that this 

whole question of student aid and student assistance is one that 

I take very seriously and our government takes very seriously, 

and I suppose, did we not, such numbers wouldn’t be read into 

this record in so far as our commitment here. 

Let’s look at what’s happened over the last five years. We’ve 

gone from a situation where we had, in terms of provincial 

assistance, 4.25 million to now where we’re at 34 million - 

that’s ‘86-87. Total assistance - let’s see, if you look at federal 

plus provincial - has gone from 12.8 million to 76 million. 

That’s in five years. And the numbers that I find particularly 

heartening - not in so far as I’m happy that this many people 

have to get assistance, but what it means in terms of how many 

people, because they get assistance, can in fact go to university 

or technical institutes, or whatever course - if we look at that 

same five-year period, we’ve seen the number of recipients 

triple. They’ve gone from 5,400 under the NDP years to now 

17,000. 

 

So if you’re asking me, do I want to go back to where we were 

when we had no special programs for single mothers, etc., etc., 

no, I do not. I don’t want to go back to a situation where we 

only had $12 million in the budget as opposed to $76 million. I 

don’t want to go back to the situation where we were only 

helping 5,400, whereas today we’re helping 17,000. 

 

But that doesn’t mean to say that what we have is a perfect 

system either, because we do not. I suppose if we did, we 

wouldn’t have asked this committee to take a look at it for us. 

 

And as it relates to the forgivable loans specifically, I’m not 

going to retreat on that point either. I think any fair-minded 

person when they examine this - and I can honesty say that a 

number of students have been talked to about this - any 

fair-minded person when they examine it, does not think it is 

unreasonable. 

 

You mean to say if I go to school and I attend my classes and 

complete my studies and pass the course, that it’s a forgivable 

. . . I get my money back, so to speak. And the answer is yes. I 

don’t think that’s unreasonable. Now obviously if there is 

special circumstances or illness or whatever, I’m sure there is 

provision for that. So I don’t think the forgivable loan concept 

is unreasonable at all - not at all. And until I see something to 

change my mind, the decision stands. 

 

But I reiterate again that Saskatchewan, compared to the rest of 

the provinces in Canada, can hold its head very high in terms of 

what it’s done for students - can hold its head very high. I mean, 

we’ve got the 6 per cent money, special programs for single 

mothers and others who need a leg up, if you like, in terms of 

gaining accessibility to the system, and all of this come in since 

our Premier because . . . spearheaded very much of these 

initiatives. We’re not going to go back on this stuff and, in fact, 

I would think we probably can set somewhat of a model for the 

rest of the country, but not that though there aren’t some issues 

that need to be looked at here. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’d simply say to the 

minister he’s head our views on this. It’s our position that the 

student bursary program ought to be reinstated and it’s our 

position that your cut to the forgivable loan program that 

you’ve now instituted by requiring students to borrow almost 

$6,000 before they’re eligible for a penny of it to be forgiven, 

for an eight-month course of  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1685 

 

study, that you ought to drop that policy; that that’s policy 

that’s standing in the way of many young people taking 

post-secondary education; and that what you ought to do instead 

is institute a policy in which students only have to borrow 

$2,000 in loan before they’re eligible for a bursary. I remind 

you again that in 1981 when the New Democratic Party was in 

government, students only had to borrow $1,100 in loan before 

they were eligible for a bursary and you have now taken this 

province a long way from that very, very reputable 

accomplishment in 1981. 

 

I want to ask you a couple of specific questions with respect to 

the forgivable loan program that you’ve instituted. And they 

touch on something that you briefly mentioned with respect to 

special circumstances - instances in which students are sick, 

instances in which there is a death in the family just prior to 

exams, those kinds of situations. 

 

(2045) 

 

I want to ask you why there are no formal guide-lines or why 

there is no set appeal mechanism for the very many exceptional 

instances which are going to arise in which students cannot pass 

their classes because they are sick, because there’s a death in 

the family, or because of a host of other possible unforeseen 

circumstances. What kind of an appeal mechanism are you 

planning to set up? And why is no mention of this appeal 

mechanism set out in the 1987-88 student loan application? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, two points that I would make 

here relative to somebody who . . . I think I used the example 

myself of chronic sickness or something like that, where the 

student just hadn’t been able to attend although he might have 

enrolled - the very next day he ended up hospitalized for the 

rest of the semester or something like that. 

 

It might be useful to set the stage for what we view as 

successful completion, and that means that a student passes 60 

per cent of a full course load. And, of course, each educational 

institution rules on its own students. For example, at the 

University of Regina, four classes each semester is considered 

full time so students must pass three classes each semester; at 

the University of Saskatchewan, five classes, five full classes 

per academic year is full time and a student must pass three full 

classes each year. 

 

As it relates to the special circumstances, I . . . What I would 

recommend to you . . . And in fact the process that’s in place is 

twofold: number one is that if this point was made known to the 

department, I think we have the flexibility internally to deal 

with it. But such that the individual thought, or it was 

perceived, or in fact we really did not deal with the issue in 

their eyes fairly, the scholarship, bursary, and loan committee 

that’s already established as an appeal - if you like in quotation 

marks - committee who deal with sundry issues as it relates to 

student loan applications could deal with these matters as well. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, could I first point out to you that 

you ought to be making it known to students, if you’re  

going to use this appeal mechanism that you talk about, that that 

appeal mechanism is available - something that you’ve not 

done. I’d suggest that you write to every student who’s got a 

student loan and make it known to them, particularly if they’re 

eligible for a forgivable loan, what the appeal mechanism is in 

the event that they do get sick, or in the event that there is a 

death in the family just prior to exams, or a host of other 

situations that can occur. 

 

And I further . . . I further ask you, while you’re doing that, if 

you wouldn’t also inform students by letter that they must 

submit a copy of their transcripts indicating that they’ve passed 

their courses to the department before they’re eligible for the 

forgivable loan - something that you also fail to do, elaborate on 

in any detail, in the student guide. There was just very, very 

brief mention of it - one sentence only. So would you take that 

under advisement? 

 

I want to ask you another question and that is with respect to an 

initiative in the area of student loans that I would ask you to 

consider. We on this side of the House believe that the time has 

come to institute a policy of repayment upon employment with 

respect to student loans. In other words, set up repayment upon 

employment schedule for student loans instead of the current 

system where repayments starts six months after studies are 

done, even if the student is without work. Students are not in a 

position to pay off their student loans until they secure a job. 

And with youth unemployment in Saskatchewan sitting at 

fourteen and a half per cent, many Saskatchewan students who 

are actively seeking work have to wait a lot longer than six 

months before they secure a job. 

 

That creates a lot of financial difficulty for them in repaying 

their student loans, and it’s our view, therefore, that you ought 

to establish a policy whereby student loans will be paid once the 

student secures a job - providing they’re actively looking for 

work throughout the period immediately after graduation - and 

not until they find a job will they be obligated to repay their 

student loans. Would you be prepared to implement that kind of 

a policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think I have some good news for the 

hon. member relative to the issue he raises. 

 

With this budget we’ve put in a program, an interest relief 

program for students unable to find work on graduation, 

whereby payments on both Canada student loans and 

Saskatchewan student loans may be suspended for up to 18 

months. And I think that covers the very point that you were 

making about some who might have some hardship, given that 

they do not find employment immediately upon graduation. 

 

So it may not exactly have the right spin on it. I guess there is 

different ways a guy could come at that problem. But this is 

what we chose and I think it seems reasonable enough. And I 

suppose if we find that it’s not working acceptably, we can look 

at making changes, but I’d like to give it a chance. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — I’d like to ask you another question, Mr. 

Minister, with respect to student loans, Mr. Chairman, I’d  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1686 

 

like to ask if the minister has taken steps to pressure the federal 

government to reduce the age of independence under the 

Canada student loan program to 19 years of age. And if so, if he 

has, I’d like the minister to table the correspondence in which 

he’s taken that initiative. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that in every other aspect of life 

for young people, the age of independence is recognized to be 

either 18 or 19 years of age. But when it comes to the Canada 

student loan program, the federal government and the provinces 

in effect discriminate against students by setting the age of 

independence at 21. I think the time has come to change that, 

and I would ask the minister if he has taken any steps to 

pressure the federal government to reduce the age of 

independence under the Canada student loan program to 19 

years of age. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, as much 

as the observations that you make and the point that you make 

about the age of independence - that’s not quite the right word, 

but 19 versus 21 if you like - although on the surface it may 

look like it has some merit, I think it flies in the face a little bit 

of all that is Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan heritage, in 

that my sense is that parents are keenly interested in their 

children’s education, not only up to the age of 19, but beyond 

the age of 19, and want to contribute tot heir children’s 

education. They’re keenly interested. I don’t know as one 

would want to uncouple it, as you suggest. 

 

Traditionally parents have been involved, as I said. It’s been the 

Saskatchewan heritage. I mean, they’re very proud to have their 

children receive some education. In the many instances it’s been 

very traditional for them to help out as best they can. And I 

don’t know why we would want to tamper with that 

particularly, albeit that as I say, on the surface some of your 

arguments seem to have some validity, I think, as one examines 

them. What we would be talking about here would be a 

disintegration almost of a Saskatchewan tradition. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, we on this side of the 

House are very, very interested in supporting Saskatchewan 

families and in maintaining the strong family tradition of this 

province. But for you to suggest that making financial 

assistance available to a student by recognizing him or her as an 

independent under the Canada student loan program at 19 years 

of age somehow flies in the face of that family tradition as 

something that we have a great deal of difficulty understanding. 

It’s our view that the age of independence under the Canada 

student loan program ought to be 19 years of age and that you, 

as Minister of Education, ought to do the best you can to 

pressure the federal government to reducing the age of 

independence. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you another question with respect 

to the Canada student loan program and your bursary program. 

Because not only have you taken the step of forcing students to 

borrow a lot more money before they’re eligible for a bursary, 

forcing them for a eight-month course of study to borrow 

$5,940, when last year, they only had to borrow $2,640 before 

they were eligible for a bursary, by, in effect, forcing them to 

borrow twice as much before they were eligible for any form of  

bursary. 

 

In addition to that, you have also failed to take account of the 

needs of students who are parents, who have children, who 

inevitably have child care expenses as a result of needing to 

study and therefore needing to have their children cared for 

during their period of study. And I would point out to you, Mr. 

Minister, that for some time now, the amount of assistance that 

is available under your forgivable loan program and under the 

Canada student loan program for students who are also parents 

and have young children under 12 years of age is that they are 

only eligible for a maximum assistance of $275 for child care 

over and above any subsidy they may be eligible for through the 

provincial day-care program. If they’re not eligible for that 

subsidy, the maximum assistance that they can claim a month 

by way of student loan and your forgivable loan program is 

$275, regardless of how many children they have. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, someone with three children or four 

children won’t go very far in terms of covering child care costs 

with assistance of $275. Can you give this Assembly your 

commitment that in next year’s budget the provision for $275 

will be changed, and that you will bring forward a provision 

that recognizes the number of children that a student has in their 

family, and that therefore increase assistance depending on the 

number of children in the family. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well let’s examine a little bit where 

your logic would take us, and I don’t think you would subscribe 

to it if you examined it to its fullest extent. You talked about the 

independence factor, and I talked about the Saskatchewan 

tradition. Well if we were to subscribe to your logic, we would 

end up with a situation where perhaps . . . which you often 

referred to as those awful capitalists. You know, those doctors 

and such who make $100,000-plus a year who, I think, probably 

do want to (a) and (b) have some obligation to support their 

children in terms of their education, would not be obligated and 

would get off scot-free, if you like. 

 

The basis for student aid has been this throughout time: (a) it’s 

meant to supplement the parents’ contribution and the student’s 

contribution, if you like, so that there can be accessibility to the 

system. But there also has been in terms of . . . given that we 

can’t be a tooth fairy for everybody obviously, that we provide 

the need where the need is greatest. And I could talk about 6 per 

cent loans, and I could talk about our single parent special 

programs, those kinds of things, and I don’t think one would 

argue with. But why we would let some who you might 

consider the obscene wealthy off the hook, I can’t understand 

that. Maybe I’m missing some point. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Prebble: — To answer my question, with respect to the 

inadequacy of the allowance for child care provisions under the 

student loan program and under your forgivable loan program, a 

student right now is only eligible, as I point out to you, for 

assistance of $275 a month for child care expenses regardless of 

how many children they have. And you have simply failed to 

deal with that issue, sir. 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1687 

 

I’d like to ask you two or three other specific questions before 

leaving this topic of student loans and bursaries. One, Mr. 

Minister, is that I’d like to ask you why it is that the 

Saskatchewan student loan program is only available to 

students for a five-year period. As you know, many university 

programs require six, seven, eight years of study. Obviously 

graduate work will involve a student in at least six years of 

university. Courses such as medicine will go well beyond that 

in terms of their course of study, and yet the Saskatchewan 

student loan program is only available for five years. Mr. 

Minister, would you take a recommendation from this side of 

the House that the number of years that the program is available 

to young people ought to be extended? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I mean, your point that you make 

about the fact that some programs do last longer and longer is 

one that’s going to receive, and will have to receive, more 

attention as time goes on, especially given the lifelong learning 

concept, etc., etc. 

 

The two points I would make here is that I’m not so sure that 

the student loan, bursary kind of mentality is the right one for 

some of the scenarios you paint. And I’ve had some options put 

forward to me, and I suspect this committee we’ve got to work 

on it will address some of those. And it’s tax credits and things 

like that for both employees and employers. There are a number 

of different twists that we can put to this. 

 

In so far as why a Canada student loan is that way, obviously 

it’s universally that way. I think the thinking behind it would be 

this: that, you know, if we can’t provide assistance for nine and 

19 years . . . I mean, if nothing else let’s make sure that we 

provide assistance to that basic core, if you like, four or five 

years of university schooling. And much as it might be 

desirable to provide more, let’s make sure that we give as many 

people as possible, or as need it, that assistance in that basic 

four or five years that is not uncommon in undergraduate 

programming. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I’d simply point out to you that 

it’s my sincere view that government has an obligation to 

continue to assist students who pursue graduate work or who 

pursue courses of study that are longer than five years, and 

there are many examples of such courses. And I would point 

out that it make no sense, Mr. Minister, to provide a student 

with loan and bursary assistance for a five-year period, and just 

as they get to a point where they are about $25,000 in debt after 

five years of study - particularly now that you’ve virtually 

eliminated the bursary program in this province - it makes no 

sense to leave them without assistance in the final years of their 

study and force them to go to a bank or credit union to arrange a 

private loan. 

 

I want to ask you another question, and this is with respect to 

portability of student loan and bursary assistance. And this is 

specifically with respect to your new forgivable loan program. 

Because one of the things that has significantly changed with 

your new forgivable loan program is that the portability 

provisions for students have been very, very substantially 

reduced. It used to be that a Saskatchewan student graduating 

from grade 12 in  

this province was eligible for a bursary if they wished to study 

abroad or to study in another part of Canada. And when your 

government was first elected, you cut in half the amount of 

bursary that a Saskatchewan student studying out of province 

was eligible for. Now you’ve eliminated forgivable loan 

assistance to students studying out of province entirely, unless 

that student is taking a program of study not available in 

Saskatchewan or unless the program they wish to enrol in in 

another province is over-subscribed here. 

 

Now we have always taken the view on this side of the House, 

Mr. Minister, that Saskatchewan students who have grown up 

here and graduate from high school here ought to be encouraged 

to study abroad and to experience the variety of cultures this 

country has to offer, if they so wish. And my question to you, 

therefore, is this: will you restore the portability to your 

forgivable loan program and make it available to all 

Saskatchewan students who graduate from grade 12 here and 

who choose to study out of province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I don’t think it’s . . . I mean, I 

think there’s the two issues here. The one of the choice that a 

student should have, and that’s clearly uninhibited. And 

secondly, in so far as that the public purse is going to make 

some contribution here, I don’t now as it’s unreasonable for the 

public purse to expect that, well, if you could take that course 

here, that’s one thing, but to go out of province or out of 

country and take a course that might be available here and have 

that additional cost and expect the public purse to pick it up, 

that might be an unreasonable expectation. 

 

I think the way it is is that if that course isn’t available here and 

you have to go out of province or out of country to take it, then 

that’s not the student’s fault, and so the public purse is prepared 

to pick up some responsibility there. 

 

However . . . I mean, to look at it from the other end of the pipe, 

if you like, to just suggest to the taxpayers that even though that 

student could have taken that course here, he chose to go 

elsewhere and that you should pick up the bill, I don’t know as 

that’s fair to them. I think in this case, we have the best of both 

worlds. It’s fair to the students and it’s fair to the taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, clearly we disagree again. 

 

But I want to ask you one final question in wrapping up this 

section on student loans and bursaries. And that is, Mr. 

Minister, whether you can explain why it is that for both the 

Canada student loan program and for your Saskatchewan 

student loan program there is no provision for inflation for any 

of the allowable educational expenses. The allowance for board 

and lodging, for local transportation, for return transportation 

from home, and for a host of other expenses are not a penny 

higher than they were last year. What representation have you 

made to the federal government in this regard, and will you 

table it in this Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the question that you ask is that 

as the student’s cost changes are any reflection in the loans. For 

some things there are, yes. It’s indexed to  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1688 

 

actuals when it comes to things like tuition and books. And in 

the other instances, as you well know, given that we basically 

piggyback on the federal program, then whatever they establish 

as the criterion of the day is what we go with. 

 

As it comes to tuition and books, which I think most . . . and 

certainly books, as you well know, is a big cost for students. 

And I think those . . . I suppose that’s why it’s indexed to actual 

because those are pretty key ones, those two. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, once again you fail to answer 

my question which was whether you had made any 

representation to the federal government to have those 

allowable educational expenditures increased. It seems clear 

that you did not. We on this side of the House urge you to do 

so. 

 

I want to switch to . . . Did you want to make a comment, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I just want to make one point there. I 

don’t want to leave you with an erroneous impression. 

 

When I was at the ministers’ meeting and we have struck this 

committee, much of this can come under their mandate, if you 

like. I only raise this because of this. Because the thing that I 

clearly raised at the meeting was this: is that I think we’re 

letting our students down generally in terms of somehow 

propagating this notion that simply the student loan and bursary 

mentality is the only one that’ll serve our students well. And I 

raise it in that standpoint because I’m not so sure that we’ve 

been very creative here. And I’m not so sure that just 

propagating more of the same, or fine tuning the dial is 

somehow going to help the students. 

 

So if you’re asking me if I’ve raised with Canada and/or with 

other ministers my general dissatisfaction about some areas as it 

relate to student assistance generally, the answer is yes, and in 

several areas. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, as you can see, we are not 

proposing changes that fine tune the system. We are proposing 

fundamental changes that first of all reverse the unkind cuts that 

you have brought down to the bursary program, and secondly, 

we are proposing some substantive changes in the system that 

would make far more students eligible for student loans. 

 

And just to recap, I want to emphasize that number one, we call 

upon your government to reinstate the Saskatchewan student 

bursary program which has been an important part of our 

heritage for many decades and which you have eliminated. We 

call upon you, sir, to do away with your provision where you 

are requiring students to borrow 6,000 and, in some cases, 

$7,000, depending on the length of their course of study and 

loans, before they are eligible for a penny of forgiveness or 

bursary from your government. We call upon you to urge the 

federal government to reduce the age of independence under the 

Canada student loan program to 19 years of age. Those are 

fundamental changes that we’re calling upon your government 

to initiate, and I  

hope you will, sir. 

 

I want to move the area of questioning to another topic. And at 

this point I want to . . . Several days ago we gave to the 

Minister of Education a copy of our final report on technical 

institute autonomy, the questionnaire results that you asked to 

see, based on a survey that we conducted as a caucus at Kelsey 

Institute and the Northern Institute of Technology in March and 

April of 1986. I want to now lay that study on the Table, if I 

could get one of the pages to come and lay this on the Table for 

me, I would like to table it. 

 

And I would like to point out to the minister that the results of 

this study are very, very clear. First of all, of the 70 people who 

responded to the study from the two institutes, 65 of them 

supported the principle of autonomy for Saskatchewan ‘s 

technical institutes. 

 

The point I want to make, Mr. Minister, is that only seven of the 

70 people who responded to this survey supported your notion 

of establishing one large board to serve all four institutes in this 

province. Only seven of the 70 people that responded supported 

your notion of centralization. Forty-four people who responded, 

Mr. Minister, indicated that they would like to see local 

governments for each of the technical institutes, and another 15 

suggested local governments for each institute, with an 

umbrella organization that provided overall co-ordination for all 

four institutes. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, the point I want to make to you is this: while 

it’s clear that the respondents to this survey support autonomy, 

they don’t support the kind of autonomy that you’re proposing 

to implement. They support local governments for each of the 

institutes involved, with perhaps some provision for a central 

co-ordinating function, which we would be not at all opposed to 

on this side of the House. In fact, we would support that kind of 

provision. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, the respondents to this survey, as you will 

have noted from reviewing it, also feel that the most important 

advantage of autonomy is an opportunity for increased input by 

staff and students in the designing of programs to meet local 

needs. 

 

And my question to you is: will you give your promise to this 

Assembly and to the students and staff and faculty of the 

technical institutes of this province that when you establish you 

new super institute board, there will be maximum participation 

on that board from local community groups and from faculty, 

students, and staff, and from local employers? Will you give the 

Legislative Assembly your commitment on that point, sir? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In so far as the configuration of the 

board of governors - call it what you will - for the new 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, 

and I suspect this is some detail we may . . . some ground we 

may cover again when we get into the legislation. 

 

And you’re asking me for a promise, I think to use your  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1689 

 

words. I think conceptually we’re coming from the same place 

in so far as we want to touch all bases, if you like. We want 

broad representation. And quite frankly, I would suggest to you 

that if you look at at what we’re doing and why we have the 

one-institute board, as opposed to what your survey shows, the 

reasons why we have the differences is because our sampling, 

our consultations, were with a much broader cross-section of 

the publics, not only in terms of users and players, but culturally 

and socially and economically in every dimension. I think your 

focus was somewhat narrow. And I’m being critical of it; I 

think it was a good attempt, but it was somewhat narrow. And, 

in fact, I read into the record earlier tonight, just the group of 

invitees, if you like, in Regina. 

 

In so far as promising you what they will look like, I think 

conceptually we’re coming from the same place. I mean, I 

envisage this board to be not unlike the board of governors that 

we have at the University of Saskatchewan. It is responsible for, 

and reflective of, all of Saskatchewan. And I have given the 

additional commitments, for example, to the existing 

community college boards that they shall have a representation, 

if they so wish, on this new board, to recognize the importance 

of each of those campuses. 

 

Why I’m hesitant to start giving you any promises or guarantees 

is for this reason, is that there’s a fine line between drawing in 

all the players and having this board representation and ending 

up with a board that can in fact function. I mean, you might end 

with a board of 106. I don’t think that’s in anybody’s best 

interest, and I don’t think that’s what you would want. If we’re 

both agreed that we want this as broad a representation 

geographically and every other which way as possible, I think 

we’re not that far apart. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I wonder 

if I could beg leave of the Assembly to introduce several guests 

who are here in the Speaker’s gallery tonight. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to introduce 

to the members of the Assembly several guests who are sitting 

in the Speaker’s gallery tonight. One member certainly needs 

no introduction to members of the other side of the House, as 

well as this side; that’s Mr. Gordon Dirks, the former member 

for Regina Rosemont, and sitting beside him . . . 

 

A Member: — A constituent of yours. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — And a constituent of mine. And seated beside 

him is the chairman of the Regina Public School Board, Mr. 

Ray Matheson, who is here to enjoy, I think, the kind of debate 

over educational policy which is being presented here in the 

House this evening. And I ask all members to welcome the two 

visitors here tonight. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I too would add  

my words of welcome to both Mr. Matheson, and as he 

discharges his role as chairman, and does it very well, I might 

add, and to our former colleague, Mr. Dirks, for joining us here 

tonight. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, it’s 

precisely the points that you made about the fact that you can’t 

really get grass roots participation if you only have one large 

board governing the technical institutes for the whole province. 

That leads me to suggest to you, will you not now drop your 

proposal for one centralized board operating out of Regina to 

govern Saskatchewan’s four technical institutes and go instead 

with the principle of local governance, but local governance that 

also provides for a guarantee that employees’ salaries and 

benefits, who were working at the institutes, will be fully 

protected when the transfer of responsibility is undertaken. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, no, I would - and we can get 

into this further when we get into the legislation - but I would 

yet have to be convinced to change what we are proposing 

relative to the single board and governance. And the reasons for 

it are many, not the least of which is to have the proper 

co-ordination. Because to adopt your logic would say this, then, 

that the University of Saskatchewan board somehow can’t 

operate on behalf of the entire province, or that somehow we 

should have four or five regional boards feeding into the 

university board. And I would further suggest to you that if we 

were to adopt your model, we would still end up needing an 

umbrella board to co-ordinate, as your own critics, you being 

one of them, said in a newspaper interview in May, I believe it 

was. 

 

So I’ve thought about this, I can tell you that. We’ve given all 

options serious consideration, and quite frankly, I think, you 

know, our consultation process was so exhaustive that I doubt 

that there were stones left unturned. And I’m not trying to 

suggest that yours was a bit narrow in its focus, but what did 

you say, you had 70 respondents? And I would suggest to you 

that 70 respondents, given that technical institutes have 1,200 

staff and 2,500 students, your sample was pretty small. And as 

you will know, your New Democratic youth support the one 

institute concept. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I want to change the focus again 

and turn to the question of cut-backs at Wascana technical 

institute. And I want to ask you three specific questions with 

respect to these cut-backs that we’ve not covered in the 

legislature today. 

 

First of all, as you will know, as a result of your decisions to 

phase out accounting and administration at Wascana Institute, 

as a result of your decision to eliminate those programs at 

Wascana, you have in effect forced students who were taking 

those programs at Wascana Institute to  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1690 

 

transfer to STI at Moose Jaw if they want to complete their 

second year. 

 

Now my question to you is, Mr. Minister: will you provide 

financial assistance to Wascana students who are taking 

business and accounting, to allow them to move to Moose Jaw 

to complete their program of study at STI? You have, in effect, 

Mr. Minister, forced these students to relocate. They will have 

to relocate at very considerable expense. In many cases they are 

married; their spouses will often have to give up jobs here in 

Regina in order to be able to move to Moose Jaw. In many 

cases students had part-time jobs in Regina and have to look for 

new part-time jobs in Moose Jaw. 

 

In effect, Mr. Minister, you have caused these students a great 

deal of inconvenience and you’ve cost them a lot of money. 

And my question to you is: will you provide them with the 

financial assistance that they require to locate, a relocation that 

is forced by your government and is no fault of their own? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well a couple of points, and the first 

one is one that I made in this House before. There’s 42 new 

spaces created to recognize the transfer, point number one, 

because there was a fair amount of rhetoric and erroneous 

reporting, quite frankly, relative to whether these accounting 

students would be accommodated. And the reality is there are 

42 new spaces. 

 

Now your second point is not well taken, particularly in that 

you’re trying to make the case that somehow we’ve forced 

somebody to move from Regina to Moose Jaw. And I ask you 

to examine in your own good conscience and in front of the 

public of Saskatchewan, why is it . . . And I mean, I appreciate 

that there is a move involved, and I don’t want to sound 

unsympathetic, but why would you focus on the fact that some 

might have to move from Regina to Moose Jaw to take their 

studies, and yet make no acknowledgement of those who might 

live in Meadow Lake or Nipawin or North Battleford or 

Estevan or Swift Current or Lloydminster, who accept 

travelling and moving to another centre always as part of the 

reality of post-secondary education. 

 

As a matter of fact, because we think they have some legitimate 

concerns, that’s why we’re getting into distance education in a 

bigger way; that’s why we’re getting into the technical institute 

extension programs in a bigger way; that’s why you heard on 

the news the other day that universities are going to deliver to 

14 communities more programming - English and history, I 

believe it was - across this province. So rather . . . While you 

want to focus on the hardships - and I recognize there are some 

- of having to take a course, the final year which you were 

going to take in Regina and now move to Moose Jaw, how can 

you look at that in isolation and not have some sympathy, or 

some regard, or some initiative in place to deal with those who 

always have had to travel from all over this province. 

 

I think you’re taking somewhat of a narrow view here. But  

to show you that the system can accommodate and cope with it, 

the student loan program does recognize travel cost. 

 

So I sympathize with the individuals. I mean, there is some 

dislocation here, but in terms of the larger picture, I think if you 

see what we’re trying to accomplish with these other initiatives, 

you’ll see that we’re trying to address the problem - not merely 

a knee-jerk react, if you like, to a single situation. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, can I just ask you a simple 

question. There were approximately 60 students studying at 

Wascana who were going to be going into their second year of 

accounting or administration. You decided in your wisdom - 

and we disagree with your decision - that you would eliminate 

those programs at Wascana, and that you, in effect, force the 

students to move to STI. You can make the point that they 

weren’t physically forced to go, but let’s put it this way: if they 

wanted to continue their course of studies - since they’d already 

completed their first year and had their second year to go - you 

gave them no choice but to go to STI. 

 

My question to you, sir, is: why on earth do you simply not let 

the program at Wascana in accounting and administration 

continue on for one more year so that those students who have 

to take their second year can complete it in Regina instead of 

being forced to Moose Jaw to complete it there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, in answer to your second 

question first, there’s more than one track they can take. And so 

to that degree, it’s a separate course, albeit it’s a second year for 

some. But some after one year might take another track, as you 

might understand from the system. But I want to come back to 

your basic point, this whole business of us forcing - which isn’t 

particularly true - and the hardship created by somebody having 

to go from Regina to Moose Jaw. You know, how is it that all 

of a sudden, if they do have to drive from Regina to Moose Jaw, 

that’s an issue? Yet two years ago the same student living in 

your city or in Prince Albert or in anywhere else in 

Saskatchewan, who had to drive to either Moose Jaw or Regina 

when it was offered in two centres, that that was not an issue. 

Do you see what I mean when I say, you know, some of this 

political rhetoric is really not all that meritorious in terms of 

debating? 

 

What we’re talking about here is do we want a change? And do 

we want to establish centres of excellence? And the answer is 

yes, because if it’s an issue that you should have to drive from 

Regina to Moose Jaw today, why was it an issue two years ago 

when people had to drive from Meadow Lake to Moose Jaw or 

from Moose Jaw to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well there 

was a course in Moose Jaw. It was more a case of driving from 

Saskatoon or Prince Albert into Moose Jaw or Regina. 

 

To us, to our party, to our government, to our Premier, the 

larger issue here is accessibility of education across this 

province. And that’s why the initiatives we put in place that I’m 

so proud of, and our party is proud of, and our caucus is proud 

of - of delivering more and more programming, whether it be 

institute or university, across the province so nobody has to 

drive. 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1691 

 

Because tonight we have discussed here about the costs in 

education and student loans. The biggest cost facing students is 

not tuition fees, it’s the room and board bill. It’s the cost of 

moving from Meadow Lake to Moose Jaw. And what can we 

do, and what can we deliver into Meadow Lake and Nipawin 

and into North Battleford? That’s what we’re examining, and I 

think that’s where some of this debate should centre tonight, 

because I think we’re being a bit short-sighted if we just 

concentrate on whether . . . I mean, I for one would have loved 

to have been raised in a university city. It would have saved my 

parents several thousands of dollars. I loved schooling so much 

I took six years of post-secondary education. Some might argue 

that it wasn’t all that successful, but I took six years, and it was 

expensive for them and for me. And how they dearly would 

have loved to have some of that programming delivered into 

our community. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s precisely our concerns 

about accessibility and you’re decisions to cut accessibility 

substantially in the technical institute system that have led to so 

much debate about the future of technical institute 

programming in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

We’re talking here about administration, office education, 

accounting. I point out to you that students in Saskatoon or a 

student in Biggar last year was able to take off his education at 

Kelsey in Saskatoon. Now, thanks to your drive for 

accessibility, they’re going to have to go to NIT (Northern 

Institute of Technology) in Prince Albert or to Wascana to 

pursue it. 

 

A student in Moose Jaw used to be able to take office education 

in Moose Jaw, or if they lived in Swift Current, they only had to 

move into Moose Jaw to pursue their course of studies. Now 

that program’s been cut in half. They’ll likely have to come to 

Wascana. The decisions that your government has taken again 

and again and again in this province have served to reduce 

accessibility to technical institute education in Saskatchewan, 

not to expand it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Now I say to the minister, there’s been a lot of 

talk in this Assembly about distance education, which we 

support. There has been talk about moving technical institute 

courses into rural Saskatchewan. We’ll commend him for it 

when we see the courses there. But we’ve yet to see very much, 

Mr. Minister; however, time will tell. And we ought to give 

your government an opportunity on that account, but in terms of 

seeing accessibility in the four major urban centres, you have 

chosen to dramatically reduce accessibility, not to expand it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Minister, I want to conclude this 

section on technical institutes by asking you a question on 

competency-based education. Very simply, there have been 

widespread rumours that you do not  

favour competency-based education. As you know, particularly 

in the trades programs, we support competency-based 

education. We think that it’s a very important vehicle for 

women, particularly for single parents or for people working 

part time, to gain access to a technical institute education. 

 

And we ask you, will you give this Legislative Assembly your 

commitment that competency-based education will be 

continued in the province of Saskatchewan at the technical 

institutes, particularly in the trade areas? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. And I wish the NDP caucus 

would get their act together on this because its only two or three 

nights ago in this House that I had to defend the 

competency-based program at NIT with one of the members, 

albeit he wasn’t from Prince Albert, who was taking quite a run 

at that institution up there, much to the chagrin, I’m sure, of the 

Prince Albert members. 

 

So I wish you would have some solidarity on your policies as it 

relates to competency-based education. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — I want to ask the minister a series of questions 

now with respect to the University of Regina. And my first 

question to the minister relates to his decision this April to 

renege on his commitments to fund at 5.5 million, of which he 

was to contribute 3.4 million, the building of a new student 

union centre at the University of Regina. 

 

And I would remind the minister that in April of 1986 the 

Premier went to some lengths to announce this project. He 

promised the students at the University of Regina that a new 

students’ union building would be constructed; that it would get 

under way by June of 1987 - a month that has now passed. 

There was a reception with approximately a hundred guests 

invited for this gala announcement. The Premier indicated, at 

that time, that it was an example of his commitment to students 

and to post-secondary education in this province. 

 

A year later, you, as Minister of Education, went to the 

University of Regina, and you indicated to the students at the 

University of Regina that you had reneged on that commitment; 

that they would have to wait at least a year before this 

construction proceeded. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you 

now honour the election promise that was made in 1986 and 

follow through on your government’s commitment to the 

students’ union at the University of Regina, and to the board of 

governors at the University of Regina, to build a new students’ 

union building at the University of Regina? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, just in response to that question, 

Mr. Chairman. As it relates to the student union building at the 

University of Regina, I have to admit that when I went to the 

University of Regina this winter, I would dearly have loved to 

announce that the project had a green light, but in all fairness, 

and being responsible to all parties concerned, that would not 

have been the right move. 

 

I would, as well, tell you and the members of the  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1692 

 

legislature and the public that the project has not been cancelled 

- it has not been cancelled, only deferred, and will come up for 

consideration as we look at next year’s budget. 

 

I also want to tell the hon. member this, that even with the 

deferral of the student union building, the government provided 

the University of Regina with $5.2 million in capital grants in 

‘85-86 - 5.2 million in ‘85-86. And for your information that 

was more - that 5.2 million was more than the NDP provided in 

their last six years of office. In one year 5.2 millions more than 

your government in six years of office. In ‘87-88 the University 

of Regina will receive 2.199 million in ordinary capital plus 

3,040,000 for special projects for a total of 5.239 million. 

 

Now our Premier was clear on this as well, in question period 

this summer. He said, we will build it - referring to the student 

centre - but we’re going to defer it until we can have the money. 

And I think that seems like a reasonable enough course. 

Certainly projects like the library are going ahead, but this 

project will go ahead, too, albeit that its been deferred for the 

time being, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Item one agreed? 

 

Mr. Prebble: — No, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want to 

simply ask you. You’ve indicated to the students’ union a 

number of times that the project was being delayed for a year. 

Will you give them and this Legislative Assembly your 

commitment that in the fiscal year 1988-89 there will be a full 

provision for construction of a new students’ union building at 

the University of Regina? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, what we have said is that it is 

deferred until finances allow, and I will be as precise as I can be 

in so far as my commitment for next year. I will be as precise in 

that commitment as I can be in determining (a) the price of 

wheat next year; (b) the price of oil next year; (c) whether it 

will rain or not next year; (d) what potash will do next year; (e) 

what uranium prices might do. 

 

Because the reality is, in a resource based economy we are 

dependant on all of those things, and it would be irresponsible 

for me to suggest that and to write next year’s budget now when 

we won’t have a good assessment on - or we’ll have a better 

assessment on all of those things as we move into next year’s 

budget preparation closer to that time. 

 

But let me be clear. We will go ahead with that project as soon 

as we can. It’s not been cancelled. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I take it from your 

statement that you’re certainly not making a commitment to 

pursue it next year. 

 

I want to ask you now a question with respect to your funding 

decisions for the University of Regina. You will know, sir, that 

in 1984-85 your grant to the University of Regina was 1 per 

cent below the rate of inflation. In 19985-86 your grant was 

one-half per cent above the rate of inflation. In 1986-87 your 

operating grant was again 1  

per cent below the rate of inflation. This year your operating 

grant to the University of Regina is 4.6 per cent below the rate 

of inflation because, in effect, you’ve decided to freeze 

operating grants to the University of Regina, not only in this 

fiscal year, but in the next fiscal year as well. 

 

In effect, during this time period, sir, that means a net loss of 6 

per cent in the operating grant to the University of Regina if 

you simply compare it with the consumer price index. However, 

I would point out to you that a comparison with the consumer 

price index is not applicable in this situation, because in fact the 

University of Regina legitimately has much, much higher costs 

than the consumer price index would indicate. 

 

I would point out to you that enrolment has risen since the fall 

of 1981 by 57 per cent at that institution - by 57 per cent, Mr. 

Minister. What that in effect means is that the grants to 

full-time students from your government in terms of the 

operating grants to the University of Regina has in effect 

declined to 65 per cent of what it was five years ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I would point out to you as well, that in 

addition to the major, major increase in enrolment, there’s 

obviously been no funding in place for an expansion of faculty 

or an expansion of staff that in any way corresponds with this 

increased enrolment. In fact, teaching staff have only increased 

7 per cent during the last five years, and a significant portion of 

this has been sessional and term appointments. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Minister, the university faces very, very 

significant cost increases well above the consumer price index 

in areas that it has no control of, such as purchasing library 

books from the U.S. where the exchange rate has sky-rocketed. 

Last year alone, the increase in library acquisitions for the 

University of Regina was 16.5 per cent, in effect four times the 

consumer price index. In addition, the universities had to make 

a number of equipment purchases and expenditures to repair 

buildings which, once again, have significantly exceed the 

consumer price index. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is in light of the major, major 

increase enrolment that the University of Regina has faced; in 

light of the fact that it has been impossible for the university to 

hire many new additional faculty or staff to keep pace with this 

increased enrolment; and in light of the fact that the university 

has faced many costs, particularly in the area of library 

acquisitions, equipment renewal, and repair to buildings that far 

exceed the consumer price index, will you now lift the freeze on 

the operating grant to the University of Regina? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, the answer to university funding 

. . . It would be very simple for me to stand in my place, as I’ve 

already done in this estimates process, when I addressed the 

question of the provincial government’s commitment and 

funding to the universities, and merely say that the record 

speaks for itself, and it’s a record that we’re all proud of. 

 

Between ‘82 and ‘86 the funding for student rose by 25 per cent 

in Saskatchewan. And if you check the record,  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1693 

 

Mr. Chairman, across this country, we’re second to none. We 

ought not . . . So one could say the commitment has been clear. 

It’s been better than any other jurisdiction in the country. And 

we could compare that with places like Manitoba. 

 

And I already read into the record about what we’ve done in 

capital funding for the University of Regina - what they did for 

six years. And I could talk about how, between ‘82 and the 

present, we’ve increased the share of the provincial product 

provided for university funding by close to 20 per cent, while 

under the NDP it decreased by 30 per cent. 

 

And I already read into the record about what we’ve done in 

capital funding for the University of Regina, what they did for 

six years. And I could talk about how between ‘82 and the 

present, we’ve increased the share of the provincial product 

provided for university funding by close to 20 per cent, while 

under the NDP it decreased by 30 per cent. 

 

I mean, I went through in the early part of this estimates, line by 

line, our commitments, and if you look at the university 

numbers during the NDP times, there was a definite curve there 

- starvation, except in election year. And it was clear - ‘77-78, 

‘81-82 - a clear pattern of starve the universities, except during 

election years, and then you give them some lip-service. 

 

I could talk simply . . . I could dismiss the question simply with 

those answers, Mr. Chairman, but that would be a simplistic 

analysis of the situation, because what are we facing there, and 

what did the Issues and Options paper address at the University 

of Saskatchewan? And what did we recognize when we put 

together that blueprint for the future? 

 

Here was the situation we saw. The demographics told us that 

enrolments had gone up. There was pressure on the system. 

Courses were jammed, so there was apprehension amongst the 

students, and the soon-to-be students, albeit, as some 

administrators would tell us, that enrolments weren’t 

necessarily a problem for them. They provided . . . They were 

cash, they generated revenues in the per pupil grant, the 

full-time equivalent. But the reality was, here was what we saw, 

was tremendous enrolment pressures. The taxpayer had anted 

up, unlike any other province, and they were proud to put that 

money up, Mr. Chairman. 

 

(2145) 

 

So here we had the public purse making a tremendous 

commitment, second to none across this country; enrolments 

were going up; there was student apprehension, or soon-to-be 

student apprehension, and the faculty weren’t terribly happy. 

 

Now I can stand here simply and say that we’ve put more 

money in than any other jurisdiction, that the capital funding 

has been second to none, and certainly far above what the NDP 

did, and just rest on the record and rest on our laurels, but that 

would be a simplistic analysis. 

 

It was because of that, exactly, that we undertook the  

dialogue we did, and why we put together a new blueprint, 

because to do anything different would be to not acknowledge 

what’s really behind those numbers. And it’s not simply good 

enough to talk about the problem; you have to do something 

about it. And that’s why, if the hon. members would examine 

that blueprint that I distributed for the House the other night, 

they would see that a very integral part of that is the 

development of the regional college system. 

 

And that’s why we heard the announcement the other day, and I 

read it into the record, and I’ll read it again. It was a 

Leader-Post story, “Classes beamed across province”, and it 

talks about students in 14 Saskatchewan communities being 

able to take history and English course from the University of 

Saskatchewan without ever setting foot on the campus. And not 

that you can deliver everything off campus, Mr. Chairman, I’m 

not so naive as to think that. But there’s no sense denying what 

has happened. The public purse has delivered in spades under 

the Progressive Conservatives. In some instances the 

universities were quite happy with the enrolment, the increases, 

because it meant more money. It was a cash generator. Faculties 

were unhappy, and to just give it . . . To not examine the issue 

something more than superficially would have been unfair and 

irresponsible, and we’ve taken it a step further, and the people 

of this province and the young people of this province will be 

well served by this blueprint, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I want to take exception to 

some of the points that the Minister has been making with 

respect to university operating and university capital grants 

under the NDP versus under his government, under his PC 

government. 

 

I just want to read these . . . You know, we have had for the past 

couple of weeks while we’ve been on the estimates, Mr. 

Chairman, a constant string of claims by the Minister about his 

increases versus our increases. I’m not trying to say that our 

increases were perfect or wonderful, but I think, Mr. Minister, 

that the record will stand up well. And I just want to put this on 

the record because I’m growing weary of the minister’s unfair 

comparison. 

 

In the fiscal year 1980-1981 under the NDP government, there 

was an 8.5 per cent increase in the university operating grant to 

the two universities of this province. In 1981-82, Mr. Chairman, 

there was a 12 per cent increase in the operating grant to the 

two universities, 3.1 per cent above the inflation rate. In 

1982-83, there was a 17 per cent increase to the two 

universities, 11.7 per cent above the inflation rate, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

To the credit of the members opposite, they continued with that 

budget proposal after they assumed government. IN 1983-84 

there was a 7 per cent increase in the university operating grant 

to the two institutions. In 1984-85 there was a 4.9 per cent 

increase under the PC government, 1 per cent below the 

inflation rate. In 1985-86 there was a 4.9 per cent increase to the 

two universities, half a per cent above the inflation rate. In 

1986-87, there was a 3.2 per cent increase to the two 

universities, eight-tenths of 1 per cent below the inflation rate. 

And in 1987-88 there was a zero per cent increase, four and a 

half per cent below the inflation rate. Those are  

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1694 

 

the statistics, and I challenge the minister to suggest that those 

statistics are any different. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you’ve also claimed that somehow the 

universities were starved for capital funds under the NDP era, 

whereas under your era there’s been a great flow of funding. 

And once again I don’t want to pretend that we had Havana 

under the NDP years, but if you take the years 1979-80, 

1980-81, 1981-82, during those years, there was an average in 

each year of $14,775,000 in capital funding to universities in 

this province. 

 

If we take the period fiscal year ‘82-83 to fiscal year ‘85-86, 

with respect to capital, we find that the average was 

$11,957,250 under your government. Mr. Minister, I suggest to 

you that those statistics put to end your rhetoric about how your 

government somehow funded universities while ours did not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you several 

questions with respect to a March 13 memo that you distributed 

on the University of Regina campus, a memo, Mr. Minister, that 

I suggest was a very, very direct . . . represents direct 

interference with the autonomy of the University of Regina. In 

fact, Mr. Minister, I can’t remember in all my time in following 

university politics when such a memo was circulated that so 

directly interfered with the autonomy of the university. I think 

we’ve not seen such interference since the Liberal government 

was last in office when we saw the attempt by the then premier 

Ross Thatcher to attack the autonomy of the universities. And I 

suggest to you that you are choosing to do the same today. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to refer specifically to a number of points 

that you make here with respect to programs that you believe 

the University of Regina should be emphasizing. You indicate 

that, in this memo, that the university ought to be emphasizing 

programs that primarily focus on high-demand areas like 

administration, arts, science, and education. And you go on to 

say in the memo: 

 

The government would prefer to see these programs 

maintained in a high quality, if need be at the expense of 

withdrawing from other program areas. 

 

By inference, Mr. Minister, you clearly indicate to the 

University of Regina what programs you do not consider to be 

priority areas. Programs like the School of Journalism, the 

School of Social Work, the School of Human Justice are the 

obvious programs that your government does not consider to be 

a priority. That was very clearly implied in the memo that your 

circulated. 

 

I say to you, sir, that you have no business telling University of 

Regina what programs it shall emphasize and what programs it 

should de-emphasize. I suggest to you that that’s a direct 

interference with the autonomy of the University of Regina, and 

I ask you to withdraw that March 13 memo. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: Well as it relates to my brief to the 

University of Regina and to the University of Saskatchewan 

boards of governors, you have suggested that I have stampeded 

over, or neglected to respect, their autonomy. Nothing could be 

further from the truth, and I’ll give you the two views here. 

 

And in fact when I was at the convocation at the University of 

Saskatchewan, if what you had said is true, it flies right in the 

face of what the president said before 2 or 3,000 people at that 

convocation. Because I distinctly recall while I was sitting on 

that platform, in the president’s address, he turned to me 

directly during part of that address and said he quite frankly 

appreciated that we respected their autonomy, albeit there was 

some obviously broad provincial view in that brief. The 

president - and I suspect he’s reflecting the view of his board of 

governors - turned in his address and said quite succinctly that 

he appreciated the fact that we respect their autonomy. And we 

do. And we do more than just so in a lip-service sort of fashion. 

 

At the board of governors at Regina, if I was to share you what 

had happened at my first meeting with that board of governors, 

is they explicitly asked for some larger direction; give us some 

sense of where the province, in our view, is going and is 

heading. And so, quite frankly, they asked for some direction in 

very concrete terms. 

 

So I would suggest to you that your view of what that brief was 

intended to do was not trample over the rights or the autonomy 

of the university - not at all. Not at all. And we do respect their 

autonomy, and we didn’t tell them that they should cut this 

course or that course. That is not our role. We said, above all, 

do not try to be all things to all people; maintain that core. 

We’re not saying what you should not have. That’s for you to 

decide. We’re not going to start making the decisions under this 

dome. 

 

I like to think that we have a very good working relationship 

with the boards. I’m very excited about the future for our 

universities. I don’t know what more I can say. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, we suggest to you that by 

indicating clearly to the university that, other than the priority 

areas that I identified earlier, that other areas were to be 

de-emphasized. You very clearly laid out the areas in which you 

expected that cuts would be appropriate, and we think it’s 

entirely inappropriate, on this side of the House, that you should 

interfere in university program considerations in that manner. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you one final question tonight, 

and that deals with another part of this memo. 

 

This is a two-part question. First of all, you spell out in this 

memo a suggested plan for deficit retirement, or debt retirement 

for the University of Regina. And you suggest to them, sir, that 

despite a two-year budget freeze, and despite uncertainty about 

what the budget shall be beyond there e- you indicate in the 

memo somewhere between zero per cent and the inflation rate - 

that you expect them to eliminate their cumulative deficit of 

$5.5 million by 1991. 

  



 

August 10, 1987 

1695 

 

But the first part of my question to you is: will you give us a 

similar undertaking that, in the view that you’re forcing the 

University of Regina to do that, that your government will also 

eliminate its cumulative deficit of some $3.5 billion by the 

fiscal year 1990-91, too? 

 

And the second part of my question to you is very simply this: 

one of the areas that I was most alarmed about in this memo, 

Mr. Chairman - and I want to read this to the House - is your 

comments with respect to admission policies. You say, Mr. 

Minister, and I quote from your memo: 

 

With respect to admission policies, the government 

believes it may be timely to open up a dialogue on what 

qualifications are required to gain admission to university. 

A number of factors are relevant here: 

 

(1) The probability of the individual succeeding in 

university studies. We cannot afford to allow someone into 

university just to let him in, or to let her in, and then have 

them fail. 

 

To continue quoting from the memo: 

 

(2) The effect of extra students on the overall level of 

quality in the university; 

 

and 

 

(3) Access of socially disadvantaged groups to the upward 

mobility that has traditionally been afforded by university 

education. 

 

My special concern, Mr. Minister, is with your words, “We 

cannot afford to allow someone into university, just to let him 

. . . or her fail.” 

 

And I want to ask you: as you know, the University of Regina 

has had a very excellent program for some years, called the 

university entrance program, which allows students that don’t 

have their grade 12, or do not have the marks to meet the 

entrance requirements for university admission, to gain 

admission to the University of Regina on a one-year trial basis 

through this program as a result of demonstrating maturity and 

commitment to pursue a course of academic studies. 

 

And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is in light of this memo, 

as you can well appreciate, this memo casts some doubts about 

whether your government supports the continuation of the 

university entrance program at the University of Regina. And 

my question to you, sir, is: will you give your Assembly this 

commitment, your commitment that you will not, in any way, 

urge the University of Regina to cancel this excellent university 

entrance program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member is asking me to 

do something just moment ago he was criticizing me for 

attempting to do, at least in his eyes. 

 

What programs the university runs will be determined by the 

board of governors, along with the administration. 

Now why . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . because I respect their 

autonomy. Now you’re asking me don’t respect that autonomy, 

try and run the place out of this legislature. You are inconsistent 

in your logic. Simply, you’re inconsistent. 

 

The other point I want to make here, when it comes to 

universities, and in fact I would make it relative to all of what 

we’re doing in education, because if one looks at it as we’ve 

examined several areas - we go to the K to 12 area, technical 

institutes, community colleges or universities - our record is one 

of accomplishment. And as was pointed out in this blueprint, in 

purely objective terms this record of accomplishment is one in 

which we might all take pride. More students are being taught, 

more courses offered, more money provided than at any other 

time in history. 

 

And yet if one examines this and gets past the simple objective 

analysis, the prevailing outlook on campuses across the country 

is more negative than positive. The struggle to meet society’s 

ever-widening expectations has left many professors and 

administrators, and I might say teachers and parents, with a 

sense of frustration rather than satisfaction. The very 

open-endedness of our standards has deprived us of a 

meaningful sense of accomplishment. 

 

So what I’m saying is: in pure objective terms, if you want to 

engage in a simplistic analysis, this record and the record that 

I’ve put into these debates over the past several days is one 

which we can be very proud of. And yet, having said all of that, 

using simple black and white analysis isn’t good enough, I 

guess, is what we’re saying, and that one has to look beyond 

that, and I guess that’s what I’m asking of you. And it seems 

clear to us at least than an effort must be made to re-create a 

shared understanding among all parties of the roles and the 

responsibilities, whether it be at the universities or the institutes 

or the regional colleges, or so on and so forth. 

 

And I recognize that this can’t be accomplished overnight. But I 

would suggest to you that we’ve made a start, and that it’s no 

good trying to suggest that complex issues have simple yes-no, 

black-white answers. Because they do not, and to try and apply 

that logic, you’re doing a disservice to the public of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That is a paraphrasing of what was laid out in page 8 of this 

blueprint. And I would recommend it to your reading because it 

really says it all. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:04 p.m. 

 

 


