


















































July 8, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 8, 1987 
 

1021 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — Yesterday I received two petitions which I now lay on 
the Table for reading and receiving. I’ve examined the petitions 
under rule 11(7) and find them to be in order. 
 
The first petition was: 
 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan praying 
that the assembly may be pleased to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan not to limit the universal accessibility of 
Saskatchewan people to insured chiropractic services. 

 
The second petition was: 
 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan praying 
that the Assembly may be pleased to recommend for the 
consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan the 
re-implementation of the drug plan and of the school dental 
plan as it has been during the past few years. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure today to 
introduce through you, and to the members of this Assembly, 
people seated in the west gallery — five members of the northern 
development advisory council, namely, Chairman, Mr. Bill 
Klassen; members, Mr. Tony Durocher of the Ile a la Crosse; 
John Carriere of Cumberland House; Joe Roberts of Stanley 
Mission, and Ben Siemens of Stony Rapids. 
 
Accompanying them are 11 members of the Saskatchewan Indian 
agricultural program, board members, namely; Chairman Gerry 
Starr from the Starblanket band; Lyle Acoose form Sakimay; 
Merv Arcan from Muskeg Lake; Ernest Mike from Beardy’s; 
Lance Ahenakew from Sandy Lake; Bobby Bird from Montreal 
Lake; Clarence Fineday from Wetckhekan Lake; Harold 
Kingfisher from Sturgeon Lake; Rick Walker from Regina; Garry 
Albert from Sweet Grass; and Percy Durocher from Flying Dust. 
 
I look forward to meeting with the various members later today, 
and I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome them 
here to see the proceedings in our legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I would also, Mr. Speaker, like to extend the 
welcome to the agriculture program people from all over the 
province, and I must say . . . (The hon. member spoke for a time 
in Cree.) 

Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Free Trade Negotiations With United States 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier, and it deals with the discussions that have been carried 
on in Ottawa with respect to the negotiations of a free trade 
agreement with the United States. And I think we would all agree 
that markets for Saskatchewan producers in the United States 
have been little affected by regular tariffs covered by treaties 
between Canada and the United States, or multinational treaties 
— multilateral treaties like GATT — and greatly affected in 
recent times by unilateral levies outside the boundaries of treaties 
imposed as a result of action by the United States Congress or 
United States administrative agencies, and one thinks of 
anti-dumping levies and countervailing levies and the like. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier this: what assurance was given to 
you that the United States will agree to a dispute resolution 
mechanism which would bind all arms of the United States 
government, including the Congress and the administrative 
agencies like the ITC (International Trade Commission), in their 
ability to impose such non-tariff barriers as anti-dumping or 
countervailing levies? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the first ministers were 
advised that there is no way to forecast what Congress will do 
with a proposal that goes from the President to Congress. I can 
say that I don’t believe there’s anybody at the Table or was at the 
Table last night that would do a deal if we don’t get a new dispute 
settlement mechanism, one that it would remove the unilateral 
nature of the current mechanism that exists today. If you left them 
with the unilateral mechanism, it would really vitiate a deal that 
you could put together. 
 
We just don’t have an ability to forecast what Congress will do. 
In theory we’ll put together a package that, say, that the 
negotiators could agree on, on the removal of tariffs completely 
and set up a negotiating mechanism, a dispute settlement 
mechanism, that would be between Canada and the United States. 
We could agree on the mechanism, agree on the people, agree on 
the chairman, agree on how it would work. And then we’d take it 
to Congress and see what they say and take it to parliament. 
 
So we just can’t forecast that, and it is not a good mood in 
Congress from what I was advised last night and from what I’m 
reading in the newspaper today. I understand Mr. MacDonald, 
Mr. Lougheed and others are down there talking to senators, for 
example, and they’re not getting the warmest response. 
 
So a dispute settlement mechanism is absolutely necessary. If we 
don’t get it, then I would highly suspect we wouldn’t have a deal 
at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1022 
 

Could you advise me whether you have any indication that the 
United States negotiators, Mr. Murphy and others, and those to 
whom he reports, will recommend to Congress that there be such 
an independent dispute resolution mechanism which will be 
binding on Congress and the administrative agencies like ITC.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I can say that in terms of the verbiage 
that is used in Ottawa, the United States is now engaged in all of 
the aspects. They have responded into the conversation on things 
that have been put forward, including a dispute settlement 
mechanism. 
 
I’m not sure what they will recommend. We are obviously saying 
that we have the big deal with respect to the dispute settlement 
mechanism, and we hope that the trade ambassador, negotiator, 
will provide that to the President, and the President will take that 
to Congress. 
 
The President of the United States wants to see that happen. He 
has told the Prime Minister that. His cabinet ministers want to see 
it happen. Whether there are sufficient number of people in 
Congress to see it happen is the key question. 
 
So my best information, and I suppose my best guess, is I would 
think that Mr. Murphy, when it’s said and done, will take that 
proposal, have it initialled by the President, and he will take it to 
Congress. Now there’s some probability that it might not even get 
that far, if they couldn’t get there. I think the President will take it 
that far, and it will be put in the lap of Congress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, you may have answered this earlier but I’ll put it in 
again. I’m asking whether you can advise us what the minimum 
Canadian position is now. And can you advise that there is no 
disposition on the part of you and, if you can speak for the 
Canadian government, the Canadian government to enter into any 
freer trade agreement involving significant lowering of tariffs and 
dismantling of other structures which we now have, inhibiting 
trade — no disposition to enter into any such agreements unless 
there is a firm dispute resolution mechanism which does bind the 
American government in all its arms. 
 
Some. Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — As I believe I answered it earlier, that most 
— I would think every — participant at the table would have to 
see a new dispute settlement mechanism that bound us both. And 
there may be some minor modifications how that might work. It’s 
never really been done in trade before where you’d have a 
completely brand-new dispute settlement mechanism, within the 
rules of GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), 
separate just for the two countries. 
 
That’s the position the negotiator’s taken; that’s the position the 
Prime Minister is taking — and they can speak for themselves — 
but it’s the position that I’m taking that it has to be a brand-new 
dispute settlement mechanism, to remove the United States from 
its unilateral capacity to break it, as we have it day after day now. 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. I think I 
understood the Premier. Are you saying, sir, that not only does it 
have to be a new dispute resolution mechanism, but one which is 
sufficiently effective so that we will not be subject to, what I can 
only term, arbitrary action in the levying of countervailing or 
anti-dumping duties? And you can comment on whether it would 
be more effective than the one currently in GATT, but which was 
effectively ignored by both the United States and Canada in the 
lumber dispute because, to put it bluntly, Canada didn’t think we 
could make it stick, even though it was in the treaty. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I would think that would be an appropriate 
word, “effective” dispute settlement mechanism, that in fact did 
bind both sides. That’s precisely what we’re looking at, and I’ll 
make it very clear — without it, I don’t think that there would be 
any first minister that would do the trade deal, not one. 
 

Free Trade Concessions from the Provinces 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a new 
question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, according to the press 
reports, much of yesterday’s or last night’s meeting, at the 
Langevin Block, on the question of free trade, dealt with 
concessions from the provinces. We are told that there are going 
to be losers and that there are going to be winners from free trade; 
both Prime Minister Mulroney has said that and other premiers 
have said the same. 
 
My question to you, sir, pertains to who the losers are going to be 
as far as Saskatchewan is concerned. My specific question to you 
is this: what did you agree to last night with respect to 
concessions as far as the province and the people of 
Saskatchewan are concerned and, more specifically, as it relates 
to agriculture in the areas of egg and poultry, Canadian Wheat 
Board, and the like? What did you agree to by way of provincial 
concessions? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, in general terms, when we 
ask another country like the United States to reduce their tariffs or 
drop their tariffs, we’re going to have to do the same. If they 
subsidize on goods that impose harm on any of our commodities 
that we export, and we have subsidies, then we’re going to have 
to agree to reduce some of those subsidies. 
 
I think the best example that I could think of would be in the red 
meat area, in terms of .. we want the market to the United States. 
Right now We’re looking at importing up to 150,000 feeder head, 
feeder cattle, into Canada from the United States. They’re 
concerned about the blue tongue testing at the border; we’re 
obviously concerned about access to that meat in the United 
States. 
 
To have access, I believe that we’re going to have to have a 
national stabilization mechanism that prevents an awful lot of 
what you would call the top loading and the bottom loading and 
the side loading and whatever, so that we can say to a trading 
partner that this is the stabilization mechanism we have in place. 
It’s actuarially sound; it  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1023 
 

works; farmers contribute; the public sector contributes; and in 
the good times there’s a kitty there, and in the bad times they 
draw out of it. But it’s not an ongoing subsidy. In fact, the 
ministers of Agriculture will de discussing that for probably the 
entire week starting on Sunday or next Monday. That would be 
an example. 
 
Another example would be the dairy industry, where you have 
marketing orders in the United States with some supply 
management, and you have marketing quotas here with supply 
management. We’ve agreed that we will continue to have the 
supply management. But you run into the problem when you hit 
processing because the processors want to have some sort of 
comparable price when they’re making ice cream, when they’re 
making yogurt, and so forth. 
 
So some resolve will have to take place to more balance the price 
of the product going to the processor. That combination of things 
is being examined and certainly I believe it’s fair to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’ve had 16 different groups, and they’ve had that 
many meetings in the private sector, involving processing, 
involving industry, involving others, bringing recommendations 
to the negotiators, saying: how could we have resolved some of 
these sensitive issues? So, I would say in the meat business, in the 
feather business, and in the dairy business you have some of 
those kinds of discussions going on. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. If the Premier 
is trying to convince me that the discussions are complicated, I 
concede that. I believe they’re complicated. That’s not my 
question. 
 
You, sir, represent the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
And you’re being asked in, what I might obviously underline to 
be the case, secret discussions or negotiations, you are being 
asked, as the Premier of this province, to make certain 
concessions in order to get an overall deal in the interest of 
Canada, or so you would have us believe, the free trade 
negotiations are all about. 
 
And my question to you, therefore, is very specific. What 
concessions have agreed to make as far as Saskatchewan people 
are concerned — farmers and others? What concessions have you 
agreed to make as part of the discussions last night with Mr. 
Mulroney? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that there are 
several Premiers, that were quoted on television last night, or 
again this morning, that were saying that there’s nothing that has 
been agreed until everything is agreed in terms of the 
negotiations. 
 
We looked at other objectives. The objectives of the negotiations 
are to reduce tariffs between the two countries. That means both 
sides will have to do that. To reduce subsidies on both sides will 
be all right — say for regional economic development. 
 
You could take .. Northern Saskatchewan, for example, might be 
categorized as an area where we could have  

economic development, and we could have special financial 
incentives and it would not bother a trading relationship with the 
United States. 
 
Now we will carve those out and say, these are special economic 
arrangements for development for specific areas, for specific 
reasons. And we can, Mr. Speaker, put those in an agreement. 
Now we didn’t sign anything. We said, we’re going to have 
economic development. There will not be a culture on the table. 
We will have to deal with the supply management. The Canadian 
Wheat Board is intact. I could go through the list. 
 
So the hon. member knows that there’s been nothing signed, and 
there has been nothing given away. It’s conceptual in design to 
reduce the tariffs on both sides. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a further supplementary to the 
Premier. On the one hand the Premier would have this House to 
believe that nothing has been agreed to and nothing has been 
signed. And on the other hand he would this House believe that 
such things as the Canadian Wheat Board are still intact. I ask 
you, sir, how can that be consistent? If everything is on the table 
and everything is being negotiated how can you assure the house 
that assure the House that the questions pertaining to the 
Canadian Wheat Board or the egg and poultry or the dairy 
industry are sacrosanct? 
 
You, yourself, are saying that everything is there. That’s what the 
Americans want on the table — everything on the table. The 
Prime Minister wants to wring concessions from you. You’re the 
biggest advocate of the free trade initiative by the Prime Minister 
in all of Canada. You tell this House, if you will please, what it is 
that you’ve agreed to, because you can’t tell us that, just 12 
weeks before these negotiations end, there is nothing specifically 
agreed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll say a couple of 
things to the hon. member. I am, and he’s absolutely right, a 
strong proponent of this trade agreement — absolutely 
unequivocally. And I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I said one thing to the Prime Minister. I 
said one thing: I won’t be nationalizing the Potash industry so the 
United States will be taking anti-dumping against that industry 
and other industries like it in this province. Because that’s what’s 
costing us, and you know a great deal about that. You know a 
great deal about that! 
 
As a result of some unilateral actions in this province and other 
jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, we’re in some trouble with the United 
States. Mr. Speaker.. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order, order, please. 
 
Now before we move to the next question, I’d just like to make 
this comment. And I’m sure that members have  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1024 
 

been listening carefully, and the questioners have been asking in 
good faith. I’m certainly not questioning that. And the person 
answering it was answering in good faith, I think, here today. But 
I think what’s happening in this: some of the questions are 
bringing in different issues into the same question, and some of 
the answers are trying to get a little too long because they want to 
try to answer the question. So I’d just like both sides to keep that 
in mind. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have one final supplementary 
question for the Premier. Mr. Premier, we have 12 weeks left 
before the so-called “fast track negotiations” run out. We have no 
full cost-benefit analysis of the free trade negotiations. I want to 
ask the Premier this question: is it your intention to negotiate 
continually in secret — probably the most important set of 
negotiations which are going to affect the independence and the 
integrity of this country and this province — to negotiate those 
talks in secret and then spring on to the people of Saskatchewan 
and Canada the terms and conditions of a free trade deal which 
might affect everything from the Canadian Wheat Board and the 
farmers, or will you start now telling the people of this country 
and this province in detail the cost benefits and the specifics of 
what you’re giving up on behalf of the Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say, I can say 
unequivocally, that we won’t be doing the deal in the kitchen, and 
we won’t leave out Quebec. And he can count on that. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’ll also say, Mr. Speaker, we have no end 
of studies that are available, and the hon. member can, if he 
wants, I’ll send them to him. 
 
With respect to all the jobs and all the benefits as a result of a 
tariff-free arrangement between the United States and Canada, we 
could be very big winners, Mr. Speaker. And if the hon. member 
doesn’t realize it, the United States has hit our industry on potash; 
it’s hit steel; it’s hit softwood lumber; it’s hit pork; it’s going to 
hit uranium, or a high probability of that. And the hon. member 
standing here saying, and the back-benchers of the NDP saying, 
we’ll nationalize that one, we’ll nationalize this one, we’ll 
nationalize this one. And they’re sitting there nodding their heads, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the reason we’re in trouble today; that’s why 
I support a trade deal with the United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you. I note with pleasure, and I 
welcome the Premier’s commitment that he will forward to me 
all of the internal studies that the government has prepared. I 
want to ask the Premier how soon it is that I can expect, and this 
caucus can expect, the detailed studies that you have prepared 
internally with respect the cost-benefit analysis pertaining to free 
trade. When will he got those studies? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — We have, and our negotiators have now, a 
stack of research from universities from universities from the 
academic community, from businesses. And all those that we 
have, Mr. Speaker, we’ll turn over to the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — When? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — As soon as I can get my hands on them. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 

Resignation of Board of Prince Albert Regional College 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, my question, Mr. Speaker, is to 
the Minister of Education. Last night the entire board of Prince 
Albert Regional Community College resigned, Mr. Minister, to 
protect your government’s decision to take over control in Regina 
of Saskatchewan’s four urban community colleges. 
 
The board members told the public meeting in Prince Albert last 
night that these changes will destroy a 20-year tradition of local 
control of community education in Prince Albert — not only in 
Prince Albert, but also in the constituencies which they serve, 
which are Prince Albert-Duck Lake, Shellbrook-Torch, Kinistino, 
Redberry, and Rosthern. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, relates to why. In this case four of the 
seven members were democratically elected representatives, and 
your take-over, Mr. Minister, of the community colleges has 
destroyed true local economy in post-secondary education in 
Prince Albert and throughout the province. why did you choose 
to destroy a local government control? Why did you force the 
undemocratic take-over? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, I did not force 
nor ask for their resignations. I’m aware of the press reports 
indicating that they have resigned. And I would say this: that it’s 
unfortunate that the board members have taken that course, if in 
fact they have. 
 
I would also say that the process of forming the new institute, the 
amalgamation of the four community colleges and the four 
institutes, the process has gone satisfactorily in the other three 
centres. It’s unfortunate that it hasn’t worked out to the 
satisfaction of everyone in Prince Albert. 
 
And I know that change is always difficult, Mr. Speaker, but if 
we’re to position ourselves for the 21st century, these changes are 
necessary. And it’s not as though somehow the board there have 
failed in the past, for they have not. It’s not a case that somehow 
they have not served the community well, because they have. But 
the issue, Mr. Speaker, is how do we position ourselves, and what 
structures do we need, as we approach the 21st century? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister, I want to  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1025 
 

know what the real reason is for the take-over. Is it now true, Mr. 
Minister, that because you fear that the federal government is 
proposing to fund post-secondary education by directing grants 
directly to those who provide the service, and not through the 
Department of Education, and that because you don’t trust locally 
elected officials, you want this super board of yours to grab the 
federal money for post-secondary education? Is that not the real 
reason for this undemocratic take-over? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, no. None of those reasons 
are at all relevant. 
 
And I would just reiterate again, the process of amalgamation has 
gone satisfactorily in Moose Jaw, in Regina, Saskatoon, for the 
most part, and it’s unfortunate that it hasn’t processed in the same 
fashion in Prince Albert. And it’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, 
because there are staff there who we want to look after the new 
institute. There are students, Mr. Speaker, who we must have the 
programming up for, for this fall. And it’s unfortunate that we 
have this glitch, but it’s one that we’ll be dealing with, certainly. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. One of the PC 
appointments — your own appointment who resigned — said he 
felt betrayed by a government which preaches decentralization 
and practices centralized control. He said they have been stepping 
on this college, on the community, and the principles they have 
been fighting for. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please! The 
member is aware that we made a ruling relatively recently that we 
won’t have any quotes of any kind in supplementary questions. I 
would ask him to please adhere to that rule and to put his 
question. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I would adhere by your ruling, 
Mr. Minister, my question is: in light of the clear opposition to 
your take-over, even from your own PC appointments and from 
your own party representatives, will you now sit down and 
discuss ways to preserve local autonomy for our community 
colleges? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I could advise the hon. member, Mr. 
Speaker, that in fact that is what I and my officials have been 
doing over the past several weeks. In fact with this board we 
have, I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, tried to walk the extra 
mile. 
 
I have met with them individually. I have met with some 
individuals of the board separately. We looked at several options, 
not only ones that Prince Albert presented to us but, as well, the 
community college trustees’ association. The Moose Jaw board 
had an option. We. Mr. Speaker, have tried to work with them in 
every which possible way to deal with their concerns, and so that 
we can go ahead, look after their staff and the programming. 
Unfortunately, it hasn’t been to their satisfaction, Mr. Speaker, 
but in terms of dealing with the jobs and the opportunities of 
Prince Albert people and the people around there, the  

new institute will serve them well into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
The opportunities will be there for them. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I want to clear the air on a 
comment you’ve just made about consulting, because if what I 
heard correctly, what you said and I heard correctly, then you are 
misleading this Assembly. Because you had one meeting, not one 
meeting with the board prior to your press conference — not one 
public meeting. 
 
I have here a letter form the Prince Albert Regional Community 
College which clearly states the first board of directors . . . in 
Prince Albert the first they heard of it was to . . . when you 
decided to grab control was at the press conference, Mr. Minister. 
Now will you admit that your statement about consultation 
applies only to after that press statement was made, or are you 
saying that this letter that I have from the board is a lie? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I know not of which letter 
the hon. member refers to, but I can tell him this, that over this 
past winter I held something in the order of 20 meetings across 
this province with some 550 groups, associations, and individuals 
to determine what the best course was, and to put together a 
blueprint for the future. The consultations do not somehow end 
with that round of meetings. We have yet to examine with other 
groups, as which we’re in the process of doing now, the whole 
area of literacy, the Distance Education Council, and just to show 
you that in fact . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Would the hon. 
member please allow the minister to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, just to show, so the hon. 
member knows that we have worked with this board in good 
faith, some several weeks ago I proposed to the board there, this: 
that they remain in place for period of up to 18 months to provide 
for continuity of programming in Prince Albert and region while 
the new institute becomes operational, further proposed that the 
regional advisory board for Prince Albert and region could be put 
in place if they so wish. And if they . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Not only, Mr. Speaker, did I say that 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’d like to ask the 
members to please quiet down and let the minister finish his 
answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I propose, Mr. Speaker, that the 
regional advisory board for Prince Albert and region, the 
membership there include the present members of the college 
board, plus regional representatives, and they in fact have the 
power to advise the board of directors of the new institute on the 
appropriate array of programs and services for the region. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, that if they wish to continue that  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1026 
 

unique tradition, that Prince Albert tradition of having elected 
community representatives, that they could still so do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, that we would make every possible 
effort to find jobs for their staff that might be located in the new .. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, before we begin orders of the day, 
you have made the ruling here in this House and have referred to 
it numerous times in regards to questions that are asked during 
question periods and the ability of members to quote from 
documents during that period. 
 
I wonder, sir, would you be able to provide us here, at least on 
this side of the House, and hopefully to all members of the 
House, precedents introduced in other Houses of Assembly in 
which the use of quotations during supplementary question period 
is prohibited. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Well first of all, I would just like to say this in 
reply to the hon. member: if the hon. member recalls the reason 
that the ruling was made, is to try to keep some order within 
supplementary questions. 
 
The reason enunciated at the time was: if quotes are allowed, 
often they tend to make the supplementary too long, or 
sometimes it occurs that by the time the quote is finished, it winds 
up being a new question rather than a supplementary. Those were 
the reasons. And I still say they are good reasons, very good 
reasons. 
 
However, if the member is interested if there are any other 
precedents, perhaps, in this Assembly or anywhere else, I’ll 
communicate with him personally and inform him of the same. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, on 
Monday we spoke about the operation recycle and you had 
promised that you would submit some materials in response to 
some questions I asked. And I simply ask if you have that here, 
and if I could have that now, please. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to raise 
with the minister and his officials some more questions with 
respect to rail line relocation that we started out on last Monday 
night. And I’d like to just refresh your memory as to what 
happened. 
 
Monday night we established about four or five things.  

One, we established in estimates that your department received an 
opinion from the Department of Justice that you may not have 
jurisdiction as a government or as a department to deal with 
environmental impacts as it relates to the rail line relocation 
project in north Regina. 
 
Secondly, we established that no decision was rendered by your 
department on the environmental impact statement. And thirdly, 
we established that you identified concerns about the 
environmental impact statement which you have relayed privately 
to the principals — namely the CTC and the city of Regina — 
with respect to noise, drainage problems, and potential disastrous 
problems about the Regina aquifer. 
 
You also established .. we established that evening you privately 
and quietly informed the city, and neglected to inform the public 
about these concerns which will impact very heavily on the water 
supply of this city, and which will impact very heavily on 
families living near the corridors of the rail line relocation. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you received your .. my question is: when 
you received your legal opinion from your sister department, the 
Department of Justice, did you then request the federal 
Department of Environment to make a judgment on the 
environmental impact statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In the member’s opening comments, you 
indicate that we privately and quietly passed our opinions across 
to the city. We did send a letter to the city. But then, following 
that, in the public review period, the public had access to the 
same information. So it was never kept quiet. It was put out for 
the public, which is the normal process in dealing with 
environmental impact assessments. 
 
Now on the other side you asked, did we pass the information on 
to the federal Department of Environment to deal with. We did 
make that offer, and we contacted the federal Department of 
Environment. At that point they asked us to continue with the 
process so that there was not a duplication of work. And that’s 
what has happened up to this point. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So you made a request of the federal 
Department of the Environment, and they advised you to proceed 
so that there was some continuity with respect to the project. 
 
Considering your legal opinion, did you ask the Department of 
Environment federally to provide you with a legal opinion on 
whether you had the jurisdiction to render some opinion on the 
EIS (environmental impact statement)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think that would have been an unusual 
process for us to follow. We were dealing with the issue. We 
asked the federal Department of Environment if they wanted to 
take over, and they asked us to continue. So that’s the process 
that was used. And no, we didn’t ask for any other opinion. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What you’ve told us this afternoon is that there 
will be no level of government, in your Justice Department’s 
opinion, of liability in the event of some  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1027 
 

hazardous thing to happen if the plan was to proceed as proposed. 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that that information has been 
put before the CTC (Canadian Transport Commission) during the 
hearings. The outcome of the decision on that has not been 
rendered as yet, but when the CTC brings down it’s decision, the 
matter of dealing with the concern you raise will likely be dealt 
with in that decision. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Would the minister be prepared to table (a) the 
legal opinion offered by .. rendered by the Justice Department for 
my information, or provide it to me in some fashion; and (b) 
provide me in this House with a copy of the concerns that you 
conveyed to the city and the CTC with respect to the 
environmental impact statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t believe that it’s customary to give 
interdepartmental memo kind of decisions in this forum. I think 
they come to us as advice and guidance, but I don’t think it would 
be the normal process for me to give you that decision. 
 
The comments that we made in reference to the environmental 
impact assessment are included in the recommendations that are 
filed with the legislative library, along with the environmental 
impact assessment. So they’re readily accessible there if the 
member just asks the librarian. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The comments that we’ve been discussing, that 
you have made to the city and to the CTC, will be on file in the 
library — is that what you’re saying? The minister agrees in 
affirmative with that. 
 
Could you provide us with some documentation, or a copy of 
your communications that you have with the federal Department 
of the Environment on this matter? Is that possible to do? And if 
not, I would sure like to know why. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think that’s normal type of 
information to communicate across the floor during estimates. 
We have advised you that we did make that contact. That 
information was presented as evidence before the CTC. I don’t 
really think that we can provide that information to the member. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Okay, what about Mr. Minister, the 
jurisdictional responsibility with respect to the EIS 
(environmental impact statement)? If you have an opinion which 
says that you are not in a position to render any decision on it, 
and you’ve communicated this to the federal Department of the 
Environment, and they have said, well you proceed because we 
want to ensure continuity, who, in your opinion, has jurisdiction 
to make a decision on the environmental impact statement, and 
under which act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that my department has entered 
into an agreement with the city whereby we will review any 
proposals that come forward for the  

placement of the new rail line, whenever it happens. 
 
We don’t have the jurisdictional authority, or at least it appears 
we don’t, from the advice we received from the justice 
department. But the agreement we have with the city will give us 
enough authority to provide them with the information and the 
direction that they would need to make the proper decisions. So 
we do have that kind of decision making authority through the 
agreement with the city. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Is this a normal course of action with respect to 
environmental impact statements, or studies, that the department 
follows? If you undertake to fulfil your responsibilities — your 
perceived responsibilities under the act — and you get a legal 
opinion — for whatever reason you would get that legal opinion I 
don’t know, but you would obtain a legal rendering of an opinion 
from your Justice Department — are you doing this on every 
project that requires that requires an EIS, or are you doing it 
because there is .. for some other reason? I would like to know 
that reason. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — This is not a normal kind of environmental 
impact assessment because it’s not a normal circumstance that we 
are dealing with. 
 
We’re dealing with a major decision affecting the city, the 
railways, and the jurisdiction of the railways traditionally has 
been under the federal government. For that reason we went to 
the Justice Department to get a decision. But no, it’s not a normal 
process on every environmental impact assessment. Many of 
them, the jurisdictional authority is clear and you just proceed to 
do the job. In this one, because of the involvement of the 
railways, the city, and the federal government, it was felt to be 
important that we get the right decision, and I think rightly so. As 
the scene unfolds it looks like we’ve made the right choice. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Does this mean then that the EIS was 
performed as a matter of course to meet the basic minimum 
requirements of the act, but it really doesn’t have any particular 
relationship to the project? Because the rail lines have been 
moved and altered from the original proposal when the EIS was 
done; as well, there are other possibilities for location. Could you 
explain that please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there have been some 
adjustments to where the rail line would be placed — not long 
distances, a couple hundred yards in some places. The decision 
for them not to cut into the soil, but rather to build up, that’s 
another change since the environmental impact assessment was 
done. 
 
So these changes would be brought back before any permission 
to go ahead would be given, and they would require approval. 
But there are no major shifts at this point. Now we aren’t final yet 
with the CTC hearings, and if it shows that there is a major 
change, that would have to be addressed before any approvals 
could be given. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — For example, what you’re saying then is, or if I 
can draw an example with the information you’ve provided, the 
change, one of the changes that were made  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1028 
 

in the midst of the CTC hearings was that a 3,000-meter stretch 
between Pasqua and Winnipeg Street, a cut of 25 feet deep into 
the Condie ridge to provide a basis for the rail bed, that has 
changed from being 25 feet deep to being 10 to 15 feet — I’m not 
certain specifically what the number is. With that change in mind, 
can you explain an example for this purpose. 
 
Will the environmental impact statement that was done, was 
obviously done on the basis of a 25 foot deep cut which would 
provide less hazards in terms of air pollution, less hazards in 
terms of noise and vibration pollution because of the deep cut .. 
Now that it’s raised higher, will the environmental impact 
statement have to be redone, or will that have to be looked at and 
be approved by your department once again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that some of the changes that 
the hon. member is mentioning, like the change of not cutting so 
deeply into the soil, that was one of the recommendations that 
was made when the first EIS was reviewed. So they’re basically 
then following what was required of them. Any other major 
changes would likely require an EIS, like if they were to decide to 
move that trackage from where it is now to go out by 3,000 
meters, I think was the figure the member was mentioning the 
other day. If something like should come up, then it’s almost a 
completely new location and would likely require a complete 
review of what’s being proposed and a new statement filed. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The 3,000 meters I was referring to was the 
east-west direction, not the buffer zone. The buffer zone is 300 
meters which is far, far less shorter in distance. The question I 
want to ask right now is in regards to the Emergency Response 
Guide for Dangerous Goods that I referred to Monday night. This 
guide clearly outlines that the 300-meter buffer zone is totally 
inadequate in the case of any dangerous goods being spilled, or 
any railway car being damaged along that line. 
 
Has the Department of the Environment made a recommendation 
on the basis of your sister government in Ottawa’s 
recommendations in this manual to the city and the railways that 
the 300 meters is inadequate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that my department was not 
even aware of the manual that you were waving there. It’s 
possible that the emergency measures side may have been. I 
would expect that that information that you’re carrying was 
brought forward at the CTC hearings and it is a federal document, 
so quite likely they will take it into consideration. We did not at 
this point. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — If the CTC (Canadian Transport Commission) 
doe not take into consideration that document, can I have the 
minister’s assurance that your department will ensure the 
minimum requirements in this book are met for the relocation 
plan of the railway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My department would be pleased to review 
the recommendations in that document, and perhaps if the 
member would read the name of the document into the record so 
we can look it up. And I can’t give you assurances because we 
haven’t had a chance to review it. We would like to do that, and 
certainly if there  

are things that we should be looking at in consideration of where 
the final place for the rail relocation will occur, at that time we 
will do what we can to see the pertinent guide-lines would be 
followed. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The book . this is an 
earlier edition. There is a more recent edition. I think it’s ‘85 or 
‘86 it was published. This was published in 1983; it’s the second 
edition, entitled Emergency Response Guide for Dangerous 
Goods, published by Transport Emergency, CANUTEC for short, 
and it’s available in the library here in the legislature. 
 
There is a more recent one which is provided to all firefighters in 
all centres of major proportions. And they use this as the basis for 
helping to fight emergency spills, and so on. So it’s a very 
important document. There is a 24-hour phone number in Ottawa: 
area code 613, phone number 996-6666. So I please refer your 
officials to that and to at least have the rail relocation project, if it 
is proposed in it’s current location, that those concerns and that 
book are followed as closely as possible. 
 
The other questions I have — we keep talking about the rail being 
moved to the north end of the city, and I would like to know, 
having discussed with many .. I’ll stop there, Mr. Minister. But I 
have spoken to many people, many organizations, and they tell 
me, including some of the railroad officials that it makes more 
sense economically, it makes far more sense environmentally, to 
have the rail relocation not running through the north part of the 
city, but in fact running it south of the city. 
 
In terms of geography, in terms of the water aquifer, they 
maintain that it is a far wiser route when it comes to 
environmental protection, when it comes indeed even to the cost 
of producing the yards, because they do not have to take the trains 
up the grades on the Condie ridge and down again, and that costs 
a lot of power throughout the trains, the oil consumption, and so 
on. 
 
(1500) 
 
I’d like to ask the minister and his officials whether they have 
done, or they are aware of, any environmental impact statements 
that have been done on any other location other than the yard that 
is proposed on this map on the north-east part of the city? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the only environmental 
impact assessment that has been done was done on the current 
proposal on the northern line. The city, in it’s decisions and 
discussions with the railways, prior to the time that they made the 
decision to go in the current route in the north end was that the 
costs would be prohibitive to have gone to the south, and so they 
had ruled that out. 
 
Now those aren’t decisions that we would make as a department. 
They would file an environmental impact assessment where they 
see it feasible to do the project. We review the environmental 
impact statement on that basis. If there are significant areas of 
concern raised that would say that, no, you can’t go there, then 
they would have to look at other alternatives. And then they may 
have the choice that the south is the best. But at the time  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1029 
 

that they came to us, that one was ruled out because of cost. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Has the department or any of the principals 
involved, raised the matter of an environmental impact study on 
the east or the west end of the city as an alternative to the south 
and the north? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — At the time we reviewed the first 
environmental impact statement, the department asked the city if 
they would consider other alternatives. And at that time they 
advised that they would not because the costs were prohibitive, 
and they didn’t think that if they had to go a different route that 
they could afford to build. So they have never really addressed 
that as an issue that would have generated an environmental 
impact statement. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Could you please inform me, or your officials, 
could you please inform me as to what were the geographic 
parameters of the EIS? Can you precisely tell me which area was 
studied in the environmental impact statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that it would be most difficult in 
terms here to spell out exactly where that line is. But it is spelled 
out in significant detail in the environmental impact statement. So 
rather than me trying to guess at it and my staff trying to guess at 
it, I would ask the member to read the exact locations. It’s hard; 
it’s the same basic location that is being reviewed at this time by 
the CTC. But it’s all delineated in the environmental impact 
statement in fairly clear terms, so you could pick it out fairly 
easily. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The concern I have, 
the reason I asked the question, is very simply because the 
comments we received from you on Monday night indicated that 
the EIS was done primarily on phase 1. And the point I was 
trying to make on Monday night, and I’ll reiterate this afternoon, 
is that phase 1 impacts enormously on phase 2. If phase 1 is 
approved, phase 2, if it goes ahead, will have to go along the 
same corridor. 
 
And what my concern is, as an MLA for the city of Regina, is 
that the corridor is only 300 meters away from a heavily 
populated district. And not only that, but it’s on a hill overlooking 
the district. When you consider the line running north on the west 
side, and then running east and west on the north end of the city, 
with prevailing winds of north, north-wests, and wests, three out 
of the six winds that blow in this city, the majority of them, the 
three of them are prevailing. If any spill occurs in that distance, 
you’re going to have a terrific problem on your hands — a major 
disaster. 
 
On top of that, if you’ve got 20 to 40 trains a day traveling this 
route, that close with those winds, you’re going to have tons of 
waste diesel fuel blowing into the homes and neighbourhoods and 
into the families and the communities that these lines coincide 
with. And that concentration, I maintain and suggest to you, is a 
concentration that no city should have, in particular if it’s a cost 
sharing arrangement. 
 
So I would like to know why an EIS was not done, or why  

you did not ask the city or request the city to do this, in view of 
those very real concerns of those people that live in that 
neighbourhood. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s not really the choice of the department to 
say, now’s the time to do another EIS. When the proposal comes 
forward for phase 2, that’s the time that the EIS must be done. At 
the time that we were discussing, the only proposal was for phase 
1. 
 
I might suggest to the hon. member, though, the diesel trains 
going by, 20 a day or 40 a day, may have some diesel smoke 
associated. 
 
If you were to consider the number of trucks that go by on the 
highway between here and Saskatoon, it’s probably far more 
serious in contamination from diesel smoke than you would find 
in that number of trains. You can probably find 40 or more trucks 
per hour going through, each way, and that would be far more 
significantly impacting the city of Regina and the residents here 
than the trains would, which would be naturally out further. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I might add, Mr. Minister, that the highway 
between here and Saskatoon has not been built where there is an 
existing neighbourhood, and has not been built that close. And I 
think that’s a point we should make. If we’re going to be 
spending $ 120 million-plus in moving rail lines, then we should 
do it properly. I don’t differ with the member’s contention that 
there is pollution provided from trucks traveling the highways. 
 
What I’m getting a sense of, Mr. Minister, is that we have, rather 
than an environmental impact study process that has to be 
followed by the principals, we are having more of a 
quasi-environmental impact study process, where things are kind 
of loosey-goosey and there’s no real parameters that they must 
follow, because they can go ahead and make their decisions, and 
then, when the decisions are made, the provincial government can 
either disapprove them, approve them, or make recommendations 
to change them. And them the principals will have to go through 
the whole process again of spending money to have hearings and 
doing EISs and so on. 
 
It seems to me that it makes much more sense to either have an 
environmental impact study system that is a system, as opposed 
to a quasi-system, that provides clear parameters and clear 
objectives to the principals involved, so they can get on with the 
business that has to be done, or we don’t. And I .. You say we do. 
And all of the reports I get from the CTC hearings and from the 
individuals and principals involved, there doesn’t seem to be a 
major system, a standard EIS system in place; it’s more of a 
quasi-system. 
 
Just as an example, the CNR commissioned another 
environmental impact study to be done, the same as the city, and 
they had the same group of people do it. But they had different 
answers. And the reason they have different answers is because 
the questions they asked were different questions. The city didn’t 
ask the questions which had to be done. And the Deputy Minister, 
I think, would recognize that those things happen. 
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1030 
 

And I’d like to know if the department, in view of these major 
differences in this quasi-system, do you, Mr. Minister, believe 
that the department should grasp this problem and resolve it so 
that we’ve got a standard system that is set out for everybody? 
Will you give us your commitment and conviction that you will 
do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’d like to advise the hon. member that the 
process that the environmental impact assessment was done, and 
the process that was used when it went through the Department of 
Environment and the response back to the city and the 
recommendation for adjustments to the environmental impact 
study — all of those things are the same process that would be 
done for any other environmental impact study. The only basic 
difference is that if we were to say no, you can’t do this or you 
can’t do that, then we don’t have any clear indication that we 
could take them to court and win in court. That’s the only major 
difference. 
 
However, the province does have the money side of it — our 
contribution towards the relocation. And I think that is a major 
tool that’s at the disposal of this government. If we’re not seeing 
the response the Department of Environment requests, and the 
government and the city request, the withdrawal of funding is 
likely a fairly significant tool to use, and likely would be used if 
that came to pass. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — If the environmental impact study process is 
standard, it seems to me the government and the Department of 
Environment have a legal foot to stand on. If it’s not standard, if 
there’s a quasi-system out there and you can’t provide clear and 
concise guide-lines for an environmental impact study to be 
undertaken, I can’t understand why you’re saying that there is, 
with a quasi-system, a legitimate foot for the government to stand 
on when it comes to court action. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I want to assure the hon. member that the 
process that we’re using is not a quasi-system. It’s a full fledged 
environmental impact assessment process that we’re using. The 
only part that we difficulty with is the legal process — if it were 
challenged at the end. And that’s what I’m advising you that there 
is some uncertainty as to who has the authority. We’re going to 
exercise the authority until somebody says, you don’t have it. I 
think that’s as plain as I can put it. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Just maybe a final question or two then, Mr. 
Minister, on this issue. If the Justice Department has rendered an 
opinion to the Department of Environment that you have no 
jurisdiction to make a decision on this — and you tell us that they 
have — and if the federal Department of Environment says to 
you: proceed so we can maintain continuity, who is going to be 
responsible if a major catastrophe ends up happening? Who is 
going to be liable? Is it going to be the provincial Department of 
Environment; is it going to be the Department of Justice for 
rendering its opinion; or is it going to be the federal Department 
of Environment; or is it going to be someone else? Could you 
please tell me that? And this is an hypothetical question, I 
suppose. 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — When I advised the hon. member that we 
had a ruling from the provincial Justice department, what they 
said was that the position was unclear as to whether we had 
authority. They didn’t say we didn’t have it; they said the position 
was unclear. That’s what I have told you prior to this, two or 
three times. 
 
As well, I mentioned to you that the Canadian Transport 
Commission, in its hearings, had the question of legal 
responsibility before it for decision. I would expect that at the 
time that the final ruling is given by that body, that the 
responsibility, the legal responsibility, should be outlined by the 
CTC as to who is responsible if a major decision occurs. 
 
I think in many circumstances — using the disaster that occurred 
west of Edmonton last year — that the railways themselves took 
that responsibility; and indirectly then, the government would, the 
federal government. So I think we use some previous cases that 
do give some guidance in that area. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to now .. 
I would just like to thank you and your officials for the frank 
answers. I appreciate them, and I will dig up that information 
from the library. My colleague from Regina North wishes to ask 
some questions as well. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, my colleague from 
North West has asked a number of questions that are of keen 
interest to me. The jurisdiction one .. I guess I’m rather stating a 
concern that I have. As I understand it, the provincial department, 
your Department of Environment, started doing an environmental 
assessment, and did it, in fact; then got an opinion from the 
Department of Justice that maybe you don’t have jurisdiction. 
 
So you approached the federal government who said, well in the 
interest of continuity, you go ahead. I think I’m right so far. Then 
where I start to get very concerned is when you did not render an 
opinion to the city, because clearly the federal government had 
abrogated its responsibility and said, here, you take it; you’re 
going with it; you should be rendering a decision. 
 
My question is: why, in light of the way the sequence of events 
unfolded, why did you choke at the very important juncture and 
not render a decision to the city? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that, because of the ruling of the 
provincial Department of Justice, we were not certain that we 
could render a decision and have it stand up in a court of law. So 
rather than do that, we entered into an agreement with the city 
which indirectly does the same thing, and it binds then to 
basically live with the recommendation of the Department. 
 
And I think I gave that to the member for Regina North so that he 
would also — Regina North West, I guess — so that he would 
also have that same answer. The agreement with the city really 
gives us the necessary authority for them to be required to follow 
the guide-lines that we lay down. So I think that it really, in 
effect, provides the same thing. 
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1031 
 

Mr. Trew: — And yet I think I heard you say yesterday that you 
did not render a written report or written decision to the city, and 
yet you’re saying the city has agreed to abide by your ruling. I’m 
just puzzled as to that whole sequence of . . . If you didn’t give 
them a ruling, how can they abide by it? I guess my question is: 
what did you give the city in writing? what have they got to go 
by? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Basically the agreement is what they have to 
go by, and all of the comments that were made and the 
recommendations that were made by the department are attached 
to the environmental impact statement that’s filed here with the 
Legislative Library and in other places during the public review. 
So they have the exact direction that my department gave. The 
city has that, the public had that, and it’s available to you through 
the library if you pick up the statement and go through it. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The ditch that is 
proposed to be built along that new rail line, that was at one time 
supposed to be about 25 or 27 feet deep and is now 10 to 15 feet 
deep . . .It’s because of the changes; it’s really not much wonder 
that the people in north Regina are a little bit cynical. Nobody can 
keep up without a daily program as to the changes that are talking 
place in this rail relocation. 
 
And then my question today, or my question now is to do with 
the phase 1 and phase 2 argument that I thought I understood you 
giving here when we last discussed this two days ago. And what I 
heard you say was that if phase 1 is agreed and goes ahead — it 
proceeds and is built — that phase 2 of the rail relocation does 
not automatically follow. Is that what I heard? And if so, I’ve got 
some follow-up questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think that anybody going to rail relocation 
around this city would be unwise to proceed with phase 1 without 
first doing the environmental impact study for phase 2. Phase 2 
has not had that environmental impact study. and when they 
propose to do it, it will require an environmental impact study. 
 
So I think the city or the railway, both, would be very unwise to 
proceed with one area without the other. So as the CTC clarifies 
its position, then I would expect that the environmental impact 
assessments will come forward to deal with the whole program 
before it goes ahead with change. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. So the onus is on the city and the 
railroads to approach your department and say, we want to do an 
environmental impact study on phase 2 before we even start 
building phase 1. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s not exactly correct. They have done 
the environmental impact study on phase 1. What I said was that 
it would be very unwise for them to proceed to do phase 1 if 
phase 2 is going to really be a part of the overall project in the 
end. I think they would be wise to get clarification. They could do 
phase 1, if they want to, but then if there’s difficulty with phase 2, 
they may never get beyond phase 1. That’s sort of the question I 
raise. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I’m sorry. Maybe I said phase 1 when I meant 
phase 2. My question was, really: it’s up to the city and  

the railroads to come to you, before they build phase 1, if they 
intend to build phase 1 and 2. They should come to you with the 
phase 2 proposal and say, is it going to get approval as well? 
Regardless of the timetable, we all realize that phase 1 is being 
built now, and phase 2 is a few years hence. They’re not being 
built at the same time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well I think we’re saying the same thing, 
maybe saying it somewhat differently. They could build phase 1 
with only the environmental impact study that they have done, 
providing they meet the requirements that were outlined. So if we 
give them clearance to go ahead, give them the ministerial order 
to proceed, they could do that. But I indicated to you that if the 
two are going to be needed in the future, they would be very 
unwise to do one without having approval for both. 
 
But the city and the railways are the ones that must make the 
decision if they’re going ahead with phase 2. And if they are, they 
must do the environmental impact study. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That was the answer I 
was seeking. I thought that’s what you were saying, and I was 
just getting the clarification. 
 
Another concern I have. You say, in regards to another location, 
that indeed the rail relocation might be moved if there were, and I 
believe your words were “significant concerns raised.” By that 
I’m sure you mean significant environmental concerns. 
 
What would that be? Would it be contamination of the water? 
Just what is, in your opinion significant concerns raised? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Any time that you’re doing a major project 
like a rail relocation around a city, there are many environmental 
impacts that occur. Noise is one, of course; danger to people 
crossing roadways and things is another; the diesel smoke is 
definitely one; the contamination of water would be another; 
hazardous goods, of course, is another. So there are many, many 
areas. 
 
When I said if there was a relocation, you know, if it’s a 
significant change of direction or location to what was first 
proposed . . . you know, I don’t mean if you move it 10 feet north 
or south. That would make very little difference. But if you 
moved it 1,000 yards, it would make a big difference. so that’s 
the kind of thing that you really would trigger a new 
environmental impact study, is if they make major changes. 
 
And at this point they are adjusting what was first proposed. 
Much of the adjustment that they are now suggesting that they 
will do are areas that were raised as requirements when the 
environmental impact study went through the department and 
through the public hearing process. 
 
Mr. Trew: — It seems to me like this whole rail relocation 
process has kind of been a case of people building a foundation 
and then expecting us to believe that they’re not going to build a 
house on it. And I think that’s a little bit of what’s been 
happening with this phase 1 and phase  



 
July 8, 1987 

1032 
 

2. And that’s part of the problem that the general public is having, 
is are we talking about phase 1, or are we talking about phase 2? 
 
There was some consideration to leaving the rail lines where they 
were, some consideration to moving it to the north, some moving 
it to the south. And it’s just a very confusing thing for most 
people. But the residents of north Regina know that the proposal 
is not a great one as it presently stands. 
 
The problem now that we’re faced, is that when this rail 
relocation was first proposed some 20 years ago, it was going to 
move the rail line well out of the city. The problem that my 
colleague from Regina North west has raised is that there is now 
housing within 1,000 feet of this proposed rail relocation. So 
what we’re doing in effect, Mr. Minister, is changing one rail 
residential conflict for another new rail residential conflict. And 
indeed, it’s causing us all a fair amount of concern. 
 
Does your department consider that, in that the residences are part 
of the now environment and the new rail relocation is going to 
significantly change that environment, does your department 
consider that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the member raises a very valid 
concern. Any time that you have a project like this that has been 
on the drawing board for many years, the first environmental 
impact statement that was filed with the government was in 1982. 
So again we’ve had another five years. And the city of Regina 
has grown considerable in that time period. And I suppose from 
the time it was first proposed 20 years, you say, or approximately 
20 years ago, the city has probably more than doubled in size. So 
you have significant changes and all of these, I believe, need to 
be addressed. 
 
(1530) 
 
Now in the Canadian transport Commission hearings, I believe 
that the fact that the housing is now much closer to the proposed 
location than it had been prior, was raised. And hopefully that’s 
one of the things that they are addressing. Our department, of 
course, is concerned with the proximity of houses to any major 
development like this. 
 
So as time progresses, these items will be watched. Whether or 
not we could redirect the rail line, that’s a question that I don’t 
think we have enough information on to really give you an 
answer. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just had a few 
supplementary questions that I wanted to ask, following up on my 
colleague from Regina North West. I will have some questions on 
another issue when that comes up, but I thank you for your 
answers here. I believe one of my Saskatoon colleagues has some 
questions. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. I wanted to 
direct some questions to you with regard to the city of Saskatoon, 
and sewage treatment and the effluent therefrom to the South 
Saskatchewan River. And the first question, Mr. Minister, is: 
when and what was the nature of the most recent formal notice 
sent to city of  

Saskatoon regarding required improvement to the sewage 
treatment system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — For me to give the member an answer is 
somewhat difficult. I’m advised by my staff that the first 
indication to the city of Saskatoon that they must put in secondary 
treatment in their sewage system goes back to 1968. It’s been an 
ongoing correspondence from that time to this, and there’s been 
much correspondence within this year. And the city itself has 
undertaken a fairly major study in the last year. I have met with 
the city on two occasions since I’ve been minister. So there has 
been ongoing discussions. 
 
I don’t think that we have arrived at a firm method of solution 
even yet. So if the member could be more specific on what he’s 
asking, we may be able to get it. But the overall question is that 
it’s been ongoing for a long time. There have been 
communications by telephone, by letter, and actual meetings held 
a number of times even over the last few months. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I’m aware, Mr. Minister, that it is ongoing 
and has been going on for a number of years. However, I worded 
my request to you very carefully. I said, when and what was the 
nature of the most recent formal notice or request sent to the city 
of Saskatoon regarding improvements to the sewage treatment 
system? 
 
Now I think the Minister should be able to come up with 
something of an answer to that, Mr. Chairman,. because I recall 
sitting on Saskatoon city council and receiving requests from the 
Department of the Environment with regard to improvements that 
are necessitated in the city’s sewage treatment in order to meet 
the standards that your department, I believe, establishes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t have the exact date of the letter here. 
It was within the last two weeks. The basic context of that letter 
was that the department would reluctantly agree to allow them to 
proceed with the plans that were recommended by the study that 
they had done, providing the city would give assurance that they 
would proceed towards complete secondary sewage treatment — 
work towards it steadily until they achieve complete secondary 
sewage treatment. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you say 
within the last two weeks the department has been in touch with 
the city of Saskatoon. Would it be possible to obtain a copy of the 
transmission that occurred between the department and the city 
urging them onward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think it’s normal practice for a 
department to release its correspondence with a client, even in the 
legislature. If the hon. member needs more information than I’m 
providing to him, I would suggest to him that he come to my 
office, and I’ll have the appropriate staff meet with him to brief 
him on the position up to this point in time. But I don’t think the 
passing of the actual correspondence to a client would be in 
order. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I will be 
satisfied with a briefing on the subject and an extract which will 
contain the essence of the request of the city of  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1033 
 

Saskatoon with regard to improvements to the sewage treatment 
system. 
 
Now I want to know, Mr. Minister, in addition, what are the 
standards that the department is requesting of the city of 
Saskatoon to meet, aside from the fact that you grudgingly permit 
them to proceed with their plan which evolved from the study 
they did towards the secondary sewage treatment system? What 
are the elements of the standards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The regulations require that 85 per cent of 
the . . . Let me get the exact interpretation here. They use a bunch 
of technical terms that aren’t that meaningful to me. But basically 
it says that cities of the size of the city of Saskatoon must have 
secondary treatment process for its sewage and that they must 
meet. We have to have 85 per cent of biochemical oxygen 
demand — b.o.d. is the abbreviation that they use — and the 
suspended solids have to be removed. 
 
The city of Saskatoon is probably one of the very few cities of its 
size in Canada that doesn’t have secondary sewage treatment. 
And it’s been a long, ongoing negotiation as long as we’ve had a 
Department of Environment that the city proceed to move in that 
direction and to indeed accomplish it. We’ve had considerable 
difficulty, as the member likely knows, of getting the city to 
move far enough to meet that requirement. 
 
Today we have the Meewasin Valley Authority in Saskatoon 
wanting to make use of the river downstream from the city of 
Saskatoon for recreation and a number of things. And I think 
because of the requirements that are now being requested of the 
government to see that the water is usable to other communities 
downstream, makes it even more urgent that we proceed to 
complete secondary sewage treatment in the city of Saskatoon at 
the earliest possible time. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I agree 
whole-heartedly with the urgency of the issue which the minister 
puts before us at this time. I was of the same position when I was 
on Saskatoon city council, interestingly enough, Saskatoon city 
council, being a child of the province of Saskatchewan, has to 
curb their expenditures to meet the financial revenue that they 
have flowing into the city of Saskatoon. 
 
While on council I kept fairly close attention to the provincial 
grants to the city of Saskatoon, and I did some graphing of those 
grants. This is urban assistance and traffic safety. And it shows, 
under a New Democratic government, Mr. Minister, the graph 
rising sharply, and under a Conservative government, falling 
rapidly. Now for the members that can’t understand that, I’ll be 
glad to send over pictures. 
 
I followed closely the comprehensive financing of the city of 
Saskatoon. This is only a couple of the components of the 
financing. The comprehensive financing from the province of 
Saskatchewan to the city of Saskatoon covering the whole gamut 
of revenue sources — urban assistance; transit; capital operating; 
community capital fund, which is now the PC fund; health; 
library; other  

items. And I see in the period of ‘83 to ‘85, the urban assistance 
being pegged at 7 per cent, dropping to 5 per cent, and dropping 
to zero. 
 
And I see the actual figures, the drop, year over year in the city of 
Saskatoon to be quite severe. In 1982 to ‘83 it dropped $649,000. 
The following year it dropped over $2 million. And the following 
year it dropped another $2 million. 
 
Interestingly enough, it went up in 1986 by just under half a 
million dollars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t know what the hon. member is trying 
to arrive at by his comments, but I can assure the hon. member 
that the Department of Environment is not in a position to give 
grants to anyone. So for any of the failures that you’re listing, this 
department would not be responsible. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I appreciate the information of the 
minister, Mr. Chairman,. but the point of what I intended to 
establish at this time, to bring us right up to date, and this is the 
most recent financial statement of the city of Saskatoon . . . While 
the city of Saskatoon was awaiting the provincial budget being 
brought down in this Chamber, which caused a fair bit of stress in 
the financing of the city of Saskatoon, shows the provincial 
capital fund deleted. And it shows drops in revenue of substantial 
amounts — another drop of about $4 million in these main 
components of revenue to the city of Saskatoon. And just recently 
the city of Saskatoon, at its council meeting, discussed a number 
of projects that would be deferred. 
 
(1545) 
 
Now I know the minister is serious when he says the sewage 
treatment in the city of Saskatoon is important, not only for the 
city of Saskatoon, but for the constituency of Rosthern, for 
example, communities in the constituency of Rosthern, and other 
communities further downstream. And I see by the news, that the 
city of Saskatoon has deleted the water pollution control . . . or 
the province of Saskatchewan has deleted the water pollution 
control grant which would have provided the city of Saskatoon in 
the neighbourhood of $1.8 million. 
 
Now we’re not talking about small change, here, Mr. Minister; 
$1.8 million cancelled on June 24, 1987, after the budget came 
down. And within two days the city of Saskatoon was notified of 
that particular cut in that grant. This particular grant affects 
directly the implementation of that which you say is so important, 
Mr. Minister, and which I agree with you. And I’m sure all my 
compatriots form the city of Saskatoon, on either side of the 
House, will agree that it is very important. 
 
And I want to know what resistance, Mr. Minister, you provided 
within the government when these grants, this cut of this grant 
was announced or decided by the province of Saskatchewan. I 
want to know what kind of a fight you put up, and why this grant 
was cut by the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I advise the hon. member that grants  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1034 
 

are not made from the Department of Environment. If you want 
to ask that question at the time when the water corporation is 
before the Assembly, I’d be glad to deal with it. 
 
There is no grant guaranteed for eternity by anyone. And the city 
of Saskatoon, had they moved at any time between 1968 and 
now, could have accessed the same grants as anybody else. And 
in the future they’ll access the same grants as anyone else. But 
you can’t sit and cry if you wait for 20 years before you move. 
and basically that’s what’s happened, is that the grant program 
has changed; it applies to not just one city, but it applies to 
everyone. 
 
I might tell you that when you’re making decisions to cut in a 
budget, we all have to get involved — you have to, I have to, if 
we’re going to provide the method for our province to continue. 
So if the hon. member would like to ask questions of that type at 
the time that the water corporation is up, I’d be glad to deal with 
it under that budget. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I take the minister at his 
word. He says we all have to get involved. And I asked the 
minister specifically: what was his involvement when his 
government was cutting out this grant to anybody in 
Saskatchewan, but specifically to the city of Saskatoon. I said, 
what was his involvement in our arguing against that? Why was 
this grant cut out? 
 
I want to say to the hon. minister, and I’m sure he’s acquainted 
with the facts, in 1980 the city of Regina received a 10 per cent 
grant from this pollution control program and other funds form 
the federal government. And I know the grant’s been cut off. But 
I asked the minister specifically: what kind of fight did you put 
up when your government was cutting off a grant which would 
have assisted the city of Saskatoon in a most important endeavour 
— improving the quality of effluent put into the South 
Saskatchewan River by the sewage treatment plant. The minister 
has evaded that question. I want to have an answer for that, and 
not from the member from Weyburn who sits in his seat and 
cackles away but provides no information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member has asked what my 
involvement was. I was at the cabinet table. The decisions that are 
made at that cabinet table, I’m not allowed to come out and say to 
the general public what input I had on either side of any question. 
I was part of the decision, because I am a member of that cabinet, 
and I made no bones about it. 
 
I would tell the hon. member that if the city of Saskatoon had 
moved at the same time that the city of Regina did — and I might 
tell you that the city of Regina is not now at the secondary 
sewage treatment stage, they’re at the tertiary treatment stage, 
which is one further yet — if the city of Saskatoon had moved at 
that time, they would have been eligible for the same kind of 
grant. 
 
But you know, grants have never stayed the same in any 
department over history. They have changed; they have 
continually changed. the grants that are in the budget at the time 
that you do a given project are the grants that apply. And I think 
that’s what the cities must realize. 

Maybe in the future, before Saskatoon is finished, there’ll be 
more than a 10 per cent grant down the road. Who knows? I 
couldn’t guarantee it, but I couldn’t guarantee that it would not be 
the case either. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I realize, 
for one, that grants don’t remain in place forever, and grants 
change from time to time. They go from CC fund to PC fund, and 
then they go into limbo. When the angel of darkness presented his 
budget on the 17th, obviously in that budget this particular grant 
was cut out. and what I’m saying is that I wanted to hear how the 
minister advocated on behalf of his department for the retention 
of this grant. 
 
The city of Saskatoon and all cities in Saskatchewan have been 
faced with declining revenue by this government ever since it got 
into office, except just before the election they gave it a little 
boost — but essentially declining revenue. And that’s one of the 
reasons the city of Saskatoon was not moving ahead with 
improvements. Some improvements have been made — the 
minister will be aware of that — over the last few years. But the 
city of Saskatoon has been faced with this consistent problem, by 
the minister, successive ministers of Finance from this 
government, of cut, cut, cut, cut. 
 
Urban areas are suffering, and the minister in charge of the 
environment cannot stand on his feet and say why this grant was 
cut. All he can give me is excuses, Mr. Chairman. I want to know 
what kind of advocacy he presented. And he need not disclose the 
secrets of the cabinet room. He needn’t say how the Minister of 
Finance wanted to cut the guts out of the cities of Saskatchewan 
as he has done successively over a number of years. He needn’t 
tell me that, because I know that; it’s there in the facts and 
figures, year after year. This Minister of Finance, and the 
previous minister of Finance, have cut and hacked and chopped at 
the urban areas of Saskatchewan. I want to know, how did you 
defend your program when your angel of darkness was cutting 
and slashing away? I want to know where you stood. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well when the hon. member asked me what 
my position was, my position was made very clear at the cabinet 
table. Cabinet is confidential. I’m not allowed to give you that 
position, and I don’t intend to give you that position because it 
wouldn’t be proper. But I did tell you that I was part of the 
decision. And when the decision is made, the whole cabinet is 
held responsible — not just the Minister of Finance, not just some 
other minister, but the whole cabinet. So I take as much 
responsibility as anyone else, and I have no problem with that. 
 
What I would like the hon. member to recall, and he was a 
member of the council in the city of Saskatoon for a number of 
years — I think four years. During that time, the city of 
Saskatoon has consistently maintained the lowest sewer and 
water rates in the province. If the city of Saskatoon wanted to do 
something to improve its sewer and water and its sewer treatment 
in particular, if they brought their rates in line with what people in 
Regina are paying, they could quite likely have provided 
sufficient capital to go ahead. So I think to cry and say it’s strictly 
because of this grant, is probably not right. 
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1035 
 

I might tell the hon. member that in the last year the total 
expenditure under that particular grant was under $200,000. So 
that wouldn’t have built much for the city of Saskatoon in the last 
year either. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, that I shall not 
rise again on this particular question, because clearly, clearly the 
minister is attempting to shift the discussion into some other area. 
He wants to shift the discussion over to why the city of Saskatoon 
doesn’t change its rates. Well that’s a question for another arena. 
The question for this arena is: why the hell did you cut that grant 
out? That’s what I want to know? What’s your reason? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I gave you all the reasons that I can give 
you. The decision was made at the cabinet table that that grant 
was not necessary today. We had to make cuts in the budget. That 
was one of the areas that was cut. It’s a very simple answer, sir. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to pursue, 
Mr. Minister, this line of questioning in a bit, although it touches 
on Saskatoon, to consider some of the larger ramifications of 
sewage treatment with respect to your responsibility for the 
environment downstream. 
 
You undoubtedly know, and officials of your department 
undoubtedly know, that in the last several years there have been a 
number of instances where there have been discharges of sewage 
from the Saskatoon municipal system by accident. 
 
In one case, in June of 1985, a broken shaft on a pump at a lift 
station in Saskatoon allowed untreated sewage to pour into the 
South Saskatchewan River from 9 a.m. to 1:30 p.m., discharging 
some 2.5 million litres which flowed directly into the river. And 
on another occasion we had another example in Saskatoon, in 
May of ‘85, of 81,000 gallons of raw sewage, untreated, also 
pouring into the river because of temporary blockage of a sewage 
system. There are other examples, minor examples, caused by 
heavy rain. 
 
I’m wondering, however, if you can tell me what steps your 
department has taken to ensure that these kinds of accidents don’t 
occur in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member raises a very significant 
concern that we have had with the city of Saskatoon, and there 
have been a number of spills — one as recently as last week. 
What we have done is to require the city of Saskatoon to have a 
portable chlorinating machine purchased so that they can go and 
chlorinate the spill immediately after it occurs. 
 
I suppose there’s no way of protecting any large operation like 
that large sewage pumping station from having equipment failure. 
That can happen,. But the number of spills have been significant. 
Our department has worked with them and asked them to come 
up with contingency plans to try and prevent spills. The success 
rate hasn’t been great up to this point in time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — When where discussions initiated on the  

portable chlorinating unit? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My staff member is not certain of the exact 
date. I t would have been more than a year ago. He doesn’t have 
the exact date in mind. It could be looked up. If that’s important 
to the member, we could do that. But it would have been more 
than a year ago. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — But the fact is that that the chlorinating unit is 
now in Saskatoon and is operative. Well that’s really 
commendable. And I .. if your department is in fact responsible 
for that sort of thing, I think that’s precisely the kind of role that 
your department should be playing. And I commend you for that. 
 
I’d be curious also to know what kind of monitoring is done to 
the river water downstream, particularly in light of the fact that 
communities like St. Louis take their drinking water from the 
river. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that in order to obtain licensing, 
the city has to agree to have sampling done in certain locations 
along the river downstream. As well, our department does 
sampling on a monthly basis. 
 
When a spill occurs, then the city is instructed which locations 
are required to be sampled immediately, which ones within a 
week — that sort of thing — so that we have monitoring all down 
the river until the spill is diluted enough to not cause a major 
problem. So our department would be on a monthly basis; the city 
is on an ongoing basis. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Your department does the monitoring for the 
downstream tests; and the city does the testing within the city 
limits? Is that the way it works? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The city of Saskatoon is required to do some 
testing downstream from the city. Because of the effluent 
disposal, they are required to monitor on a regular basis 
downstream. But our department also monitors on a monthly 
basis, just to be sure what we’re hearing from the city is correct. I 
think it’s important that we monitor at all times, and the city, 
because of it’s licensing, is required to do that monitoring. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Does the monitoring of your own department 
reflect a reduction in either the frequency of monitoring or in the 
number of locations in which the monitoring is done downstream, 
during the course of the last 12 or 16 months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There is a schedule of monitoring 
requirements that are written and attached right to the permit that 
the city of Saskatoon would get. There’s basically been no 
change in the requirement for monitoring for the city over the 
past 16 months. It’s the same. It’s been an ongoing kind of 
monitoring that’s been required. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Has there been any change in the monitoring 
that’s been taking place by the department downstream? 
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1036 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Our monitoring would also be very similar, 
except at the time when there’s a spill; then there would be extra 
monitoring done. But on an ongoing, regular basis, our 
monitoring would be very similar from year to year, except 
immediately following a spill. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I guess I’d like to ask specifically, though, if 
there’s been a reduction in your departmental monitoring, either 
in the number of sights in which testing is done or in the 
frequency with which that is done, during the course of the last of 
the last 12 or 16 months? Has there been any reduction in the 
monitoring of you department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My staff member advised me that there have 
always been adjustments. They take samples in one place, and in 
a different place at different times. But there has been no 
diminution of the amount of monitoring that has been done over 
the past 12 to 18 months. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — If that’s the case, again I commend you. I think 
it reflects a pro-active role, as we might say, toward our 
environmental stewardship, rather than just a reactive role to deal 
with things after they happen. 
 
I’d just like to conclude with a couple more very brief questions. 
Do members of your department ever sit down and consult not 
only with the officials in Saskatoon responsible for sewage 
treatment, but do they consult with communities downstream and 
share the results of your monitoring — maybe your own 
monitoring and the city of Saskatoon’s monitoring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We of course had a number of meetings with 
the sewage treatment people in the city of Saskatoon. That’s been 
ongoing because we’re trying to improve the method of treatment 
that’s being used there. 
 
When a spill occurs, we immediately notify the communities 
downstream of that spill, of the amount of the spill, problems 
likely to follow because of it, and the kinds of treatments that 
would be required to prevent any disease spread or that sort of 
thing in that community. 
 
St. Louis was notified again of the spill that occurred just now. So 
yes, we do have that. I wouldn’t say that they tell them what the 
Saskatoon tests are showing or the tests that we take are shown 
on a regular basis. I suppose during the spill period, yes, they do 
advise them when the water is back to a state where the water is 
normal again. But on an ongoing basis, when the meet with the 
city of Saskatoon, they don’t tell St. Louis the results of the 
discussions or anything of that nature. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Is there any problem in the council of St. 
Louis, for example, contacting the department to secure that kind 
of information if they desire it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that we have the data on 
computer and if there was a concern raised by St. Louis and they 
contacted us, we could provide that data. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have a few 
questions that I would like to direct to you also in the sewage 
treatment facilities in Saskatoon. 

First of all, Mr. Minister, as Minister of Environment, I assume 
that you have some goals and objectives, you know, that you 
would like to pursue and see accomplished in your particular 
department. I think every minister has that when they take over a 
particular department. 
 
And because you have that, I believe you must have some 
priorities, you know, things that you priories and you take before 
Executive Council and you say hey, look it; as Minister of the 
Environment here are some things that I think are of high 
importance to the Province of Saskatchewan, and as the Minister 
for the Environment, these are things that I simply must have or 
must accomplish. 
 
I have a high regard for your integrity, sir, as you probably know. 
But I find it a little bit difficult this afternoon to accept your stand 
when you spoke to the minister from Westmount in telling him 
that you were very concerned about the slow progress the city of 
Saskatoon has made over the years. And I agree with you, it’s 
very slow progress. At that, we can agree. 
 
But when you come before us here and say that you have the 
ultimate concern that the city of Saskatoon is not moving fast 
enough in improving its sewage treatment facility, and then on 
the other hand say to that same member that it is a decision by 
cabinet and therefore I have to abide by it, I’d like to have the 
minister show a little more indignation of the cutting of those 
grants that prevented the city of Saskatoon to move more rapidly 
in meeting the objectives and goals of your department. I’d like 
you to comment on that first and then I have a few other 
questions that I would like to ask of you, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The hon. member sat in cabinet for some 
years, and you realize that I’m not at liberty to come to you and 
tell you how I voted or what comments I made. And I think that’s 
fair ball. We make decisions as a cabinet; we have to all abided 
by those decisions, as you know. I have been concerned because 
the work with the city of Saskatoon by my department has been 
ongoing for a long period of time. 
 
The requirement for them to move to secondary sewage treatment 
has also been there for a long time. And for the city now to use a 
cop-out that says that because a certain grant was abolished, we 
can’t go ahead, I think that’s all it is, is a cop-out. Let me tell you 
that the water corporation at this time has had no request for 
funding from the city of Saskatoon. So you know, they used the 
grant but we haven’t had a request. So for to use that is really not 
very reliable information. 
 
No was it relates to the Department of Environment, we’ve had 
ongoing discussions with the city. We have asked them to give us 
a time frame that they would work towards to achieve complete 
secondary sewage treatment. To this day we haven’t been able to 
get that commitment from the city of Saskatoon. Even though it’s 
been worked on and asked for and letters have gone back and 
forth and meetings have taken place, right to this day we haven’t 
been able to get that commitment. That bothers me considerable. 
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1037 
 

You say, do I have goals? Yes I do; of course I do. And that is to 
protect the environment and to wherever possible, improve it. 
This is one of those areas where I think it should be and could be 
improved, is by moving to bring that city to complete secondary 
sewage treatment. 
 
Another area that I have had a major concern with and I think that 
it shows in the Speech from the Throne and the proposal that we 
will, in this session, bring forth a clean air Act. That’s an area that 
I have had a lot of concern about and I think it impacts on you 
and me and on almost everybody in society. 
 
So I think the overall goal I have is to protect, where possible, the 
environment that we live in, and wherever possible, to improve it 
to make a better place to live in for this generation and 
generations to come. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister let me say that I as an individual — 
and I’m speaking for myself — was very pleased when you were 
appointed to Minister of the Environment .. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You didn’t say so to the press. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — If the angel of darkness would just attend to his 
budget, Mr. Chairman, we’ll get along fine here. 
 
I intend to give the Minister of the Environment praise when 
praise is due, but I also want to tell the minister that you can’t put 
your department in isolation. You have a responsibility. 
 
The city of Saskatoon has suffered in the last number of years in 
grants that have been cut by your government. And since you are 
a member of the executive, you must bear responsibility in that 
regard as well. And I know you do. But you cannot have it both 
ways. You can’t ask the city of Saskatoon to move along with a 
secondary sewage plant and then at the same time, your 
government is cutting in all the other areas. And adding insult to 
injury, you cut the ten percent grant. 
 
Even if you hadn’t done that, Mr. Minister, you could have at 
least said to the city, look, were cutting in other areas, but I hold 
this up as high priority and so does my government and we want 
you to proceed. You can’t on the one hand say to the people of 
Saskatoon, improve your sewage treatment facilities; but on the 
other hand, we will not give you the finances to do this. I think 
that’s a hypocritical stand on the part of your government and the 
part of you, to take that stand with the citizens of Saskatoon. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Mayfair, because the 
member from Mayfair as a member of that cabinet should have 
been there also defending the citizens of Saskatoon and making 
sure that the grant was not cut .. And I want to tell you, Mr. 
Minister, that the people of the city of Saskatoon will find it very 
difficult to move ahead if you people .. all you do is show the 
rhetoric, but you won’t back it up with any finances. 
 
And I’m very disappointed that we cannot move ahead.  

We need to move ahead in the city of Saskatoon. It’s the fastest 
growing city, I’m told, in all of Canada, and yet we have a forth- 
and fifth-rate sewage treatment plant in the city. 
 
Our government wasn’t successful, when we were the 
government, in moving ahead. You aren’t at all successful. In 
fact, I think you’ve put a complete stop to it. I’m glad that 
consultation are still taking place. 
 
But I want to ask the minister .. You said that no proposals have 
come forth to the water corporation. Would you answer for me 
and for the people of Saskatoon: if such a proposal were to come 
forward, is there any money forthcoming from the water 
corporation if Saskatoon should proceed? Would there be any 
money forthcoming? 
 
I know you’re going to answer: well, I’m not the minister 
responsible for the water corporation. But you are the one that 
brought in the water corporation. Now I also want to ask you: can 
you tell me with some assurance that the city of Saskatoon would 
have at least some finances coming forth from the water 
corporation should they proceed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the hon. member realizes that it is a 
question beyond the jurisdiction of the estimates. But since I did 
say that there was no request, you know, it’s pretty hard to 
guarantee somebody some money if they never asked for any. So 
they did not come to the water corporation. 
 
And I see by the newspapers that they’re claiming that an 
agreement was broken. There’s been no agreement because 
there’s been no request. So that statement is absolutely wrong. 
And we will be dealing with the city to try to correct that. 
 
I can’t tell you what would be available if the city comes forward. 
It depends on what proposal they bring. And we talk to all groups 
that come forward, as you can appreciate. The city of Saskatoon I 
hope is soon going to come to some firm commitment within it’s 
own mind, of a time frame to arrive at a given goal. If you never 
arrive at that time frame, you’re never going to achieve it. 
 
I think they must make some decisions. The sewage treatment 
plant in that city hasn’t really experienced much improvement 
from the time that it was a city of about 75,000. Now it’s 176 or 
7. So, you know, we basically have 100,000 more people, with no 
improvement. 
 
When you have the number of people and the population growth, 
the city is not without the capability of generating some funds 
itself. I understand they have generated some and have some 
reserves to apply this kind of project. So I think it’s time that they 
set some parameters of when they’re going to achieve it, and 
move in that direction. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the minister’s 
remarks. But, Mr. Minister, you must also realize that there is no 
way that the city, with all the cuts that it has endured .. and you 
must admit that they were substantial over the last number of 
years, particularly this  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1038 
 

year. I mean, those people are politicians also. And what you are 
simply doing is you’re saying to those people, yes, we’re going to 
reduce our budget dramatically by cutting your grants. And on 
the other hand, you’re saying, but we want you to proceed. As the 
Minister of Environment, I’ve got to see to it that you proceed 
with improving your sewage treatment facilities. 
 
I think that is really taking a .. Well that’s the real cop-out, I think 
. (inaudible interjection) .. Yes. You’re saying the city is copping 
out. What I’m saying to you is, you as the Minister of the 
Environment are copping out of your responsibility. If you think, 
as the Minister responsible for the Environment, that the 
treatment improvement for Saskatoon, the sewage treatment for 
Saskatoon, is a high priority for you, then you should have seen 
to it to convince your colleagues that that grant was not cut to the 
city of Saskatoon. 
 
I think if there was a cop-out, it was a cop-out by your 
government. That’s where the cop-out came. And how can you 
expect the people of Saskatoon and the city of Saskatoon to come 
forth with any time frame at all if they don’t know what the 
finances are going to be? There’s no way that they can commit 
themselves to a tertiary plant, which would cost probably 40 to 
$50 million, with no assistance from the province. I think that is 
asking the impossible for the city of Saskatoon. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that had the city of Saskatoon 
elected four or five more PC members to this House, that grant 
would never have been cut. That grant would never have been 
cut. I say it with all honesty. And I believe that what you people 
have done, and what your .. not what you maybe have done, but 
what your cabinet colleagues have done, is said to the city of 
Saskatoon: we’re going to teach you people a lesson; you didn’t 
elect enough PC members in Saskatoon, and consequently we’re 
going to make you suffer for it, not only in that 10 per cent grant, 
but in all other grants that your government has cut. 
 
I think that’s unfair, and I think that you should do the honourable 
thing — go back to your cabinet colleagues and convince them to 
re-establish that 10 per cent grant, so that we can move on with 
the improvement of sewage treatment facilities for the city of 
Saskatoon. Go back. Tell your cabinet colleagues they made a 
mistake. And let’s review the situation and see to it that we can 
improve the sewage treatment facilities for the City of Saskatoon. 
Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I indicated to the hon. member that the 
grants program is not under this department. But I can tell you 
this much, sir, that the grant change does not affect the city of 
Saskatoon, period. It affects the province. It’s not any one group, 
it’s the whole of the province. 
 
For you to make a wild statement that if we’d elected three or 
four more PC members in Saskatoon or 10 more, it wouldn’t 
have changed anything. And I can guarantee that to the hon. 
member. If he wants this to break down into just political 
rhetoric, he’s starting in the right  

direction. And that’s all it would be, because he has absolutely no 
fact anywhere. The member is day-dreaming if that’s what he 
thinks. And I’ll say quite openly to you — that had nothing to do 
with the decision. The decision was made; it doesn’t affect any 
one group; it affects the whole of the society within the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I will believe that maybe in your 
own mind that did not enter your decision. But don’t tell me that 
didn’t enter the decision of the Executive Council. I will not 
believe you on that, and I know that we beg to differ on that 
particular topic. 
 
Let me ask the minister .. you’re saying it affects the whole of the 
province. Do you mean to tell me that Regina did not get the 10 
per cent grant? If Regina got the 10 per cent grant, why do you 
not think that Saskatoon is deserving of the 10 per cent as well? 
My understanding is that Regina did take advantage of it, and 
Saskatoon was anticipating taking advantage of it and the grant 
was cut. 
 
Secondly, let me ask you the other question. Why, Mr. Minister, 
was it not in the budget? Why was the grant not .. why would the 
Minister of Finance not announce that the grant was cut? Why 
was it announced after the budget was presented? Why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member says, why did Regina get a 
grant and Saskatoon did not? Regina moved to do their sewage 
treatment about 10 years ago, or eight years ago, or whatever it 
was. 
 
Grants don’t stay the same forever. If Regina goes ahead to do 
something in the year 1987, they would be eligible for the exact 
same grants as the city of Saskatoon would be eligible for. That’s 
very plain and simple. That would apply to cities like Swift 
Current or Yorkton or Prince Albert or North Battleford or 
wherever. So it’s the same across the country, everybody has the 
same privilege. 
 
The city of Saskatoon did not choose to move forward. The grant 
was in place over the past number of years, and they did not 
choose to move forward. So I can’t really account as to why the 
city of Saskatoon didn’t move; I wish they had. We encourage 
them . I should say the department encourages them and has been 
encouraging long before this change. 
 
Now you ask me why the grant was not in announced in the 
budget. The funding to the water corporation was announced and 
the estimates were laid on the table. That’s the way it’s 
announced in the budget; you don’t read every figure of any 
budget. And two days later, I believe, is the statement that the city 
of Saskatoon used. They got a letter. I think that’s fairly quick, 
considering Saskatchewan’s mail service at this point in history. I 
think two-day turn-around from the time of the budget until they 
got the information was very quick. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, would you agree 
with me that ..As a minister, you say that’s a high priority for you 
to get improvement in the sewage treatment in Saskatoon. If it’s 
such a high priority, do you not agree that you could accomplish 
one of your goals at least, and go down in history as the minister 
that got this  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1039 
 

thing off the ground, if you still had that grant available? 
 
If that is such a high priority for you, why then were you not able 
to convince your cabinet colleagues that if we’re going to 
improve the facilities in Saskatoon, and I believe — I’m speaking 
now for the minister — and I believe it’s a high priority, why 
were you not able to convince your cabinet colleagues then to 
help you along in your objectives to get this off the ground? 
 
Why weren’t you able to convince them? Did they not feel it was 
a high priority? Did they not think that your department of 
Environment was important? Why weren’t you able to convince 
your cabinet colleagues? Would you mind just giving me your 
opinion on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I indicate to the hon. member that the 
discussions that occur in the cabinet are confidential discussions. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I don’t want that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I know the member doesn’t want that. I 
don’t want to go down in history. I want to live for awhile, and 
you don’t get into history until afterwards. So I’m not in a hurry 
at all to get in history. 
 
I would like to see some improvements in the Saskatoon sewage 
treatment plant. I think if we continue to work together and try to 
arrive at the same goal, perhaps we will. We’ve had ongoing 
discussions with that city. We will continue to have discussions, 
and I hope we’ll have more than discussions, but some action. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, two further 
questions. Would you mind telling me what .. obviously you must 
have done some estimates as to what the cost would be for a 
secondary treatment plant in Saskatoon and a tertiary treatment 
plant in Saskatoon. What would be the approximate cost? I don’t 
want it within a few dollars. What would be the approximate cost 
of a secondary and a tertiary treatment plant be for the city of 
Saskatoon? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s a difficult figure to pin down because, as 
the member knows, inflation keeps changing a figure. I think that 
at the time the city of Saskatoon did it’s estimates of the cost, it 
was in the neighbourhood of 40 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is that for secondary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes. The tertiary treatment, I don’t think 
they’ve even dreamed about yet. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me, in your 
departments own time frame, when would you hope that this 
secondary treatment plant would come about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The city of Saskatoon has proposed that they 
would be willing to go ahead with what they called digesters, 
which are, in my mind at least, are just glorified sewage lagoons 
with some chemicals added.  

We would like to see them move with that immediately. The time 
frame to come into complete secondary sewage treatment hasn’t 
yet been arrived at. We would like it to have been in place by 
now. It’s not, evidently, so we have to sit down and negotiate a 
time frame. The sooner it can be achieved, the better it will be for 
the people downstream and the ecology within the river system 
itself. So I don’t think we can allow just the digesters that they’re 
suggesting to be in place for a long period of time — I think three 
years, four years, something of that range should be a reasonable 
goal — that they should move forward and try to achieve 
complete secondary sewage treatment. Those are just figures in 
my mind. They’re not written anywhere. There’s no agreement 
with the city of Saskatoon, but I think we should be working in 
that parameter somewhere. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I just want to .. you mentioned that 
you were going to bring in a clean air Act. Could I ask you 
several questions? First of all, when do you anticipate bringing it 
in — is it in this session? Secondly, what are the two or three 
main objectives of that clean air act? I don’t want the whole 
listing, just two or three of the main ones. And thirdly, is there 
going to be any finances .. are there going to be any finances 
available for the cities, in working with you, in accomplishing the 
objectives of the clean air act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As the member knows, we’ve had an Air 
Pollution Control Act in place for a number of years, since about 
1975 or ‘76. The new clean air act will use many of the original 
outlines of that particular piece of legislation, except that 
legislation excluded any industry that was in place prior to the 
implementation of the legislation. The intent is that we will go 
back and pick up the industries that were excluded by this piece 
of legislation because it seems that they’ve had 10 years or 11 
years to correct many of their problems. 
 
It has been discussed at length with most of the industries that 
would be involved. And for that reason we think that we can 
move forward now, and it should improve the emissions at most 
of the major plants inside the boundaries of Saskatchewan. That’s 
the main purpose of the act. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I had asked the minister to also 
indicate to me whether or not there will be any financial 
assistance available to the cities and to other urban centres in 
order to accomplish the objectives of the clean air Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There will be no grant program going along 
with the legislation. 
 
There will be a phase-in period allowed and negotiated with the 
industries that need to change. Many of the industries have 
adjusted over the period that we’re speaking of and now would 
come well within the guide-lines. So it won’t impact every 
industry to large sums of money. It will impact some. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — My last comment, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
just want to say that I — and I want to repeat — that I, as you 
know, have a lot of respect for you as an individual. But let me 
say this, that I am terribly  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1040 
 

disappointed that you are not able to convince your cabinet 
colleagues of the importance of giving financial assistance to the 
financially-strapped city of Saskatoon. It’s the largest city in the 
province, and we are financially strapped. And this has come 
about because of the cut-back of grants, and they are in the 
millions. We can add them up for you. They are in the millions, 
of cut-backs for the city of Saskatoon over the last four or five 
years. And I think it’s a little unfair of your department and your 
government to put the pressure on the city of Saskatoon and say 
that they’re copping out because they are not moving ahead with 
the improvement of the sewage treatment plant. 
 
I think the biggest cop-out is by you people. If you wanted the 
city to move ahead, then you should have provided the financial 
incentive for them to do so, and said to the city of Saskatoon: 
look, we’re doing our fair share, we want you to proceed, and 
even though there are cuts in other areas, there will be no cuts in 
this area because we believe it is important that you proceed. And 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, you must bear that responsibility, and 
so must your cabinet colleagues. And I am disappointed that you 
will not go back, will not go back to your cabinet colleagues and 
convince the minister who had the grants to reinstate those grants 
so that we can pursue this matter of improving the sewage 
treatment facilities in Saskatoon. 
 
I will be back to you on this in this session and if you are still the 
minister next year. But more than likely be moved to somewhere 
else, and that’s why I said before: what is your time frame? What 
is your time frame for this? Because next year we may be talking 
to another minister, and you have only a short period of time 
within to work as a cabinet minister in any particular department. 
And during that time you must set your priorities; you must stick 
by them; and you must say this is what I wan t to accomplish, and 
I’m going to do it. One of the highest priorities should have been 
for you, for the city of Saskatoon, to make sure they had financial 
wherewith to pursue and proceed with the improvement of 
sewage treatment in the city of Saskatoon. Mr. Minister, I don’t 
have any further questions. I will turn it over to my colleagues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I just want to indicate to the hon. member 
that I do say it’s a cop-out for the city of Saskatoon to use the 
deletion of the 10 per cent grant now as the reason that they 
haven’t moved to secondary sewage treatment, because the grant 
was in place all the years that we tried to get that accomplished; 
they never moved. And now to say that because the grant isn’t 
there, that’s the whole reason why we haven’t moved, that’s not 
fair. 
 
For me to go to cabinet and argue strictly for a grant for the city 
of Saskatoon would not be fair either. I have to deal with grants 
that affect all of these cities and towns and villages equally. And I 
assure you that I will do what I can to try and achieve that goal. 
Sometimes you’re successful, sometimes you’re not. But I at least 
will work towards it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I’m very pleased to hear that in fact you did have  

goals and objectives for your department. We spent somewhat 
close to a week and a half so far in trying to get you to define 
what those goals and objectives were. And it’s good to see that in 
fact we can both agree that we want a better quality of life and 
quality of the environment for ourselves, for our children, and for 
our children’s children. We are, as they say, custodians of the 
future when it comes to the environment. And we have not .. we 
are not the guardians of the environment today. We don’t own it, 
but we’ve just borrowed it from future generations. 
 
Which brings me, Mr. Minister, to something that’s been 
bothering myself, and bothering a great many people in 
Saskatchewan in regards to the environment. And that’s the 
question of, as I said earlier on in these estimates, the degradation 
of the environment — in fact, a going backers when it comes to 
environmental quality, as opposed to going ahead and doing the 
kind of things that we want to do. 
 
And I’d like to just read to you, Mr. Minister, some sources other 
than myself to back up what I’m saying in this regard. And we 
have here a story in the March 19 issue of the Star Phoenix, and a 
comment in the column written by Tom Loran who’s the well 
known writer in environmental matters in Saskatoon. And the 
headline of this article is “Environmental quality concerns 
federation.” And it starts off: 
 

A depressing list of set-backs for environmental quality was 
released recently by the National Wildlife Federation. 

 
While it involved the United States, some of it’s findings 
doubtlessly would apply to Canada, and we’ll get on to that in a 
minute. We’ll get on to that particularly as it regards to 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Other findings give us a taste of what’s to come unless we 
begin to act far more responsibly in respect to the environment 
than is indicated to date. 

 
It goes on to say, Mr. Minister, that: 
 

In general, 1985 was a bleak year for wildlife, the federation 
reports. Wetlands loss was put at 350,000 acres, and water at 
25 per cent to the wildlife refuges was polluted. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

While carbon monoxide and lead emissions have been cut by 
two thirds in the last decade, sulphur dioxide, and nitrogen 
dioxide, key factors in the formation of acid rain, threaten the 
health of thousands of lakes and streams. Major portions of the 
country are threatened by acid rain (it says) and at least half of 
America’s population live in areas below the clean air Act’s 
ozone standard. 

 
You’ve mentioned the clean air Act earlier on this afternoon, and 
we’ll get into that, no doubt, a little later, as estimates go on. And 
no doubt when you introduce the act, we’re going to have to take 
a look at some of the  
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1041 
 

standards as they apply to the clean air Act in the United States, 
and whether or not they worked; also the Air Pollution Control 
Act here in Saskatchewan, and whether the fact it has worked in 
cutting down on acid rain, and in fact cutting down on the 
degradation of the environment, and those kind of things. 
 
I’m glad to hear that in fact you are going to introduce this clean 
air Act, which will remove the “grandfather clause,” as they call 
it, from polluting industries such as the power dams and the 
power generating stations in this province, and other industries, 
such as Ipsco, that impact directly on the area that I and my 
children, or my wife and my child, live in, and the constituency 
that I represent. 
 
Now we have a sort of intense personal interest in this kind of 
thing. But the story goes on and, as it says, it’s a bleak, bleak 
picture of what’s happening with the environment in the United 
States. And like I say, that’s a little bit like looking into the 
future, into our own future, unless we take responsible action — I 
guess the words that Mr. Loran uses on that regard. 
 
Because if we don’t look at that kind if responsible actions, we’ll 
see more headlines like this: this is from the Star Phoenix, May 
13, 1986 — not very long ago. And the headline says: 
Saskatchewan’s lack of prairie blamed for extinctions. 
 

Saskatchewan has a reputation of environmental circles, and 
that’s nothing to be proud of. 

 
And this story is by Dan Zakreski of the Star Phoenix. 
 

Saskatchewan has a reputation of environmental circles, and 
that’s nothing to be proud of. 

 
The province has the dubious distinction of being the home, or 
the former home, of the greatest number of extinct or 
endangered animals in Canada, Stan Shadick said Monday at a 
special meeting of the Saskatoon Natural Historical Society. 

 
(1645) 
 

Whooping cranes made their nests in the province until the 
1920's, as did the Greater prairie chicken. The Black footed 
ferret and the Swift fox, once both found in the province, are 
extinct, he said. 

 
Saskatchewan consider itself to be one of three Canadian 
prairie provinces, yet most people would have a difficult time 
finding any prairie left. Because of the continuing loss of 
native prairie, several species of wildlife in this province have 
become extinct. 

 
Establishing a Grasslands National Park would reverse this 
trend.. 

 
And it goes on to say that: 
 

While publicly supporting our concerns, governments at both 
the federal and provincial level have displayed a shocking lack 
of action in establishing the park. Petty squabbles and  

bureaucratic red tape have continued to delay plans to obtain 
land for the park. 

 
Now I know that the question of the grasslands park will have to 
be left when we deal with the estimates from the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation, given the fact that it’s the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation from which your minister is responsible, that 
in fact is stalling the park, and is stalling the implementation of 
the park, and is throwing road-blocks into the development of a 
national park in Canada. 
 
But surely, sir, if your words were to be believed, and if you’re 
sincere in what you say is your plan for the environment, then 
you, putting on your hat as the Minister of Environment, either 
you can put your action and your concern over the long-term 
environment for this province, you can put it together. And in 
dealing with the whole question of Grasslands on that basis, or in 
fact, you should resign your portfolio as Minister of the 
Environment and stick strictly with the water corporation, if in 
fact you want to keep throwing road-blocks in the way of the 
formation of the grasslands park. 
 
Now that’s the view, by the way, of the Saskatoon chairman of 
the Natural History Society for Saskatchewan. He says that, in 
fact, you, as Environment Minister, and acting also under the 
rubric of Sask Water Corporation, are putting the way in the 
formation of a grasslands park and hindering, in fact, hindering 
the preservation of prairie land and species like the burrowing 
owls, and so on, and so forth. But, Mr. Minister, if your words are 
to be believed, I want to quote from a November 5, 1986 story in 
the Leader-Post. And that story says, “Wildlife Foundation 
Views Saskatchewan.” It’s a report by the Wildlife Habitat 
Canada, said that this province . . .David Neatt, the executive 
director of the Wildlife Habitat, Canada, a conservation group, 
says that: 
 

.. the province has a tremendous problem with agriculture..(He 
says, in fact) .. 40 per cent of the province’s wildlife 
co-habitates with agriculture .. (And the report says that) .. 
Over time, 1.2 million hectares of wetland on the parries have 
been converted to agricultural use, more in Saskatchewan than 
anywhere else. 

 
In other words, the wetland areas which form the refuge for the 
wildfowl, that forms, in fact, the little pockets that we see in the 
prairies that protect the wildfowl in Saskatchewan, and also forms 
the habitat for the other species like deer, and so on and so forth, 
that that, in fact that wetland is being drained at an appalling rate. 
 
This is part of a long-term trend that we’re viewing in 
Saskatchewan. It’s also part of a long term problem that we’re 
seeing throughout North America as, in fact, agricultural land 
comes into being and natural areas are put under the plough. And 
it’s a problem. And you’ve got to admit that there is a problem in 
that regard. What I’d like to ask you in regards to that problem is 
this: what has your department done in the last year to conserve 
wetlands? 
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1042 
 

Secondly, how many acres of wetlands have been lost to the 
province over the last year? And can you also tell us how many 
acres of wetlands have been lost to the province over the ten 
years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would ask the hon. member to direct that 
question to the Minister of Parks and renewable resources who is 
the minister responsible for the wildlife and the preservation of 
wetlands and things of that nature. It doesn’t fall under the 
Department of Environment at all. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well surely, Mr. Minister, as the Minister of 
Environment, you’re concerned with the question of the 
conservation of our land, and surely you’re concerned with the 
whole question of the conservation and the development of 
wetlands. And I noticed that you in fact have made several 
statements in the past concerning wetlands. I’m just wondering 
maybe, have you got any information as to the wetlands that have 
been lost in the province, and also what has your department done 
in regards to convincing the Minister of Parks, or any o f the 
other ministers, in the importance of conserving wetlands in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I really don’t have an authority to answer 
questions on wetlands — that’s not part of this department. We 
are here in the Department of Environment, dealing with 
environmental subject matter. If the member has questions on 
environment, I would appreciate if he would return to those. The 
questions that you’re asking now would more properly be asked 
of the Minister of Parks and renewable resources. Alt that time, 
you would likely get the answers that you’re seeking. But I really 
don’t expect that I should answer them here, and I would just 
leave it at that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, the question I asked you was simple 
and direct; what have you done as a Minister of Environment to 
encourage, to encourage the Minster of Parks and renewable 
resources to take major action in protecting the wetlands and the 
use of wetlands and the preservation of wetlands in 
Saskatchewan? Have you done anything in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — When the subject comes up for discussion in 
cabinet, I have an opportunity to speak, and I do speak — I’m 
extremely interested in the subject. But it has nothing to do with 
the Department of Environment. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I beg to differ. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that 
we’re dealing with the environment of the province, and 
somehow the Minister of the Environment should have 
something to do. 
 
I raised earlier on a question regarding the drainage of Adams 
Lake. You promised at that time, earlier on in these estimates, 
that you would have your department officials look into the 
matter and report back. I wonder, are you able now to report back 
as to the situation at Adams Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The hon. member is asking for information 
with regard to Adams Lake, and I would read into the record the 
report that we have on that project. 
 

The development at Adams Lake in June of 1986,  

Saskatchewan Environment received from Ducks Unlimited a 
proposal to take over and upgrade an existing PFRA 
impoundment on Adams creek in Cypress Hills Provincial 
Park. 

 
Ducks Unlimited’s proposed project would involve 
construction of a cross-dike to create two basins; a level ditch 
to connect the two basins, and replacement of the existing 
embankment, including the addition of a control structure 
therein. 

 
The purpose is to stabilize wetland conditions and therefore 
improve water-fowl habitat, including that for trumpeter 
swans. After careful review of the proposal, Saskatchewan 
environment indicated to Ducks Unlimited that the project was 
not a development, as defined in The Environmental 
Assessment act, and therefore ministerial approval under that 
legislation would not be required. 

 
We have confirmed the members report a drainage of Adams 
Lake. It is associated with the construction of the proposed 
structures by Ducks Unlimited. 

 
And I might just add that I was advised by the Minister of Parks 
just a moment ago that the trumpeter swans are nesting, and 
indeed there are some young that have hatched this year. So it’s a 
good indication that the project is working. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, in that regard, will Adams Lake be 
recharged by, is it the . . . to your knowledge that the lake itself 
will be recharged with waters, one way or the other, either as a 
result of the development or by natural occurrence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that yes, it will be recharged 
with water. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Does the department have any idea of when in 
fact that may take place? Is it short or long term? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We really don’t have the answer for that 
question. Perhaps the Minister of Parks will have that as well. But 
it will be recharged, I’m advised, but we don’t have the time 
frame. 
 
Mr. Lyons; — Okay. Just one more question on that and it’s a 
technical question: when the assessment branch of your 
department was looking into the subjects of the Adams Creek and 
Adams Lake development down there for Ducks Unlimited, did 
that assessment branch look at the effect it would have on Adams 
Lake and sort of have some kind of notion of what would happen 
to the lake itself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — When the department reviewed the proposal 
for Adams Lake, they found the lake ink the condition it was in 
not to be really valuable for wildlife or for water-fowl, and so 
they looked at this project as really an enhancement of the overall 
value to the environment of the lake and the surrounding 
wetlands. It would be controlled under that project. 
  



 
July 8, 1987 

1043 
 

The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 
 


