













































October 8, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 8, 1987 

 

 

3219 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 34 — An Act to 

amend The Prescription Drugs Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I was so rudely 

interrupted by the 5 o’clock time, I had been trying to describe 

to the Conservative members opposite the unfairness of this Bill 

34, of this drug tax, or tax on prescription drugs, this tax on sick 

people. I believe I had covered a fair number of points briefly, 

to present the unfairness picture. I was describing how the 

changes to The Prescription Drugs Act are simply attacks on 

poor people and attacks on sick people. 

 

I had outlined, Mr. Speaker, how unfair the $125 deductible is 

because, as I pointed out, it is not a deductible or a tax on 

everybody. It is only a tax on people who require prescription 

drugs during that year. And for that reason, it’s a tax on the 

sick, primarily, and it leaves the people who are well scot-free, 

if you like, in this particular instance. And that has some very 

serious ramifications for people that are on long-term 

prescription drugs. I am of course referring to the many people 

in Saskatchewan that are on heart medication or high blood 

pressure medication, diabetics, and people with similar medical 

problems. 

 

I outlined how drugs are being misused, how prescription drugs 

are indeed being misused — not abused like the government 

would have us believe. They are trying to paint a picture, I 

believe, of the citizens of Saskatchewan using prescription 

drugs just at random or at will and taking more prescription 

drugs than they need. I pointed out that doctors prescribe the 

drugs; the patients don’t prescribe the drugs. A patient goes to a 

doctor when the patient is feeling ill and the doctor then 

prescribes whatever is needed. Sometimes they prescribe 

simply exercise; sometimes they prescribe a change in diet; 

sometimes they prescribe medication. And if the doctor 

prescribes medication, I don’t think it’s up to any of us in this 

legislature who are not medical doctors to try and second guess 

that prescription. Indeed, I just don’t think that any of us are 

qualified to second guess the medical profession. 

 

I also outlined how illnesses are going to result from the misuse 

of medication. By misuse I mean when people have a monthly 

supply and they know they aren’t going to have money at the 

end of the month to buy the next month’s prescription. So rather 

than taking, for example, if the prescription called for a pill a 

day, rather than taking the pill a day they would take one pill 

perhaps every second day and try and stretch it out until they 

thought they might have the money on hand to renew their 

prescription. 

 

Those were just some of the things that I outlined before  

the 5 o’clock supper break. Some of the things that I didn’t get 

to, Mr. Speaker, are the election promises of the members 

opposite. Where are the election promises? Where did they go? 

As soon as the election is over, it’s just gone like so much 

smoke. It’s not much wonder that the people — not just of 

Saskatchewan but of Canada, and I suspect it’s even more 

widespread than that — it’s not much wonder that the people 

hold politicians in general in such disdain and disregard when 

we have a government that makes promises. They promised 

we’re going to eliminate the dispensing fee. Well technically 

they did; technically they eliminated the dispensing fee on 

prescription drugs but they replaced it with a 20 per cent cost of 

every single prescription. Every prescription where there used 

to be a maximum charge of $3.95 per prescription, now in many 

cases that cost has gone up. 

 

Indeed I outlined one instance in my own constituency where 

the total drug costs are now up front $359 per month. I have 

another case that I’ll get to a little bit later, but the 20 per cent 

of the drug costs for another family works out to $87 per month. 

That’s after they get the rebates all back. I’ll be dealing a little 

bit further with that, but their prescription drug costs have gone 

from something like $20 to nearly $90 just at the stroke of a 

pen. These are the points that I’m trying to make to the 

Conservative members opposite. When you make a promise, it 

should be kept. The people of Saskatchewan deserve that. They 

deserve that when you give them your word that you’re going to 

eliminate the gas tax, that you will eliminate it. You won’t 

impose like we’ve got in this present budget, a 7-cent-a-litre gas 

tax. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have been hit recently . . . well a 

month ago, they were hit with virtually a doubling of the 

registration fee for their vehicles, followed just scant days ago 

with a 10 per cent increase in the cost of purchasing their 

automobile insurance through SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance). Two hits. The first one cost the taxpayers $18 

million; the second one cost them $20 million; total $38 million 

from the motoring public. 

 

The motoring public, Mr. Speaker, also are in many instances 

some of the people that require prescription drugs from time to 

time. So it’s the same well that this government is going back to 

time after time after time, and I tell you that the people are fed 

up with nothing but taxes piled on taxes piled on taxes. And at 

the same time what do we have? One point seven billion dollars 

and growing daily that the government is giving to the oil 

industry in foregone royalties and tax holidays — $1.7 billion 

— 560 times what this Bill is going to save the government. 

 

They’re saving $34 million by your own figures — $34 million 

per year, and every single one of those dollars is saved on the 

backs of sick people. That’s why my colleagues on this side of 

the House are so adamant. We desperately want the government 

to withdraw this Bill. It is just affecting the wrong people, the 

sick people and the elderly and people that are on long-term 

medication. 

 

While we see the cost of our prescription drugs increasing so 

dramatically, we also have the spectacle where the  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3220 

 

people of Saskatchewan have been hit with a 40 per cent 

increase in the 5 per cent E&H tax. And they’ve been hit with a 

50 per cent increase in the flat tax — all of that this year alone. 

And it just does not jibe with any of the promises, and it 

certainly does not fit with the promise that prescription drug 

costs would be eliminated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my apologies for taking the time but I’m 

struggling with a cold, as I mentioned earlier. 

 

I outlined a problem, a concern with one of my constituents, a 

lady earning $495 a month with #359 up front prescription drug 

costs. And I’ve outlined her total income and her total drug 

cots, and of course, she has to pay her rent, her power, her 

telephone, her food bill — all of those things on that scant 

income. She does not qualify for social service . . . social 

assistance because her earnings, her income, is too great. And 

it’s a real tragedy. This woman has to make a choice, a hard 

choice, every day, time after time — is it going to be 

medication, my prescription drugs that I need, or is it going to 

be food which I also need? Those are the cruel choices that are 

facing her. 

 

I have one other example that I want to record. There is a young 

family in Regina North, my constituency, that have total drug 

cots of $435 per month, Mr. Speaker, $435 per month. And the 

drug costs are a result of a medical problem that two of their 

children have. It’s a very, very rare problem. There is only a 

handful of people with that problem in all of Saskatchewan. 

Surely, surely there should be some exemptions for extreme 

cases such as this one. 

 

This young couple, in addition to having to put out the $435, 

has to wait sometimes . . . Well we don’t know, but we know 

there are people that have waited two months for the rebate to 

come back from this cash-starved government, and they are 

waiting and waiting and waiting. How in the world is a young 

family supposed to . . . How is a young family supposed to raise 

their children and provide for them and to see that they are 

involved in some of the extra-curricular activities, some of the 

sports, that sort of thing? It is desperate enough to raise a family 

today without having to wonder about the prescription drugs 

and the medication that’s needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a better future for the prescription drug 

area. There can indeed be a future where again Saskatchewan 

government . . . And of course unfortunately, I think it’s going 

to come after the next election, when we again have a 

government that really genuinely cares about the people of 

Saskatchewan, a government that will share in the costs of 

prescription drugs in a meaningful manner — meaningful being 

totally or at very least, or at very worst, with a small dispensing 

fee such as we had before. That is part of the future of the 

medicare system in our great province that we will see again. 

Rest assured we will see it again. 

 

And I ask the government members opposite to do two things: 

first, one of you, if just one of you has got the courage to stand 

up and speak to this Bill, do so. When I sit down, stand up; 

speak to this Bill. You’re given the same opportunity that we 

are on this side of the House. Try and defend your tax on the 

sick people; try and  

defend it. The reason that nobody will stand up is because it is 

indefensible. But if you can’t defend it, if you can’t stand up in 

this House and defend this drug Bill, then at least have the 

decency to withdraw it. It is patently unfair. It is a tax on the 

sick. 

 

I see some of the government smiling and shaking their heads. 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, many of them are beyond reach. Many 

of the members opposite simply won’t recognize a baseball bat 

unless it hit them right between the eyes. That’s the tragedy that 

Saskatchewan people are apparently stuck with for the next 

number of years. They’re apparently stuck with that at least 

until the next election. 

 

In the meantime, have at least an iota of decency, withdraw this 

insane drug Bill — withdraw it. Take it away, or have to 

courage to speak on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am obviously opposed to Bill 34. I will proudly 

take my place and vote against it unless the government 

withdraws it, and then I will proudly stand up and congratulate 

the government for having the guts to realize that they’ve made 

a mistake and that they’re hurting the people of Saskatchewan. I 

will be the first person to congratulate them if they withdraw it; 

otherwise I will proudly vote against the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is with a 

tinge of sadness that I enter into this debate tonight, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I notice that after my colleague from Regina North had finished 

his words and had challenged the members opposite to stand in 

their places and to defend this Bill that has been put forward by 

the government opposite, that after he had concluded, Mr. 

Speaker, that you turned and you looked to the government side 

to see if there was anyone on that side who was going to 

address this Bill, and there was nary a move, not a twitch — not 

a twitch, not an indication of anyone on that side having the 

courage to stand and defend the Bill put forth and introduced to 

this House by the Minister of Health. 

 

Now the Minister of Health, I see he’s there and he’s with us 

this evening. And he likes to comment on this factor. And I 

have to . . . let me pay a small compliment to the Minister of 

Health, Mr. Speaker. I think, in light of the fact of the 

performance of the rest of his caucus, that he must feel himself 

under an extreme burden because he and he alone has had the 

courage on the government side to stand and speak to this Bill, 

albeit briefly, albeit briefly — stood and introduced this Bill to 

this House and quietly mumbled into his chin as he announced 

that it would be before the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan that the prescription drug plan was going to 

begin the dismantling process in this province. 

 

And I noted with interest the member from Wilkie, as I’ve 

stood her, he’s been chirping from his seat — chirping like a 

dodo bird in mating season. And does he have the courage to 

stand in this House and to put his wisdom, put  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3221 

 

his untapped and misunderstood wisdom on the record for the 

people of Saskatchewan? He stands and applauds. 

 

I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, does he applaud from his seat right 

now because he agrees with what I am saying, or does he do 

this as a sign of mockery? A sign of mockery, mockery for the 

rights of his constituents — for the rights of his constituents in 

this province who have been used to good quality, security in 

their health care system. And I invite the member from Wilkie 

to enter into this debate. 

 

I invite the member from Regina Wascana who chirped with us 

this afternoon; he had lots of comments from his seat. And the 

member from Saskatoon, the only Tory from Saskatoon, he 

chirps from his seat. And has he had the courage, has he had the 

courage to stand and make his position clear on this prescription 

drug plan dismantling that we’re seeing? 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, as the Tory representative from 

Saskatoon, if he would care to put his words forward for 

everyone in Saskatoon to understand as they prepare at some 

point in time to make a electoral decision in a by-election of 

Saskatoon Eastview. Can we hear from the member from 

Saskatoon? 

 

The member from Yorkton chirps, and the member from Arm 

River chirps, the member from Thunder Creek — but not one, 

Mr. Speaker, not one has the courage to stand in this Assembly 

and say that they stand with the Minister of Health, that they 

stand with their Premier in the introduction of this devastating 

Bill to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I address my remarks to this Bill this 

evening, I won’t bring into this Assembly examples of sad cases 

of people who have been affected, many of them seniors. I think 

the word devastated is not too strong a word to use in many of 

those cases because I know that many of my colleagues on this 

side have done that, and done it quite adequately. 

 

In standing here this evening, Mr. Speaker, I want to offer some 

reflections on the significance of this Bill, and I’d like to put 

them into the context of what’s going on in Saskatchewan 

today. Because the Bill cannot be fully understood simply in 

isolation. This Bill is yet another symptom, yet another 

symptom of the betrayal of the sacred trust to Saskatchewan 

people, the sacred trust in this province more than anywhere 

else, the sacred trust of medicare. It’s a betrayal of that. 

 

And it is also, Mr. Speaker, it is yet another expression of a 

commitment, a blind ideological commitment of the members 

opposite to a process of privatization. It can be seen clearly as 

that and in many ways, Mr. Speaker, can be interpreted no other 

way. And as I enter into this debate with a tinge of sadness in 

my heart, because I would much prefer, Mr. Speaker, not to be 

debating, not to be debating because the Bill would not be 

before us. But I think, as a member of the opposition, of her 

royal Majesty’s opposition, I have an obligation to present the 

view to the people of Saskatchewan as to what is happening and 

what is the process, because I think many people, Mr. Speaker, 

across Saskatchewan, are feeling that it’s an attack; it’s an 

attack on their security and their  

faith in medicare; and that somehow it’s happening in isolation. 

And it’s not. Its happening is a part of a process, a calculated 

definitive political process that is being thrust on the people of 

Saskatchewan by the members opposite. 

 

I notice the former minister of Health has taken his seat. He’s 

chirped occasionally as we debated this Bill, and maybe the 

former minister of Health would care to share his wisdom. 

Maybe he would care to share, not only with his constituents 

but the people of Saskatchewan, how he sees this Bill as being 

in the best interest of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Let me make it clear as well, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t place the 

entire blame on the Minister of Health. I don’t place the entire 

blame on the Minister of Health. He’s acting according to 

orders. He’s following the orders of the Premier of this 

province, the orders that are dictated to him. He’s been given a 

difficult job to somehow convince the people of Saskatchewan 

that what they believe to be an undeniable trust in the security 

of medicare can no longer be for them — can no longer be for 

them. And I don’t place the entire blame on the Minister of 

Health; he’s following the orders from the boss. And the person 

who in this province has to bear the cross, has to bear the 

political cross for the dismantling of the prescription drug plan 

and other similar thrusts in this province, can be no one other 

than the Premier of Saskatchewan. That’s where the orders are 

coming from, and that’s where the burden must lie. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on July 1 of this year many 

of us, perhaps all of us in this Assembly, were involved in 

celebrations for Canada Day. And on July 1, 1987, in our own 

communities all across this province, literally thousands of 

Saskatchewan people came out to celebrate their Canadian 

citizenship. And we stood in our places and in many cases 

reflected on one of the most beautiful gifts, the most beautiful 

gifts that any province could give to this nation and to our 

people; for July 1, 1987, Mr. Speaker, was the 25th anniversary, 

the 25th anniversary, the golden anniversary of the introduction 

of medicare to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And there are literally, I would suggest, hundreds, tens if not 

hundreds of thousands of Saskatchewan people who look back 

at 1962, July 1, 1962, and reflected on that on July 1 this year, 

and stood with their heads held high and their chests puffed out 

because they were proud of the gift of the people of 

Saskatchewan that the province of . . . the gift to the people of 

Canada that the province of Saskatchewan made 25 years ago. 

 

And how did the Government of Saskatchewan choose to 

celebrate the 25th anniversary of medicare? Those who were 

active and around in those days, Mr. Speaker, will remember 

the struggles to have won the victory of health security to all the 

people of Saskatchewan. They will remember the forces of the 

Conservatives and the Liberal parties that were mounted back in 

1962, who said socialized medicare was a move into the dark 

ages — all the threats and the fears that they tried to inject into 

the hearts of Saskatchewan people. And today, Mr. Speaker,  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3222 

 

25 years later, we have two generations of young people in our 

province who cannot imagine, they cannot imagine a province 

and a nation without medicare; people who have assumed, and 

quite correctly assumed, that medicare and all the security that 

it provides to each of us is a right that comes with our 

Saskatchewan and our Canadian citizenship. 

 

And how did the Saskatchewan government, how did the 

Saskatchewan government choose to celebrate the 25th 

anniversary? Were there grand, gala celebrations with great 

recognitions and tributes to the pioneers of medicare, many of 

those pioneers who came from well beyond this Legislative 

Assembly? No, no, we didn’t have any of that. Were there 

tributes to the dedicated professionals who work in our health 

care system today and some of the outstanding professionals 

who have worked in our health care system over the past 25 

years? No, there weren’t. 

 

What we had instead, Mr. Speaker, on July 21, we had the 25th 

anniversary of medicare celebrated in Saskatchewan by 

dismissing 400 dental therapists — 400 employees case aside 

from our dental therapy program. And I realize that that’s not 

the item on your debate today. And at the same time, on July 1, 

1987, our government introduced the first stages in the 

privatization, the dismantling, the privatization of our 

prescription drug plan. What an irony. 

 

What an irony that people called to serve their constituents and 

to serve all the people of Saskatchewan with the privilege of 

coming into this Legislative Assembly on the 25th anniversary 

of medicare would say, we’ll celebrate that anniversary by 

making it tougher for people who are sick. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I watched with interest as the debate 

has carried on and one of the members opposite who has 

chirped frequently with great enthusiasm, the catcalls to the 

members of the opposition who have stood in the defence of the 

prescription drug plan and in opposition to Bill 34 — the 

member from Qu’Appelle, from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 

 

And I looked back, Mr. Speaker, and I found a certificate. I 

know that we’re not able to display and I don’t intend to do 

that, but let me quote it verbatim; it doesn’t take long. It’s in big 

print and it’s in very simple terms. 

 

A guarantee, it says — and this is in the 1978 provincial 

election when part of that election was fought on the protection 

of medicare. And the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan said, 

oh no, if you elect us, medicare is safe. In fact, it’ll be even 

better than it was before. We’re going to go from number one to 

number one A plus. 

 

And so they found themselves feeling obliged, obliged to make 

the guarantee in writing to the people of Saskatchewan. A 

guarantee in writing. They said, we will go beyond saying, our 

word is our bond. We know there is lots of reason not to trust 

our word; we’re going to put it down in writing for you, folks. 

And along came the certificate to every Saskatchewan 

household. And what did the certificate in the riding of 

Qu’Appelle read? In big letters at the top, Mr. Speaker, it said, 

guarantee —  

guarantee, you can count on this one, it’s in writing from the 

Tory party of Saskatchewan. And it said . . . And let us reflect 

on those words because how sinister they seem today: 

 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan is 

committed to continue the medicare system in our 

province. 

 

And then it said: 

 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan 

rejects any form (any form) of deterrent fees or health 

insurance premiums. 

 

And then it said . . . Number three, Mr. Speaker, it said, and I 

quote: 

 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan will 

abolish the unfair deterrent fees for prescription drugs. 

 

The written guarantee to the people of Saskatchewan, people 

who doubted whether the PC party would stand firm in defence 

of the sacred trust of medicare. And it was signed, it would be 

signed by the member from Qu’Appelle whose initials are G.L. 

The same member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden who sits and 

estimates his deficits to the nearest $846 million today. And his 

initials are still G.L. — G.L. from Qu’Appelle. He offered the 

guarantee, the guarantee to the people of Saskatchewan . . . of 

Qu’Appelle. 

 

And then it was signed by the then leader of the Conservative 

party, Dick Collver — Dick Collver, the man in charge of the 

computerization of medicare. Dick Collver, Progressive 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. And I ask, I ask: what 

kind of a guarantee can you take on face value from the 

Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan? They say, 

you can’t take us at face value; you can’t take us for our word, 

so we’ll put it into writing and we’ll hope that you forget. We’ll 

hope that you forget. 

 

(1930) 

 

Well I say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan have 

not forgotten, and the people of Saskatchewan will long 

remember this breaking of a promise, the promise to protect and 

enhance the sacred trust of the people of Saskatchewan. And the 

members opposite, I believe, Mr. Speaker, will face their day of 

reckoning come the next election when the people of 

Saskatchewan say, we expect the promises to be kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — So here we come, Mr. Speaker. We stand in this 

Assembly debating a Bill, the effect of which has already been 

introduced on July 1, on the 25th anniversary of medicare. 

 

And why are we told, why are we told that it’s happening? Do 

we take the words of the Minister of Health? I think not. He’s 

only saying what he’s told to say; he’s doing what he’s told to 

do. The Minister of Health knows that if he doesn’t push this 

Bill through the legislature his job is  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3223 

 

gone, because he’s got to report to the boss. He’s got to report 

to the boss. He’s got to report to the Premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

And what does the Premier of Saskatchewan tell us is the 

reason why we have to have this privatization of the 

prescription drug plan? He says it’s because it’s being abused. 

It’s being abused. Now, Mr. Speaker, if a program is being 

abused, somebody’s got to be abusing it. So I ask, who is 

abusing the prescription drug plan? Is the Premier saying it’s 

the doctors of Saskatchewan who are abusing the prescription 

drug plan? If that’s what he’s saying, did he talk to the doctors 

about that? I’ve never heard anyone even suggest that the 

Premier of Saskatchewan spoke with the doctors in this 

province about his concerns for their abuse of the prescription 

drug plan. 

 

And so if he’s saying that it’s not the doctors — somebody’s 

abusing it. And if it’s not the doctors who are abusing it, Mr. 

Speaker, then it must be the people. And can we believe that? 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it seems to be a wild sort of notion. 

Now I can attest, with 100 per cent certainty, in my 

constituency there is not a band of renegade senior citizens who 

are running around with stolen doctors’ prescription pads and 

writing out their own and getting them filled at the pharmacy. I 

know that’s not happening in Moose Jaw North. 

 

An Hon. Members: — It’s not happening in Quill Lakes either. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — The member says it’s not happening in Quill 

Lakes. I don’t think it’s happening in Quill Lakes either. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not in Regina North West. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Regina North West, it’s not happening there 

either. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not Duck Lake either. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Not in Prince Albert-Duck Lake, not in 

Saskatoon Mayfair, not in The Battlefords. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, where in this province are these bands of 

wild senior renegades trotting around with stolen prescription 

forms from doctors’ offices, filling out their own prescriptions 

and just having a gay old time living on drugs? 

 

Are they happening . . . Is this what goes on in Tory ridings? 

It’s not going on in any of the ridings of the members of this 

side. They just spoke. And I don’t believe, I don’t believe . . . 

Maybe the member from Yorkton. He stands and he sits, sits 

looking glum. I don’t know, maybe there’s some renegade 

seniors with those prescription drug pads in Yorkton. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not here. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — No, he says, there aren’t. He says there aren’t in 

Yorkton. Well I don’t know where they are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if we have a Premier, a Premier who is saying we have  

to change this plan because it’s being abused, but the doctors 

aren’t abusing it, and the people aren’t abusing it, I ask who in 

the world’s abusing it. Because this is the rationale that we’re 

being told. We have to have this plan to get rid of this abuse. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when we look behind those closed cabinet 

doors, those closed cabinet doors that became entrenched into 

the institution of government at 1:30 in the morning on 

December 24, on Christmas eve, when it was passed in this 

House, Bill 5, that gave the authority — passed into the 

clandestine dark of the night by the members opposite — Bill 5, 

so that they could function behind closed cabinet doors . . . And 

what went on behind those closed cabinet doors that led to the 

inspiration for the dismantling, the privatization of the 

prescription drug plan? 

 

Can we imagine, Mr. Speaker, the conversation as the Premier 

of this province sat and consulted, told his Minister of Health 

his latest idea, his latest brainstorm for the good of 

Saskatchewan people. Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, the two 

of them sitting there saying we’ve got to make some changes 

here; we’ve given Bruce all the snoose we can give him and it’s 

not helping the prescription drug plan. My goodness we’ve not 

said whoa in a mudhole, we’ve been open for business — and 

all the lingo — and my goodness we all know there’s so much 

more we can be, they’re saying to each other. And saying we 

got a problem, we got a problem in Saskatchewan because 

we’ve got some kind of demented form of socialized medicine. 

 

You see in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, what was happening 

with the prescription drug plan. The people of Saskatchewan 

had this strange socialized medicine experience. They’d get 

sick; they’d go to see their doctor; their doctor would give them 

a prescription. They’d go to the pharmacist and they’d pay their 

$3.95 or less. They’d take their medicine and they’d get better. 

What a strange demented socialized medicine. 

 

Now that’s not acceptable. That’s not acceptable to the 

members opposite who are bound and determined to carry the 

Saskatchewan people, kicking and screaming, into the Dirty 

Thirties through a plan of privatization. They said there is 

nothing that is so effective, whether it be socialized medicine or 

whatever else, that cannot be better if it’s privatized. And so 

they said, you know we’ve got to have a better plan than this 

one. We’ve got to have a better plan because Saskatchewan 

people keeping going through this crazy series of events: they 

get sick, they go to their doctor, they get a prescription, they get 

it filled for $3.95 or less, they take their medicine, and they get 

better. What an odd notion. 

 

They said, we can do it better. We can do it better. We’ll put in 

a new system. It starts the same, Mr. Speaker. You get sick, you 

go to the doctor, you get a prescription, but then the fun begins. 

Now, in Saskatchewan, after you got the prescription, thanks to 

the Premier of Saskatchewan, you get to contemplate the 

meaning of life because people in Saskatchewan — far too 

many people in Saskatchewan when they get to that step, Mr. 

Speaker — are asking themselves: do I go to my pharmacist and 

get  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3224 

 

the prescription filled out, or do I eat? 

 

And I ask: has the quality of life for Saskatchewan people been 

improved because of this privatized, socialized, privatized 

prescription drug plan? And over and . . . Oh, the member from 

Maple Creek, she’s here in the House tonight, and we’re glad to 

have her. She says it’s stupid. She says it’s stupid. Is it stupid, I 

ask you, that people get sick, go to the doctor, get a 

prescription, get it filled up, take it and get better? Is that your 

definition of stupid? I ask you, the member from Maple Creek. 

You have cast yourself a plan, Madam, and the plan is 

privatization at any cost, and let the people of Saskatchewan 

beware. We are seeing before us a Bill, a sinister Bill 

introduced by your Premier, by your Premier because he 

doesn’t believe, your Premier does not believe in the concept of 

socialized medicine where people get sick and go to their doctor 

and get a prescription and get it filled out and take their 

medicine and get better. 

 

So they said, you know, there’s nothing so good as socialized 

medicine that can’t be approved by privatization. Now this is 

the kind of advice that comes from the Fraser Institute, that has 

in the board of directors, Peter Pocklington. There is a good 

socialized medicine defender — Peter Pocklington. The board 

of the Fraser Institute, that’s who’s giving advice to the Premier 

of Saskatchewan. And what’s the advice? The advice is, if you 

want to have a new improved prescription drug plan, you put it 

in place so that people go to the doctor, get their prescription, 

and then they make the decision. They make the decision as to 

whether they get it filled out. And it’s called user-pay, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s called user-pay. This is the great principle of 

privatization. 

 

People in Saskatchewan, hundreds of thousands of people in 

Saskatchewan, remember the battle for medicare based on the 

principle and the belief that simply because people are citizens 

of this province that they have a right to security in their health 

care and that they should contribute to that security in their 

health care, Mr. Speaker, based on their ability to pay. Nobody 

has ever suggested that health care is free; it’s not. It has to be 

paid for. Health care is paid for in many ways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand that one of my colleagues would like 

to introduce some guests that we have in the House, and I’ll just 

pause, Mr. Speaker, to allow for that. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If members permit, 

I’d like to introduce some visitors. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and 

through you to all members of this Assembly, 22 Girl Guides 

from the Centennial School, the 105th company. They’re in the 

Speaker’s gallery. They are accompanied by their leaders: 

Sheila Neal, Debbie Smith, and Annette Deis, as well as a 

parent, I believe, by the name of Darlene Zummack. 

 

I would welcome you to the Assembly this evening, and I look 

forward to meeting with you after a few moments to discuss 

some of the issues that you’ve been talking about  

in school and with your family and friends. I’d ask all the 

members in the Assembly to join with me to welcome them this 

evening. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 34 — An Act to 

amend The Prescription Drugs Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join my colleague in 

welcoming the girls here this evening. In many ways, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it’s appropriate that what sits before them as 

they come to the Assembly to see what goes on in the 

Legislative Assembly, your government, that we have before 

us, the Bill that deals with the security of the prescription drug 

plan and security for their health. 

 

In many ways, Mr. Speaker, maybe it’s a positive omen that 

we’ve had these young ladies here as guests as we debate this 

Bill because it helps to put for me — and I would hope for all 

— the consideration of this Bill into the context of the 

protection of the health, not just for those of us who are getting 

on in years, but for the future generations of Saskatchewan as 

well. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, through this privatization of the prescription 

drug plan and the battle cry of the privatizers as user-pay, many 

of these young ladies who are here tonight, of course, it will be 

only in their history books — the battle that Saskatchewan 

people went through to ensure the protection to safe and secure 

health care that’s there for everyone. 

 

As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, and I would want these young 

citizens to know that health care is not free. Health care is not 

free. Because there’s no charge for health care, that doesn’t 

mean it’s free. It’s paid for in many kinds of ways. It’s paid for 

through the income that comes to our government from our 

natural resources, and that’s an important factor in being able to 

provide good quality health care. It’s paid for through the sales 

tax, which is referred to as the E&H tax, the education and 

health tax, Mr. Speaker, and it’s paid for, as well, by all of us 

through the payment of our income tax. 

 

Now all of those, those are other topics for debate, and I won’t 

comment on those because those are getting more hefty too, Mr. 

Speaker, but the point is this, the point is this: is that 

Saskatchewan people have considered it to be a sacred trust that 

our health care is there for us to use when we’re sick, not when 

we’re sick and have money, but when we’re sick. Health care is 

there to use when you’re sick — that’s why you have it. 

 

What we’re doing with this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is attacking that 

fundamental principle of health care that is so sacred, so close 

to the hearts and the souls of Saskatchewan people. And now 

we have in Saskatchewan a plan which doesn’t say any longer 

you get sick, you go to the doctor, you get your prescription, 

you go to the pharmacist and  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3225 

 

pay your $3.95 or less, you take your medicine, and you get 

better. It says that you take your medicine if you can afford it, 

and in your family your pay every dollar through the first $125, 

and then after the first $125, Mr. Speaker, you pay every dollar 

again, but when you collect them, then you can send some in. A 

month or two later you get a rebate for four-fifths of that 

amount. 

 

And so what we are seeing, Mr. Speaker, is the introduction of 

user-pay health care in the province of Saskatchewan — in the 

province of Saskatchewan, which gave the people of Canada the 

beautiful gift of no-cost medicare, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1945) 

 

I think that may help to explain somewhat why I say that I’m 

saddened to stand here this evening to debate this Bill. And 

while I feel it is a sinister move by the Government of 

Saskatchewan to introduce this prescription drug plan that we 

have now, a user-pay prescription drug plan for the people of 

Saskatchewan, a privatized — the privatization of the 

prescription drug plan. 

 

And is it any less expensive? Because we’re told we can’t 

afford, you know, we can’t afford to care any more, we’re told 

by the Premier of the province. And I don’t believe that, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re not saving one single penny. There is not one 

single penny being saved through the introduction of the 

prescription drug plan. 

 

All that’s happening, Mr. Speaker, is that instead of the cost of 

the prescription drug plan paid through the collection of 

resources and revenues that the provincial government has, the 

costs will now be borne proportionate to how sick people are. 

It’s a shifting of the cost of health care from that collective 

solution, that co-operative solution that is so much a part of the 

culture and the nature of Saskatchewan people, a shifting of the 

burden to the backs of the sick, Mr. Speaker. And most cruel of 

all, Mr. Speaker, most cruel of all is the shifting of the burden 

to the backs of the sick who are poor in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the Premier and the Minister of Social Services, he’s here 

and grinning like a Cheshire cat too. They say, oh, no, no, no, 

that’s not true, because people who are on social assistance still 

have the same rules as before. And I admit that’s correct, Mr. 

Speaker — thank God. I think God for that. But there are many 

people in Saskatchewan, many people in Saskatchewan who are 

the working poor, who are not eligible for social assistance, and 

whose lives are being absolutely devastated by the introduction 

of the prescription drug plan. 

 

I had a conversation just today, Mr. Speaker, with an individual 

in my constituency, a family with a total income of $850 a 

month who are faced with drug costs of $550 a month, who are 

just desperate, Mr. Speaker, for a solution. Now hopefully some 

things will happen to help reduce that load for them. But even 

under the new plan, Mr. Speaker, even under the new plan at its 

best, it is going to cost those folks with their $850 a month 

income — and they’re not eligible for social assistance — it’s 

still going to cost them, after they’ve paid that first $125, an 

additional amount in excess of $100 a month on an  

income of $850. And I ask: where is the caring? Where is the 

compassion in that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So it’s not less expensive; it’s only less expensive if you have 

some kind of nefarious sort of idea in your mind that the 

government is something other than the people. And there are 

those who believe that the government is the people, and that 

when the government bears the cost of socialized medicine and 

socialized health care, it bears that cost for all the people, and 

all the people contribute to that. So we’re not saving a single 

penny; not a single penny is being saved in the province of 

Saskatchewan. All that’s happening is that increasingly the cost 

of prescription medicine in Saskatchewan is being borne by the 

sick. 

 

And I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that I stand in my seat in 

this Assembly firmly in defence of the belief that all people in 

Saskatchewan have a right to expect from their government the 

security of health care regardless of their income and regardless 

of their ability to contribute. And that comes, Mr. Speaker, 

merely as a statement of their citizenship. Whether their 

citizenship means that they’re 8 years old or whether it means 

that they’re 80 years old, we all have a right to that same basic 

protection for the security of health care in our province. And 

I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that I stand firm in defence of 

that principle, and I see it being eroded today with Bill 34 — 

Bill 34 to privatize, to privatize, to user-pay the prescription 

drug plan of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this prescription drug plan has given a 

whole lot of folks in Saskatchewan a new experience. Many 

people have been forced to reflect on the meaning of life and 

their priorities and values, and in a way that’s never happened 

before. And isn’t it sad as well, Mr. Speaker, that one of the 

spin-off effects is that we’re making beggars out of sick people 

— beggars out of sick people. You see, Mr. Speaker, when the 

prescription drug plan is available to everyone, we’re all the 

same. When we all paid that fee of $3.95, or in some 

pharmacies, less, we were all the same. And we got our 

prescriptions filled out, we got our medicine, and we were all 

dealt with the same way. None of us felt that we were better or 

worse when we got our prescription filled out. 

 

But what happens today now under this new, improved 

prescription drug plan introduced by the Premier of 

Saskatchewan? What we have today then, Mr. Speaker, are 

people having to make the decision: (a) do they get their 

prescription filled out? And the (b) if they can’t, what do they 

do? Do we have a plan in place to automatically help people for 

whom this imposes an unbearable burden? 

 

No, what we have is a hare-brained scheme brought to this 

legislature by the Minister of Health, as the messenger boy for 

the Premier, who said, you know folks, if you’ve got a bit of 

difficulty paying for your medicine now, all you have to do, all 

you have to do is get down on your knee and ask for help. 

We’re going to make a little committee, a little committee, and 

we’re going to pretend that it’s nothing to do with the 

government’s decisions. And if you’re really in dire straits, 

what you do is this — you fill out a form, you fill out a form 

that says, number one, you have to state what your income is. 

You  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3226 

 

have to declare that you’re poor. You have to declare that 

you’re poor to get help on the prescription drug plan, and then 

you have to say, not only are you poor, you’ve got high 

prescription drug costs — high prescription drug costs. 

 

Ah, and the Minister of Health, he chirps here. Maybe he’s got 

some of those renegade seniors up in Meadow Lake who are 

running around filling out their own prescription drug . . . 

prescriptions on their pads, stolen from doctors’ offices. I don’t 

know. I don’t think so. But he knows, he chirps, Mr. Speaker, 

because he knows what he’s doing is not right. He knows that it 

is wrong in the province of Saskatchewan to say to people, 

you’ve got to state that you’re poor and you’ve got to state that 

you’ve got an unbearable burden, and then we’ll give you some 

help. And that’s the help we’ll give you? We’ll give you a blue 

envelope. What a breakthrough! You’re poor. You’ve got high 

medicine costs, and we’ll give you a blue envelope. 

 

And what does the blue envelope do? Well the claim is you’ll 

get your rebate if you’ve been able to find a way to pay those 

medicine costs. You’ll get your rebate back in a couple of 

weeks if we’re really speedy. 

 

And I ask, Mr. Speaker, where in there is the defence of the 

principle that all people in Saskatchewan, regardless of their 

income and regardless of their age and regardless of their 

circumstances, have a right to be treated equally by our health 

care system? Can we endorse a health care system that says, 

there is a system for the rich and a system for the poor? Surely 

we can’t. Surely we can’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some of the other help that you can get if you’ve been able to 

prove that you’re really poor and your costs are really high, 

well, maybe we can make an arrangement here that you just pay 

the 20 per cent. You don’t have to pay it all and get this 

hurry-up envelope to get back the 80 per cent rebate. 

 

And there is not a single person in Saskatchewan, not a single 

family in this province that is better off because of that. There is 

not a single individual or a single family in the province of 

Saskatchewan that is paying less for their medicine to get better 

today than they were before the introduction of the dismantling 

and the privatization of the prescription drug plan on July 1, the 

25th anniversary of medicare. Not a single family in 

Saskatchewan is better off and is feeling more secure in their 

health care system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also wonder, Mr. Speaker, why it is that the Minister of Health 

doesn’t allow those of us in this Assembly to even facilitate the 

access to this committee that he’s created. And I wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, why it is that when my office contacted the office of 

the Minister of Health and said, could we at least get some of 

these application forms for people to send into the committee to 

ask for special help for the prescription drugs? Why were we 

turned down? Why in the world would a government that is 

dedicated to quality and accessible health care to all it’s citizens 

make it . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Impossible. 

Mr. Hagel: — I don’t know if it’s impossible . . . my colleague 

says impossible — but more difficult to get hold of the forms 

because now you’ve got to contact the Minister of Health and 

then they’ll send you out a form, then you fill out the form and 

send it in. And it doesn’t jibe, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t jibe. Even 

when you look at the futile and the minuscule attempts to 

provide help for those who are most devastated by these 

changes, when members of the Legislative Assembly ask for 

something as simple as the form so that we can give them to 

people and let them get moving, we’re denied. And it doesn’t 

wash, it doesn’t wash. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when I started out this evening, I said that I 

wanted to cover some items related to the debate in this Bill that 

are different from the kinds of propositions that have been put 

forth by the members opposite. And I wondered aloud why all 

the members of the government, all of them under the same 

orders from the Premier of Saskatchewan, as the Minister of 

Health, why none of them has had the courage to stand in this 

Assembly and to put on record why they think that this is better 

for their constituents and the people of Saskatchewan. Not a 

single one, not a single one. 

 

I can only assume . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, we get the 

member from Rosthern, he’s chirping here now, and any month 

now he could get in on the debate. I see him screwing up the 

courage. If this debate goes on for a month or two, he may no 

longer be able to resist the urge to enter the debate. And I’m 

sure the people of Rosthern would like to know why their 

member thinks that this is better for them. 

 

You know what I think, Mr. Speaker? I think we will not hear 

from a single member opposite, I’m sad to say, because the 

Premier of Saskatchewan has got their lips locks — the lock is 

on. Their lips are locked by the Premier of Saskatchewan who 

has said we are bent for leather on this exercise of privatization. 

We’re going to ram it through the legislature, and I don’t want a 

single one of you to stand and say what you think. Because you 

know, Mr. Speaker, I think there is a little conscience over 

there. Every now and then you see a little light go on. Every 

now and then you see a little heartbeat. 

 

And maybe over there is, maybe over there there is a little 

compassion. And the Premier of Saskatchewan knows that if 

the members of his government stood and said what they 

thought, what might sneak through those locked lips are the 

words that say, we think this is wrong, we think this is wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — We have grown up in this province, those 

members opposite will say, and we know about the sacred trust 

of medicare, and we believe in our heart of hearts that what our 

constituents tell us, when we have the nerve to go home, when 

our constituents tell us we’re doing the wrong thing, we believe 

that what those constituents tell us is right. 

 

But the Premier’s got the lock on. The lips are sealed, Mr. 

Speaker. And I don’t believe, I don’t believe that there’s a  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3227 

 

member opposite who’s got the courage to face the Premier of 

Saskatchewan and to stand in this Assembly and to express 

their disapproval for Bill 34 and to express their support for the 

people of Saskatchewan and to express their support for the 

sacred trust of medicare for all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

(2000) 

 

And I unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, find myself standing here 

and believing that when this debate comes to an end, every 

member of the opposition will stand for what is right, and every 

member of the government — having uttered not a peep — will 

stand and do what the Premier tells them that they have to do. 

And what a sad statement, what a sad statement for the 

members opposite and the Government of Saskatchewan and, 

most seriously of all, the Premier of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it will be no secret to anyone that I will be 

standing in opposition to Bill 34. I will be standing for the 

interests of my constituents, and I will be standing, Mr. 

Speaker, for the interests of the constituents of those members 

opposite as well — for their constituents who also believe and 

have a right to believe that the sacred trust of medicare is a trust 

that was won with a lot of battle and a lot of hard work and not 

won easily. But it is a sacred trust, which must be fought for 

and defended in the province of Saskatchewan, which gave to 

the people of Canada the gift of medicare 25 years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be voting clearly in opposition to Bill 34. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I want to start by saying that this is one of the most 

important Bills before this legislature, and the only amount of 

speaking from the other side was a two and a half minute short 

dissertation by the Minister of Health. And here is a 

government that says they are improving the health care in 

Saskatchewan, and not a single one have the nerve or the 

decency to stand and try to support what they have done to the 

drug program and to medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is an important 

Bill. It’s important because what at least has come out of the 

closet is the real Tory government philosophy, and that is the 

undermining of the health care system in this province, and 

that’s what it’s about. 

 

And I’m going to take a little time here to indicate to the people 

out in the various cities and towns across this province, who 

have been phoning our office and indicating and asking us to 

continue to fight this Bill . . . People, old people, and those that 

have children who need medication, are phoning our office and 

saying to all of our MLAs, stand up, fight this vicious cut in the 

drug program. And I’ll tell you, I don’t care what this smiling 

member — used to be from North who left and went to the 

South — indicates. He may think it’s funny but to the people 

who needed the drug program as it was, it is now no laughing 

matter, my friend. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — And I want to say to you here that basically 

what they’ve done is to destroy an outstanding drug program 

that we had here in Saskatchewan. And first of all what they did 

is to place on a premium. For every . . . You have to pay up to 

the $125 before you get any assistance, and then thereafter what 

they have required the people of this province to do is to pay the 

whole cost of the drug thereafter and to wait — and to wait for 

a rebate. 

 

Last night I talked to some seniors who have said that they 

have, shortly after the program came into effect under this new 

method of payment, paid the full amount for the drug, 

submitted to this government for the refund of the 80 per cent, 

and they are still waiting. And they are waiting weeks, and 

they’re waiting, and they can’t afford not to have that money 

refunded to them. And I’ll tell you, the strain that has been 

placed on those who are sick, to our seniors who built this 

province, who are the in need mostly of drugs, the pioneers who 

built this . . . And the Tories attack them and they put a tax on 

the sick. They taxed every other ordinary Saskatchewan person 

and they said, we’ve forgotten one; we’ve forgotten to tax the 

sick, and that’s what they did in this Bill. 

 

And I’ll tell you that the people of this province are concerned 

and they are speaking out against this Bill. And I’ll tell you they 

are speaking out and they are phoning us and they have signed 

petitions indicating their concern. And there are people from 

every political party who are joining in this fight to stop this 

vicious Tory attack on medicare and our drug plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — What callousness; how callous and how 

deceitful. How do you look in the mirror after you’ve promised 

the people of this province . . . as my colleagues from Moose 

Jaw North said, sending out certificates, if you could believe it, 

that they were going to improve it. And I’ll tell you, every one 

of you on the other side gave that commitment to the people of 

this province, and you deceived them. 

 

And they did it in the drug program, and they did it in the dental 

program, and they have the callousness to put ads in the paper. 

The new dental program — if you could feature it — as though 

it was improved. And I’ll tell you, they don’t have the guts or 

the decency to stand up and explain why they’re . . . put a tax 

on the sick. They just won’t do it. 

 

And so I say to you, this is a very, very important Bill, and I 

think we have to take time . . . And we don’t apologize for 

debating this important Bill on behalf of the thousands of 

people across this province. And I’ll tell you, you’re not going 

to deny us the right to continue to debate it either with your 

half-truths and deception that you’re trying to pour out to the 

public. I’ll tell you, you’re the ones that are incompetent; you’re 

the ones that deceived the people of this province. And I’ll tell 

you, we’ll be here and debating this Bill as long as it takes that 

every individual citizen in this province know how you have 

raped the drug program which was assisting those who needed 

it. 

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3228 

 

I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we are continuing to 

communicate with the citizens across this province. Thousands 

of them are joining in petitions to demonstrate their concern and 

respect to this here. And for that reason, we are indicating and 

urging the government to come to its senses, to realize that the 

last group of people in society that you should tax are those that 

are sick. Just imagine, that’s what they’re doing, putting a tax 

on those people that are sick, that need drugs. And the little 

fellow from Regina South laughs; he thinks it’s funny. Yes, he 

really thinks it’s funny to put a tax on those who need 

medication. Very funny, I’ll tell you. 

 

But as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that really what we have 

here is an exposure of a true Tory philosophy. And I’ll tell you 

it’s consistent, because here you have them undermining the 

drug program and placing extra burden of cost onto the 

individuals using the drugs. And it’s a consistent Tory approach 

because in Ottawa they’re doing the same thing; they’re 

extending the patent laws so that the drug companies can make 

more money and charge more to those who are using the drugs. 

 

And I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan, you might fool 

them, but you can’t continue to deceive them. And the 

reckoning day is coming. You can’t continue to deceive the 

people of Saskatchewan because I’ll tell you, when the next 

election comes, most of you won’t even have an opportunity to 

return to this legislature. 

 

But if we take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the unbelievable 

deceit — deceit — to the people of this province, just imagine 

that they promised to improve the drug program, and after 

they’re re-elected, the first thing they do is to erode one of the 

best programs in North America. Saskatchewan had a great 

reputation. Saskatchewan was the social laboratory of North 

America. Saskatchewan pioneered medicare. And 

Saskatchewan built the best dental program and the best drug 

program in all of North America. 

 

And the people of this province, I’ll tell you, we’re proud of 

that tradition. And the pioneers who built this province were 

proud to have been able in a co-operative way build the greatest 

health care system in North America. 

 

And today what we see is new priorities, priorities by the PC 

government. Corporate taxes in the recent budget have been cut, 

but taxes have been increased and placed on those who are sick. 

That’s Tory philosophy. That’s the true Tory position. And I’ll 

tell you, the people of Saskatchewan will never forget. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s easy to govern for 

the rich and the powerful. It takes no genius to govern for the 

rich and the powerful and to be puppets and mouthpieces for 

them. But I’ll tell you, it takes integrity and decency to build a 

society where individuals in that society, in a co-operative way, 

build social program and a health care program that will help 

those who are sick. 

 

Yes, this PC government said in their last budget they were 

going to build, they were going to diversify, and they were 

going to protect. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, go 

back to your constituency, each of you, and  

ask whether the people of Saskatchewan are agreeing with the 

fact that you’re protecting them. And I’ll tell you by the phone 

calls and the letters that we are getting they’re not in agreement 

with the vicious policies that you have put in place. These are 

just hollow words, rhetoric, no longer believable. And the 

Premier of this province is the steward of this vicious attack on 

our health care program. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a better way of 

doing it. There was a better way of doing it. People in society 

can join together, can join together to share the responsibilities 

of helping to pay the cost of those who are sick. And what 

we’re doing here is the reverse. We’re saying if you’re sick, 

what you’re going to do is to be taxed now by this Tory 

government. 

 

And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what priorities? As I said, 

corporate taxes are down. They have millions of dollars for 

self-serving advertising. They have millions of dollars for their 

patronage. They have millions of dollars for the Peter 

Pocklingtons, but to the pioneers and to those who are in fact 

requiring the use of drugs they say, no, we don’t have it, you’ve 

got to pay now. 

 

(2015) 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to relate to you a report that 

was made by one of the most distinguished lawyers here in 

Saskatchewan. And I remember when he was attending an old 

gentleman’s 100th birthday. It was J.M. Goldenberg, who had 

been the lawyer for this gentleman that was having . . . Mr. 

Clark Wilson, who are having his 100th birthday. And he spoke 

at that birthday celebration with friends and neighbours, and 

one of things that Mr. Goldenberg, who had a very successful 

law practice, said to that crowd of friends of Mr. Clark Wilson’s 

who was celebrating his 100th birthday, and he said, I just want 

you all to remember what a great medicare system that we have 

here in Saskatchewan. He said, do you realize that I was sick 

recently, and he said, I went to the hospital. I received pretty 

good care, he said, well attended to. But he said, what a 

remarkable system, whether you’re a distinguished lawyer or 

just an ordinary truck driver, mechanic or . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Horse doctor. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Or hose doctor. He said there was equality. 

Every citizen in society was allowed to be given the same 

degree of treatment. And that is a tribute, that is a tribute by a 

distinguished lawyer, a distinguished pioneer of this society. 

 

And what is happening now? We see the vicious erosion of the 

drug program. But not only are they . . . not only are they 

charging people more but they’re also cutting back in the basic 

programs and the coverage and the drugs that are under the 

program. 

 

Some of the drugs are being taken off, can no longer be 

purchased under the prescription drug program, and indeed 

they’re charging people more. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

what separates the New Democratic Party from the government 

opposite, the Premier’s PC government, is that we want, in our 

party, to build a  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3229 

 

society of compassion and of caring for our people who are 

sick. 

 

And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, we’re of course not going to be 

supporting this Bill. And we have a lot more that we’re going to 

be saying on this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And at this time I 

beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member’s asked for leave to adjourn 

debate. Is that agreed? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Debate continues. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. Point of order. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, he 

didn’t. No, he did not. He moved the debate adjourn. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I moved that the debate adjourn. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member asked leave, but it is a motion of 

adjourned debate. Call in the members. 

 

(2041) 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 12 

 

Blakeney Mitchell 

Brockelbank Upshall 

Shillington Solomon 

Koskie Kowalsky 

Tchorzewski Atkinson 

Rolfes Hagel 

 

Nays — 29 

 

Muller Klein 

Duncan Meiklejohn 

McLeod Toth 

Andrew Sauder 

Berntson McLaren 

Lane Hopfner 

Taylor Petersen 

Swan Swenson 

Muirhead Martens 

Maxwell Baker 

Schmidt Gleim 

Hodgins Neudorf 

Gerich Kopelchuk 

Hepworth Britton 

Hardy  

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said before 

moving to adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker, I indicated that this 

was a very important Bill, one of the most  

important Bills before this legislature. Because what it is, it’s a 

clear betrayal of the PC government opposite, in accordance 

with their election promises to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that we can approach this Bill, and we are 

going to continue to debate it, because we feel that it’s a Bill 

that is bad for the people of this province. It places a tax on the 

sick, and I say to you that we will here pledge to the people of 

Saskatchewan that we will continue to debate this Bill because 

it’s a bad Bill; it’s a betrayal; it’s a destruction of medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Koskie: — And I ask the back-benchers on the government 

side to screw up their courage at least, and to confront the 

people of Saskatchewan and try to justify these cruel cuts and 

the wrecking of the drug plan. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 

that we are going to continue to debate, while the government 

ultimately can win because of the majority. On behalf of the 

people of this province we are going to put up speaker after 

speaker to indicate our scorn for the betrayal of the people of 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Members on our side have consistently stood 

and indicated the pledges that the members opposite gave to the 

people of Saskatchewan. And in pieces of literature, time after 

time they indicated that they were going to improve the drug 

program. Well I’ll tell you, this is a Tory improvement of a 

drug program, but the people of Saskatchewan don’t believe 

that they improved it. In fact, they have placed a tax on the sick. 

 

So we’re going to do our job here, and we’re going to debate 

this Bill. And as I said, we’re going to have speaker after 

speaker debate it. And I’m saying to the people of 

Saskatchewan, we are on your side in this fight, and we’re 

going to stand shoulder to shoulder with the people of 

Saskatchewan to try to drive some sense into this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — This government with its false priorities, a 

government that can cut corporate taxes, a government that can 

hand out to Pocklington $10 million, but a government so 

callous, so deceitful that they turn on the pioneers — many of 

our pioneers who built this province — and lay and destroy the 

drug program and make them pay. 

 

I say to the people of Saskatchewan as we enter this debate, 

we’re prepared to join shoulder to shoulder to shoulder with 

you to try to get the Premier of this province to keep his trust 

with the people of this province. Unless he changes this Bill and 

does away with it, he has breached every commitment in 

respect to health care. And he got elected on it, and many of 

you over there did the same thing. 

 

I can go through brochures, but we have done it. I don’t  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3230 

 

know how you can look in the mirror having deceived the 

people of this province to the extent that you have. But I know 

that you’re having trouble out at your ridings because the 

people of Saskatchewan are rising in revolt against this massive 

destruction of medicare. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that we 

are going to do our job here, and what we are asking the people 

of Saskatchewan to do is to join with us on an attack against 

this vicious Bill undermining the drug program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — We pledge to the people of Saskatchewan to do 

our share, and we will debate it, and we will urge the 

government to reverse this vicious Bill. In turn I ask the people 

of this province to join with us also and to communicate 

through petitions, but more than that to join in a massive 

campaign of letter writings to their MLAs who refuse to stand 

in this House and to justify this vicious Bill that is destroying a 

significant part of medicare. So I’m asking the people of the 

province to join the pioneers, those with a social conscience, 

those who helped to build the best health care in North 

America. I ask the people to join with us in a massive writing 

protest to the Premier of this province. It was the Premier’s 

decision. The buck stops with the Premier. He is the one that 

betrayed the people of Saskatchewan. Those people, many of 

them ran believing that the Premier what his word was good. 

But the people of Saskatchewan have found that you can’t 

believe the Premier. 

 

And I’m going to take a look at some of the advertising that 

these boys did in indicating how well their program was. And 

we have list after list of them, indicating how good . . . how 

they were going to improve it. And here’s one here: “Continue 

medicare at no extra cost and upgrade health care.” “Eliminate 

dispensing fees on all drugs prescribed for senior citizens.” That 

is a promise, a commitment, by the Tory candidate, endorsed by 

the Premier of this province, saying, “Eliminate dispensing fees 

on all drugs prescribed for senior citizens.” Well, I’ll tell you, 

the seniors didn’t get what was promised, Mr. Speaker. They 

got the real Tory medicine, a total wrecking of our medicare, a 

tax on the sick. And I say to you, to the Premier of this 

province, shame on him for betraying the trust of the people of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are not the only ads that members of the 

Progressive Conservative Party put out during the election 

campaign. They say here: “Expand drug plan to include all 

prescription drugs.” And you know what they did, Mr. Speaker? 

They have cut back on the number of drugs that are covered 

under the drug program. 

 

And so I say, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party . . . and I 

think the people of this province have a great trust in the New 

Democratic Party in being the steward and the caretaker of the 

health care system in this province. And that is why so many 

people now are turning to the New Democratic Party and 

saying, if only we had known. If only we had known that this 

Premier would betray the people of this province, we would 

never have trusted him again. And I’ll tell you, once this 

Premier loses the trust of the people of the province — and he 

has — he will never be Premier again. That is my prediction. 

One thing that is sacred to the people of this province is the 

quality of health care that was built over the years. Here in 

Saskatchewan we can take claim of building the finest and first 

medicare in all of Canada and in North America. Here in 

Saskatchewan we gave protection to our people of our society. 

And now after four years, five years in government, we had 

another re-election. And again the people of Saskatchewan were 

told that their health care was safe but little did they know, Mr. 

Speaker. Little did they know that this Premier, once elected 

again, would deceive the pioneers who built that program, and 

that’s what he has done. 

 

And so I say, Mr. Speaker, what is happening here in this Bill is 

really that the true philosophy of the Tory party opposite is 

coming to the forefront. They don’t believe in having a sharing 

and caring society. They say, let the rich look after themselves 

and let the poor struggle in their poverty. But I’ll tell you, that’s 

not the philosophy of the New Democratic Party, and that in the 

hearts of Saskatchewan people is not the philosophy. They 

know that the health care that we have grown accustomed to 

using was the best. 

 

And what they have done here is an erosion of medicare. They 

have denied accessibility to drugs to the poorest and those who 

are sick. Now that has to be callous and that is the true 

philosophy of the government opposite. 

 

And so, in closing my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I again urge the 

people of this province that we . . . And we give this 

commitment, that here in this House we are going to stand and 

debate it, and we are going to indicate and explain that every 

single individual in society know the seriousness of the 

massiveness of the cuts in this drug program. And again I ask 

the people of this province to join with us to fight this Bill, and 

unless it’s changed, I say to them, this government can no 

longer deserve their trust. This Premier has betrayed young 

people, middle-class people, seniors, pioneers. He destroyed the 

trust he had built up during the first three or four years of his 

mandate. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what we need to do here is to urge the 

members, the back-benchers, to take some courage to stand up 

for the ordinary Saskatchewan people, to ask your Premier and 

your Minister of Health, who is the puppet for the Premier in 

this instance, ask him to change this here. If we have millions of 

dollars for advertising self serving, surely we have money to 

help those to purchase drugs. The last time I . . . The last thing 

that I think we should be doing is those who are sick, who are 

under prescription drugs, to cast and to place upon them yet 

another burden — a financial burden during the period of time 

that they’re sick. But that’s what it’s done. It’s a tax, Mr. 

Speaker, on the sick; it’s a tax on those who need medication. 

And I say that’s a wrong priority. I say to you, to change this 

Bill. We ask the government to revert back to what we had, but 

go further to keep their commitments to remove all of the 

dispensing fees included on the seniors, as they had promised. 

That’s what we’re asking. And again, I challenge members 

opposite to pucker up their courage, stand up and be counted, 

stand up and defend your vicious acts. 

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3231 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, naturally what I will be doing then is 

voting against this Bill, and, as I say, we will continue the 

debate and we’re going to ask the people of this province to join 

us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this evening with some 

hesitation. I was hoping that the members opposite, whether 

they be front-benches, or middle-benchers, or back-benchers, 

whether they be from the urban area or from the rural area, or 

whether they represent young people, old people, families, 

farmers, workers, to see if they would get up and speak on this 

Bill. 

 

I’ve had some patience, our caucus colleagues here have 

patience, and we’re wondering where the members opposite 

stand on Bill 34 — an Act to gut the prescription drug plan. 

And we see, Mr. Speaker, that the members of the government, 

in the cabinet, and the private members in the back-benches 

don’t have the balls to stand up. They don’t have the guts to get 

up and talk about this Bill, which is a clear attempt on the part 

of the government, Mr. Speaker, to destroy medicare. 

 

I notice the member from Melville, I notice the member from 

Melville, Mr. Speaker, is silent in his chair. The others are 

squirming and squealing and whimpering and whining from 

their seats. They won’t stand up and tell the people of this 

province why they’re gutting the prescription drug plan and 

hurting people who are sick and can least afford the plan that’s 

required for their health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — When I was in Melville, Mr. Speaker, on 

Tuesday evening I talked to about 30 or 40 individuals that I 

had a chance to speak to out of the 150 that were at this meeting 

that I attended. And the 30 or 40 that came up to me after the 

meeting told me very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that the member for 

Melville, who is the minister in charge of Labour and Social 

Services, will be serving his last term as the representative from 

Melville, because they feel, Mr. Speaker, very clearly that he 

has betrayed the trust that they have put in him. 

 

I had spoken to people, Mr. Speaker, that I have never seen in a 

New Democratic Party meeting before, in Melville, tell me 

these things. They are embarrassed with the member from 

Melville for his position and the stand with respect to medicare, 

not to mention his comments that he’s made throughout the 

province that have totally embarrassed hundreds of people, 

including his own caucus. 

 

But I want to get back to Bill 34. This Act which will destroy 

and gut the prescription drug plan. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I recognize the 

member from Melville. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — There is certain parliamentary language, 

and we have the member from Regina North West referring to 

matters that are not before the Assembly.  

This member does not use unparliamentary language in this 

Assembly. I think, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’m having 

difficulty hearing the member because the member to my left is 

interrupting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, you should review the 

record and consider all the remarks of this member, that there 

are certain vulgar forms of language that are not acceptable in 

this Assembly. 

 

I believe that the member opposite has used such language and 

that the Speaker should consider the nature of the language of 

this particular . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I think the hon. 

member has the right to raise his point of order without being 

interrupted, and if any other member wishes to speak to the 

point of order he raises, I will give them that opportunity. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I think you should review 

the record and look at the way the member from Regina North 

West refers to the anatomy of men in this Assembly and that 

you should consider the language that he is using here and rule 

accordingly. And I ask you to examine the record for tomorrow. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’ve heard the member’s point of order, and I 

will take note of it. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, just to clear the record. What I 

meant to say was they don’t have the courage and I apologize if 

it was taken the wrong way. Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Melville obviously doesn’t have the courage to stand up and 

speak on the Bill. He doesn’t have the virility to stand up and 

tell his constituents where he stands on the prescription drug 

plan amendments, the gutting of the plan, under Bill 34. 

 

But this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is a typical Tory, a typical 

Conservative Bill. It’s a tax which is an unfair tax. It’s a tax on 

the sick, as my colleagues have indicated, and it’s a tax not only 

on the sick, Mr. Speaker, but on those who have the least ability 

to pay, the ones that are the most vulnerable in society, the most 

powerless. And this government, time after time, since October 

20, 1986 has introduced legislation, has introduced cut-backs 

which affect the powerless the most in this society. 

 

And this action, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is another example of 

betrayal with respect to their commitments in the past. They 

have double-crossed the people of this province, in my view, 

and I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Melville and the 

people from all parts of this province are going to look upon 

this Bill as another double-cross by the Conservative 

government and the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — The government opposite, Mr. Speaker, has 

promised . . . And you’ve seen the promises in writing, and I’ll 

just go over a couple of them. They promised and  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3232 

 

guarantee “that the Progressive Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan rejects any form of deterrent fees or health 

insurance premiums, that the Progressive Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan will abolish the unfair deterrent fees for 

prescription drugs.” It’s been signed by the member for 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. It was signed by the leader of the 

Conservative Party. It was distributed to thousands and 

thousands of individuals across this province. It was a 

commitment not in word but in writing. And as we go around 

the province, Mr. Speaker, talking to people and listening to 

what they have to say about this incompetent government of 

antonyms, what we hear, Mr. Speaker, is that this guarantee was 

not wroth the paper it was written on. And that’s what people 

are telling me. And they’re telling me because they have every 

reason to believe that to be the truth. And you know that, and 

the members opposite know that. But they made that 

commitment; they made that commitment in writing, and they 

have delivered the opposite. 

 

This is a government, in my view, Mr. Speaker, of opposites. 

It’s a government of antonyms. Whatever they do, whatever 

they say . . . I should say, whatever they say, they do the 

opposite. Whatever they promise, they break. Whatever they 

suggest one day, they deny the next. This is not a Progressive 

Conservative government. It’s an antonym government. 

 

You get the Premier up here in the House talking about the 

benefits of free trade. We all know it means the opposite. There 

is no benefits to free trade. They get up and talk about the 

benefits of their new prescription drug plan. We know there is 

no benefits. We know there is no benefits to the prescription 

drug plan, Mr. Speaker. Not on your life. 

 

My colleague from Saskatoon South, earlier this afternoon, 

talked about the four basic underlying corner-stones of 

medicare: that medicare be universal, that it be accessible, 

comprehensive, and that public funding is the major element. 

But this government of antonyms, when it comes to health care 

and prescription drugs, Mr. Speaker, this double-crossing, 

deceitful government, what they have in terms of four 

underlying principles — their four underlying principles are not 

universality or accessibility or comprehensibility or public 

funding. Their four principles are patronage, massive corporate 

give-aways, gross mismanagement, and cut-backs. That’s the 

four corner-stones of the Conservative antonym government 

opposite. 

 

When the government opposite is in a difficult situation, Mr. 

Speaker, they don’t bear down and work harder and try to find 

positive things to do to resolve the problems. What they do is 

they resort to self-indulgence and patronage; they start giving 

away our resources and our cash to out-of-province corporate 

friends, or out-of-nation corporate friends; or they mismanage 

programs. We’ve heard example after example on, including the 

drug plan, where they cut one program or 10 programs or 20 

programs. Rather than bear down and accept the responsibility 

and obligation of government, they desert it and they get eaten 

alive with their four corner-stones of patronage, give-aways, 

and cut-backs and mismanagement. 

Mr. Speaker, in December of ’86, when we were first elected, at 

least in this House when I was re-elected, we talked about the 

drug patent Act and at that time I suggested that the proposed 

changes to the federal drug patent legislation, if it were to take 

place, would mean very simply that there would be less 

competition between pharmaceutical manufacturers, that there 

would be increased prices in drugs. I predicted an erosion of 

medicare in Saskatchewan and in Canada and, as well, hundreds 

of millions of dollars more leaving the country, stifling 

economic development, job creation and, of course, massive 

increases in taxes. 

 

And I predicted at that time if the proposed changes to the 

federal drug patent legislation took place, that that would mean 

as well that profits of U.S. and European drug manufacturers 

would sky-rocket beyond their high prices right now and record 

levels. And in terms of Bill 34, Mr. Speaker, I predicted as well 

that Saskatchewan people would pay a great deal more for 

drugs. 

 

And now we’ve seen . . . with this following of what I 

predicted, we see the prescription drug plan being gutted. We 

see, Mr. Speaker, not only that, but we see very clearly who the 

hand that pushed the pen that signed the agreement is . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And I’m asked: who is the hand that 

pushed the hand that signed the agreement in the drug patent 

legislation? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s the same group that is the 

hand that pushes the pen that is signing the agreement to gut the 

prescription drug program. 

 

And that same hand, Mr. Speaker, is the hands of the 

Conservatives and their friends, the drug companies. And who’s 

benefiting from this, Mr. Speaker? Who is benefiting from the 

changed Bill 34, the gutting of The Prescription Drugs Act? 

You know who’s benefiting? Well I just happen to have a 

couple of names of organizations that are benefiting. We have 

the Smith Kline French Pharmaceutical Company as benefiting; 

we have Merck Frosst, a large multinational, benefiting; we 

have Lilly Pharmaceuticals, all of those from out of the country; 

we have Desbergers; we have all kinds. And these are a short 

list, Mr. Speaker, of the hand that’s pushing the pen that’s 

changing the legislation to fill the pockets. 

 

The reason these are instrumental people in terms of the 

Conservative legislation tonight that we’re debating is because 

they contribute money to the Conservative Party. They provide 

the grease to oil the machine, the public relations machine of 

the Conservative Party. I predict, Mr. Speaker, that the people 

of Saskatchewan will reject out of hand this external influence 

in our society, in our province, in our economy. They will reject 

that at the very first opportunity that they have, and hopefully 

it’ll be sooner than the next election, but I predict for certain at 

the next election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Pharmaceutical Drug Association is very 

pleased with what the Tories are doing opposite. They represent 

65 multinational drug companies operating in Canada — 65 

multinational drug companies. They have hired a lobbyist firm 

in Ottawa with strong Tory connections to press the government 

for the patent amendments and to press this government for 

changes to  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3233 

 

the Prescription Drug Plan Act. The name of that is 

Government Consultants International. The name of that 

company is Government Consultants International, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s run by Frank Moores, a former Conservative 

premier of Newfoundland, Gerald Doucet the former 

Conservative member from Nova Scotia is in the group, and 

Gary Ouellet, a Quebec city lawyer who helped organize the 

Conservatives in that province in the last election. Here is a 

little influential lobby group that has worked with the federal 

Tories to change the drug patent legislation. 

 

Now we’re seeing the drug companies as well influence these 

members in this government, this so-called government, to 

change the way people are served in this province. It’s an attack 

on medicare, Mr. Speaker; it’s an undermining of the four 

corner-stones of medicare. It certainly isn’t an undermining of 

the four corner-stones of the Conservative government of 

patronage and give-aways and cut-backs and mismanagement. 

It’s basically fuelling those four corner-stones of the 

Conservatives. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what we see is a very sad amendment to a 

very prominently successful plan in this province. This 

government has ripped medicare; they are hurting the people 

who can least afford it. 

 

And I want to share, with you and others, one or two letters that 

I have received from constituents and others about their 

concern. The government has lost its sensitivity. They disregard 

correspondence from concerned residents and citizens of this 

province. They refuse to respond to most of them. They 

disregard the problems that these people are having, and they 

are negligent in their carrying out of government obligation. 

And I ask the Speaker and other members opposite, if they’re so 

negligent and they really don’t want to provide better services 

for our people or enhance programs, why do they want to be 

government? Why don’t they go back to the private sector and 

do what they were doing in the private sector? If they don’t 

want to improve government and make it an operation that 

serves people rather than multinational corporations, then 

maybe they should leave. I’m sure the happiest people in the 

world will be the people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have one letter here which I’ll just . . . very short 

one: 

 

Dear Sir: Prior to the changes in the drug plan, my wife 

had been granted exceptional status for the drug histmanol. 

Her doctor has told her to make two tablets or to take two 

tablets per day to counteract the effects of some very bad 

allergies. This is going to cost our family over $700 under 

your new plan. My purpose in writing is to request that 

special status be granted for this particular care. Yours 

sincerely, 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this letter was sent; a response was received. 

We acknowledge receipt of your letter; can’t help you. They’ve 

made an appeal to the Minister of Health requesting 

reconsideration, and the only response that they’ve got is 

maybe, just maybe, we’ll give you a blue envelope. We’re not 

going to help you, but maybe  

we’ll give you a blue envelope, but we haven’t decided that yet. 

But I can understand, Mr. Speaker, that it’s only been probably, 

oh, five or six weeks since the second or third letter was sent. 

But that’s one example, Mr. Speaker, of the insensitivity of this 

government. They refuse to respond and assist those in need. 

People who are suffering, that require prescription drugs on the 

advice of their doctors are having great difficulty. They’re 

making a choice of whether they obtain medication or whether 

they buy food that day. It’s a choice, Mr. Speaker, which comes 

right out of the Dark Ages. It’s a program that only right-wing 

conservative elements would introduce and wish on people. 

 

(2115) 

 

I find it very puzzling that a government of that colour and of 

that insensitivity would want to even be around. Why don’t they 

just leave and do us all a favour and do the people of 

Saskatchewan a big favour? 

 

I have another letter here, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to read it 

into the record if I may. It’s to the Minister of Health, with a 

copy to me. And it says: 

 

Dear Mr. McLeod: I can no longer sit back and watch 

silently at the contemptuous manner in which you and 

your government are treating the people of this province. 

 

Your most recent announcement of cut-backs in the drug 

plan and dental plan show that you have no compassion 

for humanity in general. Those in our society who will 

suffer due to your arrogant decisions are the poor, the sick, 

the elderly, the children, and those who are now recently 

unemployed. 

 

The basic reason given for the cuts was one of financial 

restraint. Mr. McLeod, you are not dealing with an 

unthinking public. You say that you are saving . . . (a) 

million in rearranging the dental plan, but you have not 

told the public what the costs of unemployment, welfare, 

re-education, and incalculable waste of existing dental 

equipment and facilities will amount to. I’m sure it will 

surpass the $5.5 million mark. What you have robbed from 

419 families you have bestowed on 300 dentists who 

already enjoy lifestyles that surpass that of most people in 

our society. 

 

And it goes on to talk about the drug plan and: 

 

The confidence and trust given to you by the people of this 

province in the last election has been totally destroyed by 

your changes to the health privileges (such as the dental 

plan and the drug plan) . . . in the past. You have made the 

same mistake the Liberal government of 19 years ago 

made with they imposed deterrent fees on medicare. The 

result was political suicide. 

 

And that was from the little concerned person. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Might as well shoot yourself down. 

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3234 

 

Mr. Solomon: — A great deal of concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another one, and this is a very long letter, 

and I’d like to read it except there are some comments here that 

don’t pertain to the prescription drug plan — but I have outlined 

those; I would like to read them into the record. And this is 

from an elderly person, and it’s regard to the prescription drug 

plan, and this is page 4, and she has talked about a couple of 

other concerns in terms of cut-backs. 

 

And this is where I can put forth a very person view (she 

says). My situation is not unique. Many others in the same 

boat, just a different chronic ailment, but still requires 

continuous medication. I have chronic asthma — a 

hereditary condition in my case — well controlled but 

only due to continuous advice and interest by Dr. Hopkins 

over the years. I do not take any unnecessary medication, 

so I nor my husband or family abuse this service, but 

appreciate it. I have enclosed an estimate on my costs, and 

I’d like to have your comments on same. 

 

I have to take one drug that I had the exemption for — 

please, why did you eliminate that service? Do you think it 

is by choice to be different that I take these drugs? I 

cannot take any ventolin-related medication because of a 

severe reaction, so I have to take alupent — not under the 

formulary — but until now at least covered under the 

exemption. Now I have to pay either $28 or $32 every 

week for this medication that I cannot do without. There 

are others that could be substituted for the other 

medications, but not this one. Now if I happen to require 

any other prescriptions such as an antibiotic which often is 

the case for asthmatics, then I pay again and again. 

 

Now that is just my case — then there is my husband, who 

had to retire on medical grounds eight years ago due to, 

primarily, a heart condition. So he has heart pills, et cetera, 

not more than necessary, as he tries to keep himself in 

reasonably good shape, so he does not have worse health 

problems, so you can add X number of dollars to my list 

attached (she says). 

 

His problems stem largely (and I ask the members 

opposite to listen to this point) from World War II wounds 

— he fought and suffered for this country and for you too. 

Never forget this . . . 

 

And she underlines “never forget this.” He fought for all of us, 

including the Minister of Health who has introduced this gutting 

of the prescription drug plan and Bill: 

 

. . . and for our children and grandchildren to have the best 

in life. 

 

We also fought hard for our (Saskatchewan) . . . medicare, 

and now by “unthoughtful, misinformed” members, as 

yourself, we are very definitely losing what the rest of 

Canada has looked to and patterned their care after. 

 

And just because others are taking this all the way, why 

should Saskatchewan be the same? If they cut their heads 

off would you too? 

 

And she goes on: 

 

Even though I’m still working, for a short time anyway, 

my job does not carry any medical/dental benefits. We, 

and other pensioners cannot go out and get a job to earn 

extra money, so what answer can you give to us to pay for 

all this extra? Most keep their pride and will not, or 

cannot, ask for help. We have worked all our lives and just 

when we think we could take it easy, and have looked 

forward to (retirement, we are faced with) . . . extra dollars 

(that has to) . . . be used for services that we had 

appreciated, at a low cost previous to this. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what this letter says — and I know you’ve 

been listening intently, and I appreciate that — what this letter 

says is that here is a family who is in a low-income situation, 

the male spouse a World War II veteran who has fought for this 

country, has sacrificed his good health so that we in this 

Assembly can stand here and produce laws which hurt him. I 

mean, it doesn’t make any sense. It doesn’t make any sense. 

 

New Democratic party members are not in this Assembly to 

injure people of this province. We are here to provide whatever 

assistance that we can. What this person has indicated in 

writing, in longhand, is that she is suffering as a result of this 

amendment to Bill 34 — Bill 34, this amendment to the 

prescription drug plan, which will injure her and many others. 

And they are very proud people. They fought for this country. 

Those who lived are now witnessing the enemy right here in 

Saskatchewan that they helped elect. And that wasn’t the case. 

They have been betrayed, Mr. Speaker. They have been 

betrayed by people who came to their door in writing and said, 

here is what we are going to do. You vote for us, and we’ll do 

this for you. 

 

And what has happened, Mr. Speaker, is that this government 

who has promised to do away with prescription drug plan 

premiums of $3.95 or less, they, in fact, have raised the 

premiums. They’ve done away with the $3.95 cost, and for 

most people it’s going to cost them hundreds of dollars every 

year in prescription drugs that are absolutely necessary for their 

comfort or control of a major disease. 

 

I don’t know what to say about this, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think 

any more needs to be said. I think the members opposite, the 

member from Shellbrook-Torch River, the member from 

Regina South, the member from Wilkie . . . The member from 

Wilkie will know and appreciate something like this because he 

probably has a lot of people in his constituency of the same age 

and of the same experience. And they’re fairly proud people. 

We’re all fairly proud people who are Canadians and living in 

Saskatchewan. And I think it’s just dismal and incredulous that 

the Government of Saskatchewan would introduce a program to 

purposely inure the most powerless in our society when the 

obligation, the mandate of government, is to assist and help the 

most  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3235 

 

powerless in our society. 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, some examples of commitments that 

the Conservative members have made in writing — and those 

of you that will remember me making a speech on other issues, 

including taxes, will recall the examples I raised — the 

members opposite, the Conservative members who make 

commitments in writing and broke them as soon as they 

possibly could. 

 

But I have some others, Mr. Speaker, dealing with prescription 

drugs. And I have one here from the member from Regina 

Wascana, the Conservative member. And in his important 

notice to all senior citizens, he says: 

 

A Progressive Conservative government will eliminate 

dispensing fees on all drugs prescribed for senior citizens. 

(He says) A Progressive Conservative government will 

continue medicare at no extra cost and upgrade health care 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

This was done by the member from Regina Wascana, former 

member Gordon Currie. And I find this particularly incredible, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The former member from Wascana I hear — I never met him 

personally myself — but I hear the former member from 

Wascana, who was a Conservative member, was a relatively 

well respected individual in the Conservative caucus, which I 

can’t say for many others. But even he, even he broke his word. 

He had a reputation, this Mr. Currie, around the province for 

being a sportsman, for being involved with sports, for basically 

saying things that he believed in. And even he misled the 

people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I find that incredulous. I’m sure that people in Regina Wascana 

and other parts of this province who know Gordon Currie will 

be shocked, will be shocked at that information, but certainly 

not shocked at the Conservative Party for what they’ve done. 

 

I have here some more handwritten information. The member 

from Last Mountain-Touchwood, 

 

. . . revitalize and improve health care (was the promise). 

A new PC government will place great emphasis on 

improving the delivery of health services by providing 

more adequate financing to our hospitals, by expanding 

the drug plan, by guaranteeing first-rate ambulance service 

. . . (and so on) and by ensuring that all areas of the 

province have access to the best in medical care without 

medicare premiums to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This saddens me too, Mr. Speaker, because I’ve had a great deal 

of respect for the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

And I find that it’s another Conservative commitment and it 

really doesn’t do a lot to enhance one’s position in politics. 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, one from the member from Saltcoats, 

a Progressive Conservative pamphlet, and it says, “It’s time for 

a change; a PC government will do all  

the things they promised that they didn’t deliver.” And they did 

the opposite. But it also says here on the bottom that — in the 

green — it says it “will extend drug plan coverage, a plan to 

include all prescription drugs.” 

 

What does that mean, Mr. Speaker? It means that these 

individuals who were elected on the basis of their word, to 

deliver a service, to improve a program, to introduce something 

which is of benefit to the general population, they have gone 

and said they’re going to do these things and they have 

double-crossed the people that they have made these 

commitments to. 

 

How do you think people will relate to you and deal with you 

on other matters? The “antonym” government — whatever you 

say, you do the opposite, whatever you promise, you break; and 

whatever you say, you deny. I can’t believe it. This 

government, Mr. Speaker, is not only a government of 

antonyms, but it’s not a government at all. It shouldn’t even be 

here. 

 

I have another one, Mr. Speaker, it’s from the candidate from 

Morse. The Conservative candidate from Morse promised in his 

literature and writing that: 

 

The PCs have an awareness for the people in the province. 

We will expand the drug plan to include all prescription 

drugs. We have an awareness. 

 

Well I wonder where the member from Morse is right now. I 

wonder if he’s aware of how the people in his constituency 

believe the program that he is not supporting, or at least he’s not 

opposing — the gutting of the prescription drug plan — I 

wonder how they feel. I wonder if he’s aware of their feelings 

and whether or not he is going to do something about that. 

 

He’s here this evening, Mr. Speaker, and he’s looking fairly 

forlorn, and he’s looking betrayed himself. I think he’s a bit 

shocked at what this government is doing, too. And I believe he 

is; I truly believe that he’s as shocked as many of the other 

people around this province. 

 

(2130) 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, of course, the member from 

Kindersley, his literature. This is the member who gets up in the 

House and squeals and whines about freedom of information in 

opposition. And when he gets elected he introduces Act after 

Act, Bill after Bill, behind closed doors to make information 

more difficult to get, he does the opposite. He’s one of the 

antonym members. And in this leaflet, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

title: “Vote Bob Andrew,” it says, right there. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please, 

order. The hon. member has broken two rules. He used the hon. 

member’s name, number one, and from what I can gather, he is 

attempting to use his advertisement as an exhibit. So I would 

ask him to refrain from that. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, a point well taken. 

The member from Kindersley, the antonym MLA, says, 

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3236 

 

A new PC government will place a great emphasis on 

improving the delivery of health services by providing 

more adequate financing to our hospitals and by 

expanding the drug plan. 

 

And he goes on to make other commitments, which of course 

have not only been not kept but they have cost people more in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to end my remarks now by saying that, 

with respect to Bill 34, an Act to gut the prescription drug plan, 

that this government is introducing, that whether it’s the 

promise of balanced budgets, whether they promise to balance 

budgets, or whether it’s the promise to never reimpose the gas 

tax, or whether it’s the promise to eliminate the E&H tax, or 

whether it’s the promise to cut person income tax by 10 per 

cent, or whether it’s the promise to protect our health care 

system and to improve our drug plan, Mr. Speaker, the 

Progressive Conservative government has broken every one of 

those promises. Not one promise have they kept. Whatever they 

say, they do the opposite. This government of antonyms, this 

opposite government, whatever they promise, they break; and 

whatever they suggest, they deny. 

 

A warning should go out from this Assembly this evening, Mr. 

Speaker, a warning that the Progressive Conservative 

government in this province and in this country is trying to 

change the fabric of Saskatchewan society. They’re trying to 

change people’s reliance and confidence in government. 

They’re trying to change how our economy runs by making 

people less confident in some of the financial institutions that 

we have. They’re trying to change people’s reliance and 

involvement and consistency in government programs to less 

reliance on government and more reliance on a few powerful, 

rich individuals and corporations like the drug companies and 

the multinational oil companies. 

 

I think what is happening, Mr. Speaker, that this warning should 

go out, because what happens when we go down the road and 

people are now becoming more concerned about their survival 

for tomorrow, that they’re becoming more concerned about 

putting bread on the table and having a job than they are about 

their neighbour, their community, or their province. When they 

become more concerned — and that’s the objective of this 

government — they lose sight of where the government is 

going or where the government wants to take them. And that’s 

very dangerous, Mr. Speaker, because this government is taking 

us down a very difficult path, a very wrong road. People are 

telling me all over this province that it’s the wrong way to go. 

 

In the first week in June, before the legislature sat, I was called 

in one evening by two pharmaceutical employees. And they 

produced a document which the Conservative government had 

sent out telling the pharmacists what plans or what changes 

were coming in the prescription drug plan. And they were 

worried, Mr. Speaker. They were very worried, not because — 

and these were two unrelated individuals — they were worried 

because this government is trying to rip apart a program, and 

they have indeed ripped this program apart, which has become a 

very important program to all of the people in  

this province. And they’re also very concerned because what 

happens once the government starts getting their fingers 

involved with the pharmaceutical drug companies is that certain 

pharmaceuticals on the shelves become preferred — higher cost 

drugs are there and the generics are not there. 

 

We’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, a concern by these two individuals 

that the government was destroying a program that had sorted 

itself out over the years and provided a service that was second 

to none on the North American continent. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, or in finishing my remarks, those 

with chronic health problems like asthma or high blood pressure 

or arthritis or heart problems or allergies that require medication 

to exist, are people who are now going to be paying 

significantly more for their drugs. They are on prescription 

drugs not because they want to be but because their doctors 

have prescribed them and it’s required for them to keep a basic 

level of health. 

 

And this is a very sad thing, Mr. Speaker, because once you 

start taxing the sick, once you start transferring the deficit from 

where it should be in the hands of cabinet to the sick, you have 

a society, Mr. Speaker, that is changing in terms of its fabric. 

And they are now trying to survive as individuals in this 

province so that they can make it till tomorrow, and that they 

can make it till the week after and the month after. 

 

But I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker, that what these people are 

trying to do is they want to make it to the next election because 

they want to tell this government what they believe they should 

be doing with respect to the drug plan. And I’ll tell you, they 

won’t be casting their votes for that government opposite. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve heard a great deal said in debate on this 

particular Bill that’s before the House — many words. And I 

would argue, Mr. Speaker, a fair amount of licence in so far as 

what this Bill really means and what it’s all about in terms of 

the health care for the people of this province. 

 

And earlier tonight I was reading an interesting piece that I’d 

. . . actually that dated back to 20-25 years ago. And sometimes 

the arguments are made in politics that the weaker the case, the 

deeper the pile of paper, or the more verbose the rhetoric. When 

I listened to speaker after speaker after speaker using this 

endless rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, the speeches are no different than 

we heard three or four months ago in this House. Nothing new 

has come forward, but for the most part, simplistic analysis. 

 

And I thought that stands . . . all this talk, Mr. Speaker, stands 

in sharp contrast to really some of the great documents in 

history, and how some people throughout history have been 

consistently able to put a lot of meaning in a few words. And a 

few examples, for example — Lincoln’s address at Gettysburg 

used only 266 words, Mr. Speaker, and yet that’s been a 

memorable document and  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3237 

 

one that people know throughout history. The Ten 

Commandments, Mr. Speaker, use only 297 words, and 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, they have left their mark on society and 

are with us to this very day. 

 

And yet the NDP have gone on and on and on about what this 

Bill means and have not come up with any solutions. They 

somehow think, Mr. Speaker, that by endless debate that 

somehow they’re going to make their case better. Such is not 

the case. 

 

I want to start tonight, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk, first of all 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I want to talk about three things, Mr. 

Speaker, tonight. First of all, why are we making these changes 

to the drug plan, Mr. Speaker? What is society really facing? 

And what really has been the commitment to health care in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, by this Minister of Health and by 

this government? 

 

Well why are making these changes to the drug plan, Mr. 

Speaker? First of all, anyone who would suggest that making 

change of any sort is easy, Mr. Speaker, would be sadly 

mistaken, for such is not the case. It is never easy to make 

change. The status quo is always the easiest, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

always the easy way out — don’t make waves; don’t make 

change. The status quo people get used to it and somehow it 

will always be all right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well in making these changes, the other thing 

that was absolutely and first and foremost in our minds is that 

we did not want to jeopardize the quality of health care in this 

province. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we are faced as a 

government by making decisions not always that are easy, but 

ones that must be responsible. They must be right for the 

province, they must be right for the people, and the must be 

right for the health care in this province — but not necessarily 

easy. 

 

And let me explain, because this is a classic situation, Mr. 

Speaker. The easy way out of this is to make no change. But are 

we, as legislators, taking the right course if we stand back and 

say that we can let our . . . that we can afford to not put our 

economic house in order? Are we making the right decision for 

the people of this province by saying, Mr. Speaker, that we 

don’t have to put our economic house in order? And I would 

argue, Mr. Speaker, that we, as legislators, would not be making 

the right decision if we took that decision. And why do I say 

that? Because, Mr. Speaker, would it be right for us, as 

legislators, to merely let the deficit rise, to let the deficit rise 

and get ourselves to the point where we’re spending several 

hundreds of millions of dollars a year, Mr. Speaker, merely 

servicing the debt, paying the interest bills on that accumulated 

deficit, Mr. Speaker? All we would be doing, Mr. Speaker, 

would be mortgaging our children’s future. Nobody will be well 

served if we got to the point in this province where it took 

hundreds of millions of dollars a year to service the debt. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we were faced with making some 

decisions and making some changes. And the NDP have come 

out with the simplistic analysis. They’ve said  

simply, we are against these changes. They have not proffered 

up one solution, Mr. Speaker. They have not given one example 

of how we, as legislators, collectively, could approach our task 

responsibly and reasonably about how we can put our economic 

house in order without making changes. They have been against 

everything, Mr. Speaker. They are the change resistors, second 

to none. 

 

They say, Mr. Speaker, the deficit must not be allowed to rise; 

they say that. Then in the second breath they say, but don’t cut 

back on programs, don’t make changes. And then, Mr. Speaker, 

they say, don’t raise taxes, don’t increase spending. You can’t 

have it all ways, Mr. Speaker. You can’t on one hand say, don’t 

let the deficit go up, but don’t cut programs. You can’t say, 

don’t let the deficit go up, but don’t increase taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fundamental issue that we’re facing in this 

legislature tonight is not whether . . . is not a simplistic analysis. 

We have to face the choices. And I believe that this is a 

responsible way to go, Mr. Speaker, because in so doing not 

only will we not jeopardize health care this day in this province, 

but we will not jeopardize it in the future when our children and 

our grandmothers and our grandfathers will still want to access 

this system. 

 

We cannot go unhooked from reality, Mr. Speaker. We must 

address the reality of today. We cannot get ourselves into a 

situation where it takes hundreds of millions of dollars to pay 

the debt — that is hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, 

that should be going to fund health care down the road. To take 

any other course, Mr. Speaker, would be absolutely 

irresponsible. And you cannot, the opposition cannot cop out on 

this. Either they come up with a solution or they look at the 

inconsistency of their approach. They’re against the deficit; 

they’re against increased taxes; and they’re against decreased 

spending. You can’t have it all ways, Mr. Speaker. You can’t 

have it all ways. 

 

(2145) 

 

But as I said, Mr. Speaker, as well we do not want to see quality 

health care jeopardized. And although the NDP will trot 

examples out — and I would argue, Mr. Speaker, rare examples 

— about the change in the drug plan. If one picks up some of 

the articles that have been written in the various daily and 

weekly media from across this province over the last few weeks 

— I’ve got some from Prince Albert, September. This one here 

is, as well, around in September. This one’s from the 

Star-Phoenix in July. And just to give you an example, Mr. 

Speaker, of how this Minister of Health and how this 

government is on the right track with these changes, some of 

the headlines read like this: “Revised drug plan forces pill 

prices down,” “Revised Saskatchewan drug plan remains best in 

Canada,” Mr. Speaker. Another headline says: “Drug plan 

generally working well — pharmacists.” And I’ll read from that 

one, Mr. Speaker. It’s the Prince Albert Daily Herald, 

September 3. And on the paragraph here goes: 

 

A lot of people are no longer buying or taking drugs they 

don’t really need says Roses Mamchur, president of the 

Prince Albert District  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3238 

 

Pharmaceutical Association, (Mr. Speaker). 

 

Some inherent public responsibility, Mr. Speaker. Another 

example in one of these articles is how the tendering system 

used by Saskatchewan Health has seen one pharmaceutical drop 

by 70 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Saving the taxpayers money 

already. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say that by making changes, we can make 

change responsibly and still have the best health care, the best 

drug plan in Canada, as this article refers to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other point that we have to address here, Mr. Speaker, is 

that to not make these changes what were we faced with? We 

were faced with drug bills that were escalating and escalating 

rapidly. I think the track we were on would have seen us at 125 

million and certainly within half a decade, or a decade at most, 

probably something close to a quarter of a billion dollars, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It seems to me if we had got to that point then we put the entire 

system in jeopardy, that would be spending more, then, on the 

drug part of our health care program than probably we’re 

spending on the entire health care system just a few short years 

ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other reason why you have to address health care, why you 

have to stand back and ask yourself the hard questions and not 

merely engage in simplistic analysis, Mr. Speaker, is what else 

to this very day do we know about in Canada and in 

Saskatchewan’s population that’s going to be a major change 

that we must deal with and that we’re going to face, and in fact 

are now starting to face it, Mr. Speaker. And that is that we are 

dealing with an increasingly ageing population. 

 

You cannot turn your back on that, Mr. Speaker. You cannot 

somehow pretend that it does not exist. You cannot come in this 

House and merely say we want no changes in anything, that 

somehow these problems will all work themselves out, for that 

would be, Mr. Speaker, irresponsible and once again forsaking 

the future. Because the thing that we know about an ageing 

population is that the health care costs go up as the population 

ages, in fact there’s some rather startling statistics that point out 

the costs that one faces as one gets older, and certainly the 

numbers over 65 are significant, and numbers over 85 are even 

that much more significant. 

 

That is an irrefutable fact, Mr. Speaker, and it’s one that must 

be faced up to if we’re going to approach our job responsibly in 

this legislature. We can all engage in political rhetoric and 

political debate and try and score our points, Mr. Speaker, but at 

the end of the day we have to face up to some realities. That is 

one of them, Mr. Speaker, and really it’s one that should cause 

us some very, very sober thought. 

 

It’s not going to go away, Mr. Speaker, and it has been always 

in this province that we have cared for those who broke the soil 

in this province some several years ago, those who pioneered 

this province. We have an obligation to them and if we are not 

good stewards today,  

Mr. Speaker, we will not be able to look after our children. By 

every measure, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to face up to the future. 

We have to face up to the future, Mr. Speaker, in health care or 

we won’t have a future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some three or four years ago, a fellow by the name of James 

Laxter who did a fair amount of research work for the NDP, 

Mr. Speaker, wrote a rather damning critique of the NDP and 

how they had become high-bound in their ideology. And one of 

the comments that he made, Mr. Speaker, one of the comments 

that he made, Mr. Speaker, read like this: 

 

The time has come for Canadian social democrats to put 

the issue of rebuilding the Canadian economy first so that 

the human ends we all share can be achieved. 

 

That is the fundamental point, Laxter had it right, Mr. Speaker. 

They yet have not realized this, that you cannot have a good 

health care system, a good social safety net if you don’t have 

some economic engines to pay the bills, Mr. Speaker. You 

cannot be totally preoccupied with income redistribution, Mr. 

Speaker, if you don’t have somebody creating the income, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — He then went on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

By concerning themselves with distribution much more 

than production, Canadian social democrats have stood on 

the sidelines as far as this great debate about the future is 

concerned. It is a time for them to face the future and enter 

the debate (end of quote, Mr. Speaker). 

 

And that’s classic here tonight again, Mr. Speaker. They are 

resisting change because they don’t have any other answer, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s very easy to say, no, do not make change. In fact 

it’s probably even, in their minds, extremely politically 

palatable to take that route because it’s very easy to go out there 

and either be inaccurate in your examples, Mr. Speaker — and 

if you’re not being inaccurate, then all I can argue is that they 

are creating uncertainty and, perhaps, some fear where it need 

not be created. 

 

We have to face up to some overwhelming fiscal and health 

facts and population demographics, Mr. Speaker, that are 

staring us in the face. And to not deal with them would be 

totally irresponsible. 

 

The other point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make is that this 

government, unlike any other, has probably recognized this all 

along. It was this government that sensed the increasing ageing 

population and what it would mean for nursing home care, for 

example, and the demands there that led to the very aggressive 

programming in that area. 

 

We’ve heard a lot of rhetoric tonight. I know the hon. members 

talked about promises made by the government members and 

trotted through several examples. Well I  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3239 

 

want to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The hon. member from 

Regina North East says, let’s talk about it. And I would like to 

talk about it. Because, Mr. Speaker, I happen to come from one 

of those constituencies where there were a lot of promises made 

to the residents of Fillmore and Stoughton, Saskatchewan, not 

just in 1981, Mr. Speaker, and not just in 1980, and not just 

before the ’78 election. But I want to tell you, promises that 

were made 17 years ago by the ministers of Health that yes, you 

would get a hospital and yes, you would get a nursing home. 

 

Thirteen years, Mr. Speaker — 13 years after that promise had 

first been made, I was elected and met with these communities. 

And they had been bounced around right, left, and centre, 

promised to death, Mr. Speaker. And you talk about betrayal 

and the lack of commitment. I’ll tell you, those people have 

been betrayed. I would say lied to, Mr. Speaker, but that might 

be unparliamentary. But I’ll tell you they have been jerked 

every which way on the issue of health care. 

 

In fact it shouldn’t surprise me that they’ve never had a nursing 

home and a hospital built, Mr. Speaker, because on July 11, ’77, 

the minister of the day then, the member who today from 

Saskatoon South was the minister of Health, sent letters to those 

communities wanting nursing homes across this province, 

talking about a moratorium on nursing homes, Mr. Speaker. 

Well I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, this very next month 

Fillmore will open up their brand new hospital-nursing home 

complex. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And more than that, Mr. Speaker — 

and more than that, Mr. Speaker, it is one of the finest nursing 

home-hospital complexes that you will find anywhere in the 

world. 

 

And you talk about maintaining rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. You talk about maintaining it, that’s exactly how you 

maintain it is with a fine centre like that you can keep the senior 

citizens in their home communities. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s only 

about a year ago or so now that we opened up one of the finest 

nursing home complexes in North America in Stoughton, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 

stands in sharp contrast, in sharp contrast to moratoriums that 

wee put in place in 1977 and people being jerked around for 17 

years, Mr. Speaker. That stands in sharp contrast. That’s dealing 

with some of the demographic pressures that we’re talking 

about and that stands in sharp contrast to a headline in the 

Hospital Products and Technology journal, August-September 

’85, and the headline reads, Mr. Speaker, “Building more 

institutions for aged is road to disaster, says Romanow.” Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what they thought . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order please! Order! Order please. The hon. 

member knows that he cannot refer to other members in the 

House by their name. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I meant  

to say the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, but I’ll repeat 

the headline so there’s no mistaking what he said: “Building 

more institutions for aged is road to disaster, says member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale”, the NDP member, the man who would 

be leader of this province if people would be silly enough to let 

him, Mr. Speaker. And they will not. And I’m sure the NDP 

themselves are having second thoughts about that member after 

his stance on the free trade, Mr. Speaker. I have no doubt about 

that at all. Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What is the member’s point of order? 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Weyburn is 

insulting the people of this province by calling them silly and I 

would ask him to withdraw that remark. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’m sorry but I didn’t catch the last part of 

your point of order. Would you please repeat that? 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Let me repeat that, Mr. Speaker, then. I rise, 

Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, because the member from 

Weyburn has referred to the people of Saskatchewan as being 

silly, and I would ask him to withdraw that remark. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The point of order is not well taken. The 

debate continues. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, if I’ve offended 

somebody, then I certainly would apologize. The point I was 

making, Mr. Speaker, is this, and I’ll rephrase my words. What 

we have, Mr. Speaker, with that story, is the opposition’s view, 

as much as they would try and suggest that they and they alone 

understand the health care needs of this province, that they and 

they alone are not prepared to make changes to deal with the 

pressures that we deal with, and one of those pressures, Mr. 

Speaker, is an ageing population. And not that . . . (inaudible) 

. . . is the only answer or the only tool that one would use in 

dealing with an ageing population in terms of the health care, 

Mr. Speaker, but certainly it is one that we have to give some 

consideration. 

 

Similarly, on the other end of the scale, Mr. Speaker, in dealing 

with the ageing population, the Minister of Health is addressing, 

it seems to me, what ultimately is even the larger and better 

solution and the solution that can perhaps do more for our 

seniors than all the nursing homes in the world can do, and 

that’s the whole question of keeping them fit; the whole 

question of wellness; the whole question of gerontology, Mr. 

Speaker, of proper nutrition for our older people; the whole 

issue, Mr. Speaker, of physical exercise for that ageing 

population; the whole question of keeping them ambulatory and 

out of nursing homes and in their communities and in their 

homes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it seems to me there’s an exciting area of hope and 

promise. It’s the area of preventative medicine, Mr. Speaker. I 

had an example related to me shortly after I was elected, where 

the local Rotary Club in Weyburn gathered up the funds, Mr. 

Speaker, to help buy a whirlpool bath for the nursing home. 

And you know what they told, that the director of nursing came 

from that  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3240 

 

nursing home to the Rotary Club to tell them of the success of 

their project. You know what the story was that she related, Mr. 

Speaker? That they had dropped their prescriptions for sleeping 

pills for these senior citizens by one-third, just because they 

could have that soothing and relaxing effect of physical therapy 

— hydrotherapy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet the NDP want to cling to the past and somehow say, 

fill them up with drugs; that we ought not make any changes; 

that we ought to ignore the demographic changes, Mr. Speaker, 

when such is not clearly the case, and there are other options, 

and those are the kinds of solutions that should be put forth. 

Those are the kinds of solutions that are being put forth by this 

Minister of Health, and I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker: not 

because these changes are easy, but because they are right, and 

they’re responsible, and they’re right for the future of this 

province, Mr. Speaker, that why, and that’s why I support this 

Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 


