













































September 2, 1987 Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 2, 1987 

 

 

2237 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

my pleasure to welcome to the Assembly, and to introduce to 

you, the community college, and a class from the community 

college. I’m told there are 21 students with their teachers, or 

chaperons as it may be: Mrs. Sheila Cressman and Ms. Maria 

Castaneda – I may not have done that name entire justice. 

 

Before taking my seat, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the 

community college. I would venture a wager of fair size that the 

community college comes here more often with students than 

any other educational institute in the province. They’re here at 

least once a month, and the people that they bring are, by and 

large, new Canadians. And it’s with particular pleasure, 

afterwards, that I get to meet them to find out what their 

experiences are and how they’re faring. It’s really an interesting 

experience. 

 

I may say to the students, and I’ll be saying afterwards that as I 

see them some years later in the riding, my experience is that 

most of them do very well in this country. So I know you want 

to join with me in welcoming the students and the community 

college. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to introduce to you, and through you, some guests seated in 

your gallery, three scholars from Jilin Province in China who 

are here studying at the University of Regina for a year as part 

of the twinning arrangement we have with Jilin province, and 

the agreements that we have for cultural and educational 

exchanges. 

 

Here in the Speaker’s gallery are Mr. Wang Shubin, Mr. Long 

Dongyun, and Mr. Yu Yongkai, and I would wish them every 

success in their studies. I hope they enjoy Regina and have a 

chance to see not only all of Regina but as well, all of our fine 

province of Saskatchewan and, perhaps, other parts of Canada. 

 

And I would ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 

wishing them well in their studies, and a warm welcome to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to introduce to you, and through you, Mr. Speaker, to the 

members of the Assembly, a couple who are visiting from 

Moose Jaw and from my home constituency. They are Frank 

and Janet Plawucki, and are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

and I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome them 

here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

American Anti-Dumping Tariff Imposed on Potash 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Energy, and it deals, Madam Minister, with your incompetent 

and ineffective response that you gave yesterday to the 

anti-American dumping tariffs against Saskatchewan potash 

which your government introduced yesterday. 

 

Madam Minister, this legislation calls on Saskatchewan potash 

workers and Saskatchewan potash producers to limit 

production, which means lost income for our people in our 

province. My question, Madam Minister, is this: what 

arrangements have you made with potash producers in New 

Brunswick and overseas to make sure that they plan to limit 

their production as well; and, Madam Minister, what guarantees 

do you have that they will share this burden, rather than use it 

as an opportunity to gain a bigger share of the American 

market? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member’s opinion 

of being incompetent legislation and ineffective, I assure you, 

cannot begin to meet the inconsistent position of the members 

opposite on this particular issue, beginning with last week. But 

perhaps we’ll get into that later on in debate. 

 

This legislation – and the member from Saskatoon South will 

know that when we put in legislation it’s within our borders, not 

New Brunswick or some other place, but within the borders of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I can indicate to the member that the legislation as he knows, 

because he’s read it, is one of volumes’ control that will apply 

to Saskatchewan. I can assure the member that we are not 

willing to give up our position in the world in terms of what we 

consider to be our fair market share, and we will make every 

effort to ensure that that does not occur. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. From 

what I gather from the minister, she’s had no discussions 

whatsoever, and she’s going to lay the burden on the 

Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan producers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, my supplementary question to 

you is this: what discussions have you had with American 

government officials and representatives of the U.S. potash 

industry with respect to this legislation; and do you have their 

guarantee that production limits in Saskatchewan will result in 

an early withdrawal or dismissal of the American anti-dumping 

action? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, we have had lawyers for 

several months in discussion with the various officials out of 

Washington and other people that would be  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2238 

 

concerned with it. It has been left at that. The member also 

knows that our Premier, in his leadership role on international 

agricultural issues, has spoken many times in the United States, 

and the potash issue is very much tied to the agricultural issue. 

 

So to answer his question briefly, Mr. Speaker, the 

consultations have taken place through the lawyers in 

Washington. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address a 

question also to the Minister of Energy, and I want to ask you, 

Madam Minister: what is the basic point of this legislation if, in 

fact, it doesn’t guarantee that the American tariff threat will, in 

fact, be removed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — And it seems to me that is the essential problem 

confronting the industry at this time. And so my question to 

you: will you, in fact, indicate whether, in your opinion, the 

legislation addresses that essential problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, the basic intent of the 

legislation is to deal with the issue of supply and demand, and 

also to deal with the issue of prices. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — A supplement, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask the 

minister: is it not a fact that the potash prices bottomed out in 

1986; and is it not a fact that the inventories of the mines today 

are lower than they were in 1986; and is it not a fact that it’s as 

low as they’ve been since 1980? In light of those facts, Madam 

Minister, why are you just now discovering that you have to 

introduce a Bill in order to regulate the demand and supply, or 

over-supply, of potash? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, what we have on our world 

markets today on potash is approximately four million tonnes 

surplus. Over one-half of that remains with Saskatchewan. 

That’s substantial. While the member for Saskatoon South says 

that’s not true, that is precisely what it is – four million tonnes 

overhang within the world today. 

 

It’s true, as the member from Quill Lakes has given this House, 

that the price has in fact gone up in the last couple of months. 

However, I would suggest that that has not given any kind of an 

indication that it was in fact going to remain, or in fact be even 

at a stable level. Two months does not give you that kind of 

stability. 

 

The reality is, while it may appear that the potash industry was 

coming out of its doldrums, they got smacked square in the face 

with the anti-dumping action – the levies from 9 per cent to 85. 

That, in turn, Mr. Speaker, added to the problem, a problem that 

they were having difficulty in dealing with on their own. So 

today we have legislation for it. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. I just want to  

say, Madam Minister, it’s a wonder that some action wasn’t 

taken if the supply question was the problem in 1986, before the 

election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask you, Madam Minister: are you 

aware that the American potash analyst this morning said that 

this legislation, far from helping to solve the American tariff 

problem, could weaken Saskatchewan’s case. He makes that 

point that the voluntary production limits are as much of an 

admission that Saskatchewan has been dumping its surplus 

potash into the American market. 

 

So I ask you, Madam Minister, if that is the commonly held 

viewpoint by the Americans – that this Bill will in fact hurt the 

long-term health of the industry. I want to ask you, who have 

you talked to in the United States to explain this legislation? 

Have you talked to the industry? Have you talked to Commerce, 

Department of Commerce? Who in fact have you been 

communicating to indicate who in fact . . . the purpose of this 

Act? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — In response to his first question, yes, I’m 

aware of what some of the people out of the United States have 

been saying about this legislation, and I guess it’s not 

surprising. I would ask the member if he’s aware of what his 

own Saskatchewan people are saying. For instance, a professor 

of economics from the U. of R., he says this legislation is going 

to help, and it’s going to be positive for the province. I would 

like to think perhaps he would listen more to the professor from 

the U. of R. than he would from somebody from the United 

States who in turn has created some of the problems that we’re 

dealing with today. 

 

In response to his second question, Mr. Speaker, we have been 

in constant contact for several months with the Department of 

Commerce. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. A new question, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re not learning very much from the professor 

from Swift Current, I can tell you that, or the professor from 

Albert South. 

 

Madam Minister, if all of this is such a threat to the health of 

the potash industry, why weren’t you warning Saskatchewan 

potash producers to do something about it before the last fall’s 

election, and before the anti-American dumping action became 

such a threat? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had several 

discussions with various producers over several months – over 

several months. And we talked about their problems and how 

are they going to get out of their problems. I think he has seen, 

as been suggested the last couple of months, a price increase, 

but as I’ve indicated, the anti-dumping action coming from the 

United States has all but made that void at this point in time. 

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2239 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Interest Charges on Loans to Saskatchewan Farmers 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Agriculture. Last month, Mr. Minister, a group of 

farmers launched an important test case when one of them filed 

a statement of claim in Humboldt against the Canadian Imperial 

Bank of Commerce. Their court action alleges that the 

Canadian chartered banks overcharged farmers interest in the 

early 1980s. This test case will determine whether or not 

farmers and other small-business people will be able to recoup 

some of the money lost by overcharged interest. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question is this. These farmers are now trying 

to raise funds. They’re trying to help themselves in this 

complex court battle. Will your government provide legal or 

financial assistance for those hard-pressed farmers to try this 

important test case? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we are aware of the case, 

and my officials have been examining a good part of the details 

of various cases and concerns with respect to interest rates and 

those charged by various financial institutions. We are 

examining it in some detail, and I will just say to the hon. 

member that we’re aware of it and we will stay on top. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

you will know that this will be a landmark decision if, in fact, it 

goes in favour of the farmers who have been overcharged, or 

possibly overcharged, interest. This could mean millions and 

millions of dollars for Saskatchewan farmers who are now hard 

pressed to make ends meet. The National Farmers’ Union is 

supporting them morally and they’re supporting them possibly 

with financial assistance. Where, I ask you, is your 

government? Why do you refuse to take the side of 

Saskatchewan farmers on this important issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition is all over the 

map when it comes to potash, and it’s the same with interest 

rates being charged with farmers. On one hand, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I’ll ask all 

members to please try to restrain themselves, and I’ll allow 

question period to proceed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition wants us to 

be concerned about interest rates for farmers. As the opposition 

knows, and I’m sure everybody in Canada knows, when interest 

rates were high, and whenever they’re high, we step in to 

protect farmers. We have right across the piece in this province, 

and we take it very seriously when somebody charges 

exorbitant rates against farmers. 

 

We’ve stepped in with 6 per cent money, a billion dollars for 

farmers here; we have limited farm interest rates at 8  

per cent, Mr. Speaker; we’ve got cash advances for the 

livestock industry right across the piece in the province of 

Saskatchewan because of interest rates. 

 

Talk is pretty cheap, Mr. Speaker. We defend the farmers when 

it comes to high interest rates, and they know that. And we’re 

involved in examining all situations and will continue to be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 

could go on for hours at your 26 per cent cut in the Department 

of Agriculture, and all the lack of support that you’ve showed to 

farmers, except for expounding this myth . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — . . . except for expounding the myth that 

you’re helping them. I ask you now, yes or no, will you support 

the farmers who are putting this case before the courts, and will 

you help them financially? Yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is afraid to 

acknowledge the fact that in the last couple of months farmers 

on average in Saskatchewan received $10,000 apiece — 

$10,000 apiece in the last couple of months, Mr. Speaker – right 

across the board, $675 million in cash in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And obviously, Mr. Speaker, that has never 

taken place before. 

 

When we look at interest rate protection, Mr. Speaker, let’s 

make sure that everybody recognizes that we were there when it 

mattered. All you’d get was succession duties and death tax 

from the members opposite, or nationalize the industry like they 

did the potash, because they don’t understand farmers and they 

don’t understand . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I think hon. 

members should, as I said earlier, please restrain themselves on 

both sides of the House. Let’s allow this question period to go 

forward. We’ll have good questions and good answers if we do 

that. 

 

Lawyer Representing Province of Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Finance. Yesterday the minister accused me of not reading the 

government information that comes out. Can the minister 

produce the government news release that named the Alberta 

lawyer who is representing Saskatchewan at the Principal 

Group inquiry, and his terms of reference? Your government 

information services has no record of such an announcement in 

its files. Will you now tell us when and how this announcement 

was made to the Saskatchewan public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, a letter went out August 28, 

1987 to all investors that had contacted the  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2240 

 

Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs in the province 

of Saskatchewan, indicating the name of the prominent Alberta 

lawyer, Joe Brumlik, as its counsel to monitor the proceedings 

in Alberta and to represent the government in those proceedings 

as necessary. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it obviously came to the attention of a 

very prominent news-letter that is well circulated within the 

province of Saskatchewan called Just in Time, Mr. Speaker, put 

out by Mr. Ralko, who makes reference back on August 29, Mr. 

Speaker, that a Mr. Joe Brumlik, a partner in the 

Edmonton-based law firm of Newson Brumlik has been hired 

by the Saskatchewan government to monitor proceedings in 

Alberta. There was a spelling mistake, Mr. Speaker, in Mr. 

Ralko’s article, which I’m sure was brought to his attention. 

 

As a result of the financial collapse of the Principal Group of 

companies last month, Mr. Speaker, I would assume, Mr. 

Speaker, and I say this with some tongue in cheek, that if Just in 

Time knew about, I assumed everybody did. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I’m 

not one of the Principal investors, so I didn’t get your 

news-letter, and I also don’t have $150 a year to pay the 

subscription on that private magazine that you referred to which 

is not a public information source. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — Moreover, if you continue to treat public 

information in the way you are, it really spells ill for the people 

of Saskatchewan. Yesterday you refused to guarantee that this 

lawyer’s report would be available and tabled in the legislature 

or made available to those who lost money in the Principal 

Group collapse. 

 

Why do you continue to refuse access to this information, and 

you in this House how many Saskatchewan investors are 

concerned with this collapse, and you say you have a mailing 

list and you don’t tell me how many people are involved. So 

you have information that you’re not giving us. Don’t you think 

you have any obligation to keep us informed and the people 

informed when it’s their taxpayers’ money that’s paying that 

lawyer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, with regard to the hon. member’s 

first question, I’m prepared to make representations to Mr. 

Ralko to perhaps give a discount to the hon. member if she 

can’t afford the $150 so that she does have access to the 

news-letter. I’m prepared to make representations. I can’t give 

assurance to the hon. member that that particular company will 

give a preference to the hon. member. 

 

I would suggest, as well, that the letters were given by members 

opposite, copies of letters I believe, to the department. If the 

people that gave you the information and that did not bother 

giving you the information back, I think you should take it up 

with the people that you were speaking on behalf of, because 

the letter went out to all of them. I’m surprised that the hon. 

member did not keep in contact with them to get that 

information. It was obviously public information, Mr. Speaker. 

With regard to the latter question, I think I indicated to the hon. 

member that it is the government’s intention to try and give as 

much information as possible to the Saskatchewan investors 

and that it would depend on the circumstances, whether the 

information was given is privileged. I can’t judge that. I think 

that that would be a limitation placed by the Alberta courts. I 

could not breach that, and I don’t think the hon. member would 

expect me to do that, but I did indicate that we would try and 

give as much information to the Saskatchewan investors as 

possible. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The arrogance of 

the Minister of Finance absolutely knows no bounds. A letter to 

the investors is not public information. I have asked you several 

times in this House if you will give me the numbers of 

Saskatchewan people who have lost money in the Principal 

Trust collapse. You have told me that you don’t have that 

information. How then do you have a mailing list? Will you 

table that information in the House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I apologize to the hon. member if my, 

I thought, rather plain-spoken response to a question is seen as 

arrogant, because I did make it abundantly clear to the hon. 

member that we wrote the letter to those that had communicated 

to the department . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I really 

wonder if members want to hear the questions or the answers. 

Like for about the last five minutes there has been almost 

constant noise in here, so I’d just like to please, once more, 

calm down and allow the questions and the answers to flow 

back and forth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, that in no way constitutes – 

and I wish the hon. member would pay attention – that in no 

way constitutes a complete list of all the Saskatchewan 

investors, which I have indicated on several occasions now, we 

do not have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I did indicate, in no uncertain terms, and I hoped as clearly and 

precisely as possible, that we did respond to those that had 

communicated to the Department of Consumer and Corporate 

Affairs. And that’s what I said in my . . . the answer to the first 

question to the hon. member, and if that list is . . . if the hon. . . . 

I would ask the . . . we will check and if the people that have 

written to the department are prepared to have their names 

released to the opposition, I have no difficulty giving that list to 

the opposition. I think it would be fair to check with those that 

have communicated to the department whether they want that 

list public or not. If they do, I would have no hesitation giving it 

to the hon. member. But I want the hon. member to understand 

that that is not the full list of Saskatchewan investors that we 

have been trying to obtain, and we have not yet obtained. 

 

Ms. Smart: — New question. But first a comment that that is 

not public information, and you have not given people what 

they need to know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2241 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, my final question is, people who 

lost money in the collapse of the First Investors and Associated 

Investors have been told to expect no more than 60 cents to the 

dollar. In light of that, can you explain why the head of the 

Principal Group, Don Cormie, is walking away from this whole 

collapse with something like $5 million? And have you 

instructed Saskatchewan’s lawyer to make that point to the 

Alberta investigators? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — My understanding, Mr. Speaker, was that 

the courts had not, in fact, accepted any proposals. I understand 

that there are some assets that are personally charged by the 

principals in Principal Trust, that they need be cleared off in 

order to expedite and affect the sale of some of the assets. 

 

Now those arrangements will be done by the trustee in 

bankruptcy. I will advise the hon. member, because obviously 

she doesn’t understand the legal obligations of the trustee in 

bankruptcy, and that is to act on behalf, and in the best interests, 

of the creditors. Mr. Speaker, that is the legal obligation; that is 

the obligation for which the trustee is traditionally bonded. 

Those are the obligations that bind the trustee before the courts, 

Mr. Speaker, so that any actions by the trustee must be in the 

best interests of the creditors. That is the law. I am assuming 

that the law is being upheld in the province of Alberta. I know it 

would be upheld here, Mr. Speaker, and I have no reason to 

believe that the law is not being upheld in the province of 

Alberta. 

 

Neglect of the Saskatchewan Archives Board 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Premier, in the absence of the minister responsible for the 

Saskatchewan Archives Board. Mr. Premier, as a result of the 

neglect that your government has given the archives board, it’s 

now in crisis. Never before this has it been treated in such a 

shabby way by a government since it was started in 1945. And 

since you took office, sir, the budget of the archives board, in 

real terms, has been cut by 50 per cent, and the provincial 

archivist and associate provincial archivist positions have now 

been vacant for over a year. 

 

My question to you, sir, is: are you aware that your 

government’s neglect has resulted in more than a five-year 

backlog in the processing of government records and other 

archival collections? Are you aware that this huge backlog, Mr. 

Premier, in effect threatens the ability of this province to 

preserve our historical records. And will you now, Mr. Premier, 

go on record as being prepared to restore the budget of the 

provincial archives as to what it deserves to be to do its job? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, this has to be a historic 

question period for the province of Saskatchewan and this 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it’s my understanding that we have provided 

reasonable headquarters for the archives, and  

accommodations, and, Mr. Speaker, the new headquarters are 

probably the best that they have had in some time. I’m informed 

that the minister is addressing the backlog because of the 

particular circumstances and, with respect to further 

information, I’ll consult the minister. 

 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Before orders of the day, I rise on a point of 

personal privilege. Yesterday during question period, the hon. 

Minister of Health said, and I quote from page 2192 of 

Hansard: 

 

. . . I want you to take note of this fact, which is true. The 

member for Saskatoon Sutherland one day in this House said: 

their government, if re-elected, would reinstate the drug plan 

as it was constituted. I heard him say that. 

 

I categorically deny this. It simply is not fact, and it is not true. 

And I invite you to look at the record. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might have 

an opportunity to correct the record, and I appreciate the 

member from Saskatoon Sutherland raising this. 

 

I have been in this House long enough to remember the day 

when the member who is now the member from Saskatoon 

University was, in fact, the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, 

and I referred to him. And members will notice that I pointed at 

his desk in a matter of fact when that was the case. 

 

But the fact is the member from Saskatoon University did state 

that very categorically, and the member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has taken a different position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Now I must 

remind hon. members again that, before I make my ruling, that 

there’s a bad habit developing in this House, and that is the fact 

that when the Speaker is on his feet, there is heckling between 

members and unnecessary talking. I just want to remind you 

that you don’t offend me personally for doing that, but you 

offend the Chair, the Office of the Chair, the historical Office of 

the Chair. And I would ask you all to remember that and refrain 

from those actions when the Speaker’s on his feet. 

 

Now in regards to the ruling, according to Beauchesne’s, 

paragraph 19: 

 

(1) A dispute arising between two Members, as to 

allegations of facts, does not fulfill the conditions of 

parliamentary privilege. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 – An Act respecting the Potash Resources of 

Saskatchewan 

 

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2242 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 

second reading of Bill No. 36, An Act respecting the Potash 

Resources of Saskatchewan. 

 

The occasion of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, at this point in 

time in our history impresses upon me several factors that we, 

as legislators and citizens of this province, often overlooked – 

and that is that history returns in one form or another. History 

often shows us some very clear paths and cycles – some on 

weather cycles, others would suggest the various cycles of the 

economy. And the cycles of our resources within the world 

economy can also be shown over time. Yet for all our 

education, Mr. Speaker, our progress in civilization, our history 

lessons are often ignored. 

 

As citizens in a world that we view as very much larger than 

ourselves, sometimes different from us, but sometimes 

surprisingly similar, we often ignore, or perhaps we choose to 

ignore, the interdependency of the worlds’ countries on each 

other. 

 

On this occasion, Mr. Speaker, it should be impressed upon 

every member in this Assembly of our interrelationships around 

the world. We in Saskatchewan do not live in isolation of places 

such as China and India, nor Israel, nor Jordan, or Mexico, or 

closer to home, the United States. 

 

Over Saskatchewan’s history we have seen and felt the impacts 

of world events and government actions – events and actions 

half-way around the world, countries far removed from our 

prairie province. Actions and decisions such as Russia’s 

decision to perhaps buy more American wheat; actions by Saudi 

Arabia, Iran, Iraq, or Venezuela to move more oil; the actions of 

the European farm subsidy program; the decision, Mr. Speaker, 

of Australia to mine more uranium; or the decision of countries 

such as Israel and Jordan to mine more potash. 

 

Likewise, Mr. Speaker, actions and decisions taken in Canada, 

and indeed in Saskatchewan, have the ability to impact on other 

countries through the market-place. As we consider ourselves 

very small in a very large world, we often overlook the strength 

of our own capabilities. Mr. Speaker, while we are a province 

of only one million strong, we are a province that is rich in the 

natural resources of the earth; resources that are in demand 

around the world; resources that must compete in world 

competition; resources from our uranium and gold mines in 

northern Saskatchewan; to our oil and gas fields; to our sodium 

sulphate and coal in southern Saskatchewan, and to the very 

rich and plentiful potash resources in eastern and central 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The development of these resources over the years has served 

this province well. While we in this House may disagree on 

some of the policies for development and management of these 

resources – for example, nationalization – I believe that we are 

probably unanimous in the recognition for the necessity for the 

development of the resources and, in turn, the benefits that flow 

to the citizens of this province. 

 

Over the years Saskatchewan people have gained  

substantial benefit from the development of our province’s 

abundant resources. As participants in the world market for 

these vital commodities, Saskatchewan has been responsible in 

developing our resources and acting fair in our trading 

practices. As participants we have learned that these 

commodities indeed run in cycles in nature. We have good 

years and we have difficult years. Through difficult times our 

resource industries have exhibited a vitality, allowing them to 

adjust to changing conditions. That in itself is a testament to the 

strength and endurance of prairie people. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we are dealing specifically with our potash 

resource. The history of this resource dates as far back as 1943 

when potash was encountered from a core drilled by Imperial 

Oil near Radville; also during the drilling of the Ogema no. 1 

well. While they were looking for oil, their bonus for us was 

potash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 1950s saw further exploration outlining 

massive potash beds covering much of southern Saskatchewan. 

In November of 1958 the first shipment of potash was made by 

the Potash Corporation of America from a mine near Saskatoon. 

From then on, Mr. Speaker, IMC (International Minerals and 

Chemical Corporation) came into production; and the ‘60s saw 

Kalium Chemicals begin production at Belle Plaine. Other rural 

communities such as Esterhazy, Cory, Lanigan, Vanscoy, 

Delisle, Colonsay, Allan, and Rocanville felt the positive 

impacts from a new industry in their communities. Saskatoon, 

being one of our larger urban centres, also felt that impact. 

 

While the province as a whole has benefited, Mr. Speaker, the 

industry has weathered its storms over the years. Poorly staged 

expansions, coupled with price cutting and a very weak world 

market, combined to push the Saskatchewan potash industry to 

near disaster by 1969. Lay-offs and mine closures were 

imminent, given the bleak outlook at that time. 

 

Government action at that time, Mr. Speaker, kept those mines 

open, and revenue from potash sales increased from $69 million 

in 1969 in 116 million in 1970. Today, Mr. Speaker, we face 

problems again in our potash industry. 

 

The problems which currently threaten our province’s potash 

industry have the potential to jeopardize the very existence of 

this industry, the livelihood of the potash workers, their 

families, and the many Saskatchewan communities that are 

dependent on the industry. It puts at risk the jobs and the 

enormous investment in many communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s problems started some time ago in the 

boom markets – 1979 through to 1981. World markets at that 

time were enjoying a very strong demand; there were record 

high prices, and the optimistic forecast of continued growth and 

demand and industry profitability led to further expansions. 

Some of these forecasts came from organizations like the Food 

and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations. Closer to 

home, I remember the NDP member from Regina North East, 

minister of Finance at that time – even as late, I believe, as 

March of ’82 – outlining an extremely  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2243 

 

optimistic forecast for potash. 

 

At that time, Mr. Speaker, world demand was projected to 

increase from 25.9 million tonnes to 37 million by 1986, and 

then to 47.2 million in 1990. In response to these promising 

demand projections, the world industry, including 

Saskatchewan, expanded production capacity from their 27 

million tonnes in ’81 to 31 million tonnes in 1986. And what’s 

unfortunate about that, Mr. Speaker, the anticipated demand 

growth did not come about, contrary to the expectations. World 

potash demand in 1986 was still only at 27 million tonnes. 

 

As a result, today there is a massive world over-supply of 

potash, causing a serious deterioration in prices in our potash 

markets. This deterioration clearly puts this province at risk. To 

make matters worse for us, the weakness in demand for potash 

has been most apparent in key Saskatchewan markets, both 

domestic and offshore. Total United States sales have declined 

from a peak of 4.6 million tonnes in 1980 to 3.8 in 1986 – 

down, Mr. Speaker, close to 20 per cent and, I might add, a 

problem that is tied directly to the woes of the farming industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these problems are not going to disappear 

overnight. Current forecasts suggests that the declining state of 

potash markets will continue for several years, and in fact the 

situation may worsen, given the depressed state of the world 

agricultural market. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, there is a problem. 

 

To date the cost to the industry and Saskatchewan of this 

fundamental weakness in our markets has been enormous. 

Saskatchewan sales to the United States, our largest market, 

have declined by almost 20 per cent since 1980. Industry 

revenues have been cut in half, and as a result many companies 

have suffered substantial losses. 

 

(1445) 

 

Closer to home and where it hurts, Mr. Speaker, is the 

production cut-backs with the frequent shut-downs and the job 

lay-offs. Saskatchewan’s capacity utilization has fallen from a 

high of 100 per cent in 1980 to a low of 67 per cent in 1986. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan communities have lost almost 

1,000 jobs in the potash industry, with many of the remaining 

workers uncertain of their futures. Government revenues have 

dropped from $280 million in 1980 to just $37 million in 1986. 

Clearly, these are serious problems. Mr. Speaker, if those 

problems are not enough to deal with on their own, we have had 

insult heaped on injury by the anti-dumping action out of the 

United States, taken in what I suggest is a protectionist 

environment bordering on frenzy. 

 

We have seen preliminary duties brought down on our 

companies ranging anywhere from 9 per cent to 85 per cent. 

And that in turn has effectively created one of the most uneven 

playing fields for our producers to compete on. Mr. Speaker, the 

legislation before this House is absolutely necessary if we are to 

see the continued operations of Saskatchewan potash mines. 

Mr. Speaker, there is a massive overhang, as they call it in the 

industry, of production capacity. It amounts to four million 

tonnes in the world. It is available to world markets for which 

there is no demand, and this overhang, Mr. Speaker, has 

seriously brought our prices down and led to the insanity of the 

U.S. trade action. That action, Mr. Speaker, threatens to 

seriously reduce our sales to the United States, one of our better 

markets and our closest markets, which is important for a 

land-locked province that doesn’t have a lot of options when it 

comes to transportation. That action threatens to force total 

mine closures. The difficulty with that in potash, if they are 

closed for any length of time they are lost for ever. 

 

Last but not least, and more importantly, Mr. Speaker, there 

will be massive lay-offs. We on this side of the House are not 

prepared to see that happen, and I do not believe that those on 

that side of the House are prepared to see that happen either. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the objective of this legislation is to protect our 

industry and our jobs. In order to accomplish this we need to 

increase our prices and lower our excess capacity. Mr. Speaker, 

our large unused productive capacity will no longer be available 

to the markets with this legislation. This will, in turn, force 

prices up. This may well not require cut-backs in production. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation will go a long way to eliminate the 

impact of trade action and the basic problem of the imbalance 

between supply and demand. Mr. Speaker, this government 

clearly has the authority and the responsibility under section 

92(a) of the constitution to manage, develop, and conserve its 

resources. That authority specifically includes setting a primary 

rate of production for its resources, and we intend to exercise 

that authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation will apply to all potash resources 

in Saskatchewan, all potash mines in Saskatchewan, all the 

primary production of the potash from those mines in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation has three major elements. Number 

one, it will place the responsibility for approving increases in 

potash productive capacity explicitly with cabinet in order to 

minimize further risks of massive over-supply. Point two, Mr. 

Speaker, it will authorize cabinet to establish the total volume 

of potash to be produced in Saskatchewan in any given period. 

Number three, it will create a potash resource board that, in 

turn, will be charged with allocating the total allowable 

provincial production between the mines to achieve a fair 

balance between producer and Crown interest. Mr. Speaker, this 

legislation also allows, for those who choose to operate outside 

this legislation, heavy fines. 

 

While the circumstances which exist from time to time will 

determine the actions taken by this government to manage the 

potash resource, we fully intend to exercise our leadership role 

as the world’s largest exporter and the largest producer of 

potash in the free world. In doing so, Mr. Speaker, we will 

move to protect the livelihood of the employees and preserve 

the value of the investment in the industry and its infrastructure, 

and ensure a fair return to the people of Saskatchewan for their 

resource. 

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2244 

 

Mr. Speaker, for those who would suggest that this legislation 

will cost us our market share, let it be perfectly understood that 

we are not prepared to give up our place in the world market. If 

there should be those around the world or across the floor who 

would see us as being vulnerable, they should also know, Mr. 

Speaker, that the necessary actions will be taken to ensure that 

our share of the market-place remains. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for those who suggest this government has taken a 

risk with jobs, communities, and the industry in this legislation, 

let them also clearly understand that you not do this legislation 

to ensure mine closures and massive job losses. We believe on 

this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that these resources are too 

great for this to happen, and that our people in this province, 

and particularly within the industry and its workers, deserve 

strong action without partisanship. With this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan will exercise its leadership role in the 

world potash industry. 

 

With those comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 

Bill No. 36, The Potash Resources Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Energy attempted 

to give us a lesson in history, which I appreciated, but it had 

really no relevance to the Bill whatsoever, and as a history 

teacher I certainly wouldn’t give her very good passing marks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this day is certainly going to make history in 

Saskatchewan, there’s no doubt about that. Bill 36, as the 

minister indicated yesterday in her press conference that she 

had said: is going to deal, not with the anti-dumping tariffs that 

were put on by the United States, but the first and foremost 

purpose of the Bill was to deal with world over-supply of 

potash – those were the words of the Minister of Energy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s ironic, it’s ironic that we have a Bill 

before us today where the minister is going to deal with the 

over-supply of potash and ask Saskatchewan people to make 

that sacrifice. She doesn’t address the problem of over-supply 

and ask New Brunswick, for example; she doesn’t ask Israel; 

she doesn’t ask West Germany; she doesn’t ask Jordan; or she 

doesn’t ask Russia, but she asks our people – our people of 

Saskatchewan – to make that sacrifice to deal with an 

over-supply of potash in the world. Those are her words: it will 

address the over-supply of potash in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the information that the minister gave out 

yesterday – I perused it very quickly this morning – indicates 

also that while Saskatchewan producers are working at 67 per 

cent capacity today, many of the other potash producers in the 

world are working at 87 per cent capacity. And yet, Mr. 

Speaker, this government is asking the Saskatchewan producers 

and the Saskatchewan people to make the sacrifices in order to 

come to grips with what she says is an over-supply of potash in 

the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is this government again asking the  

people of Saskatchewan, the workers in the potash mines, and 

our producers, to make that sacrifice to address a problem that 

has not started here in this province, and has not started in this 

country. 

 

Let me ask the minister where she was last year. And by the 

way, Madam Minister, I was very disappointed by getting 

absolutely no answers, and this side getting no answers, in 

question period to some very serious questions regarding potash 

and what has happened over the last year in potash. 

 

It is very ironic . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, 

would you please ask the Minister of Education, if he wishes to 

participate in this debate, he will have his turn, otherwise I 

would very much appreciate . . . I let the Minister of Energy 

make her statement; I wish now that he wouldn’t interfere, and 

let me make my statement. Would you ask him to please not 

intervene? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Now the member who is speaking would like 

no interference from members, and he has indicated that, and I 

would ask that members co-operate. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, the problem 

hasn’t originated here in Saskatchewan. And the problem, Mr. 

Speaker, did not originate in 1979, as the minister has indicated. 

The problem has arisen since 1982, when we had a government 

who did not take action in world markets to find the markets 

that were necessary for the expansion of potash not only in 

Saskatchewan but in New Brunswick and in the world. 

 

Those markets were there. Those markets were there in Brazil; 

those markets were there in China; and this government took no 

action to address this problem of increased supply and the 

markets that should have been found. They were there; the need 

is there; the demand is there in the world. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s rather ironic – it’s rather ironic when you 

look at the situation in 1986. In 1986 we have an inventory that 

was the highest since no one knows when – I suppose since the 

potash began – and the prices were the lowest. Did we see any 

action by this government? Did we see any of these ministers or 

the Premier go to New Mexico or go to the United States to talk 

to the farmers, or go and talk to the politicians in Washington? 

Nothing. The Premier has been all over the world – travelling 

all over the world. Did he get any more markets? No., very few 

new markets. Did he talk to the Americans about the problem 

that existed? As far as we know, no, he didn’t; and if he did, he 

absolutely had no success or no impact. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I am told that our Premier has a very 

good relationship with our Prime Minister. Has he talked to the 

Prime Minister to try and get a Canadian solution and thereby 

get a world solution to the problem that is before us? If our 

Prime Minister, as members tell us opposite, has such a good 

relationship with the President of the United States, why didn’t 

he use his relationship to deal with the situation before the 

anti-dumping tariffs were put in place? 

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2245 

 

Mr. Speaker, this didn’t start two weeks ago. This didn’t start 

seven months ago. It started a long time ago, as I indicated, in 

1982. And they should have started addressing the problem, 

certainly in 1986. Why, Mr. Speaker, are we asking 

Saskatchewan people to make the sacrifice for a problem that is 

not theirs? The problem is a world problem, and it should be 

addressed by the Premier through our Prime Minister and to the 

United States. That’s how you solve those problems. You don’t 

do it on a parochial basis in this province. And these people 

opposite just don’t seem to realize that, Mr. Speaker – they 

don’t seem to realize it. 

 

(1500) 

 

And I want to say to the minister, there are many concerns that I 

have about Bill 36. I do want to say, the Minister of Education 

says it is urgent – it is urgent. If it is that urgent, Mr. Minister, 

why didn’t you introduce this Bill last year? If it is that urgent, 

Mr. Minister, why didn’t you take the action that you could 

have? Why didn’t you take the action that you could have, Mr. 

Minister, under The Mineral Resources Act, which gives you 

sufficient powers to deal with this problem that you have. 

 

You didn’t need the Bill at that time. You had all the powers 

you needed under The Mineral Resources Act that you could 

have dealt with the problem, but you took no action. You took 

no action. You let it become a crisis. You let it become a crisis 

for the people of Saskatchewan, for our producers, and for the 

workers, and now you’re saying, through your inability to deal 

with this problem, you’re asking the workers and the producers 

to shoulder that sacrifice that you should have taken care of a 

long time ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more that I want to say about this Bill. 

I want to peruse it in more detail, and I also want to have a look 

at what the minister said today. Therefore . . . Mr. Speaker, I 

want to also meet with a number of people, particularly the 

workers in the potash mines and others that are concerned about 

this Bill. Therefore, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 36 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 

start by introducing my officials. Should we finish today, these 

officials will carry us through, but should we go on to other 

days, we may have others joining me as I felt that it was fair for 

some of them to be able to take a vacation this summer, so one 

or two of them are on vacation. 

I have with me today the assistant deputy minister, Henry 

Kutarna, directly to my left; Anne MacFarlane, director of 

planning and income security division, seated behind me; and 

Naomi Mellor, director of budget branch; Eric Johansen who 

should be in the whip’s chair, but he isn’t there yet, but he will 

be with us soon. Also we have with us in the Assembly, 

theoretically, when they arrive in the chairs in the back: Lorelle 

Schoenfeld, executive director of policy and program services 

division; Denis Lyons, director of young offenders program 

branch; Dr. Allen Hansen, the assistant deputy minister; and 

Debbie Bryck, assistant director of the day care branch. 

 

I will try to not be very long in my opening remarks with 

respect to this department, the Department of Social Services. 

We have a relatively large department, approximately 2,000 

employees. It’s in that general area; it might be slightly lower 

now. We have an annual budget that exceeds $1 million a day. 

We have a lot of responsibility for in excess of 60,000 people, 

and the services that we provide cover a broad spectrum of 

society. 

 

I have been the minister of the department for eight months. We 

have tried to implement some management improvements. We 

would hope that this will, in time, as we continue with 

improving the management of the department, reflect on better 

service to the public and better staff morale within the 

department. I am satisfied with the progress that is being made 

in the department and with the management changes that have 

been made. We are running the department more efficiently, 

and I would say that the improvements have only begun and 

that we expect in the next few months to get the management of 

the department up to the highest standards, and so I’m prepared 

to answer all questions. 

 

I can give some indications of future plans, but I caution the 

members opposite that I cannot indicate the details of things 

that we are going to do in the next few months or the final 

details of improvements that will be made. We will be making 

constant changes in the department, and I am prepared to 

explain the expenditures that we propose to make. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister. I would like to begin by welcoming those of your 

officials who were able to make it to the Assembly here today. 

 

I find it a bit odd, Mr. Minister, a couple of statements you 

make and the context within which we gather together in this 

Legislative Assembly today to review the function of your 

department. I find it odd that in your opening remarks you 

would say that you may not be able to answer questions about 

the plans of your department in the upcoming months. That is 

clearly a strange statement to make as you’re introducing the 

Social Services estimates to this Assembly. 

 

I find it odd, Mr. Minister, that in light of the fact that in the 

Speech from the Throne last December, in which it said that it 

was the intention of your government – your  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2246 

 

government, Mr. Minister, yours and the Premier’s – to review 

Social Services and the delivery of Social Services; that you 

then delayed the calling of the Legislative Assembly until June 

of this year; that you would walk into this Assembly on 

September 2 and say that you’re not sure that you’re prepared to 

answer questions about the plans for your department in the 

coming months. I find that an odd statement, Mr. Minister. 

 

Let us just review, Mr. Minister, some of the history of your 

leadership – and I use that word somewhat loosely – for the 

Department of Social Services in the months gone by. And I 

also wonder, Mr. Minister, why it is that as we gather here in 

this Legislative Assembly today, you find yourself introducing 

more of your officials who are not here than officials who are 

here. And I wonder if this is indicative of the whole way that 

you have approached social services, the low priority that has 

been given to meeting the needs of Saskatchewan people who 

are dependent and rely on the Department of Social Services to 

provide some competence and caring, in their times of need, 

across the whole range of services that you’re responsible for in 

the Department of Social Services. And so I guess in a sense it’s 

not surprising to me that you wander into the House this 

afternoon with half of your officials and begin by announcing 

that you’re not sure whether you can answer questions about the 

plans of your department in the months to come. 

 

Now your role as minister, Mr. Minister, began last November 

when it was announced to the province that you would be not 

only the minister responsible for Social Services but the 

minister responsible for the Department of Human Resources, 

Labour and Employment. Many people around the province 

began to refer to you as the super minister with the super 

ministries. 

 

And I guess what they were looking for, for you, Mr. Minister, 

was some sense of direction, a sense of philosophy, a sense of 

compassion that you might have to offer to the people of 

Saskatchewan. When we review the programs in both of the 

departments which you head up, clearly they are the programs 

that require some human sensitivity. And it is my point of view, 

Mr. Minister – and I think I’d not alone in this point of view – 

that you, along with your Premier, have demonstrated anything 

but compassion for the people of Saskatchewan in the term that 

you have served as Minister of Social Services. 

 

Over the course of the past few months we’ve found you 

making some remarkable kinds of statements coming from the 

mouth of the man in the Government of Saskatchewan who is 

responsible for the delivery of programs that are intended to be 

compassionate and require sensitivity to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve heard you make offhand comments about the problems 

faced by people on social assistance and their difficulty to 

survive to meet their food needs on $3.60 a day maximum that 

your department allots, by saying that you and your family, 

your wife, and her garden, could easily feed your family on the 

amount allocated for food for social assistance recipients. 

 

And I note, Mr. Minister, that after you made that outrageous, 

outlandish comment, when I asked you to  

put your money where your mouth is or to put your food where 

your mouth is, and challenged you to live and to feed your 

family off of the amount allowed for social assistance recipients 

– it’s $3.60 a day per adult, maximum – that you denied . . . or 

declined, I should say, that you declined that offer to put your 

money where your mouth is. 

 

(1515) 

 

We heard you in January, Mr. Minister, when you received a 

report from the Ombudsman of Saskatchewan saying that there 

are a number of issues related to child protection in this 

province, that he called a crisis, we heard you – did we hear you 

stand and publicly express some sensitivity and some concern? 

No. What we heard you say, in effect, Mr. Minister, Minister of 

Social Services, we heard you say the – and I’m paraphrasing 

you here – but in essence your message at that time, Mr. 

Minister, was: kill the messenger. 

 

Did you respond to the Ombudsman’s request to hold public 

hearings, to bring into this legislature a new child and family 

services Act which has been under review for over two years 

now, and to hold public hearings to allow for concerned people 

to input as to how a new Act would reflect the wishes of 

Saskatchewan families and people concerned about the 

protection of children? Did we hear you respond in that kind of 

way? Did we hear you respond to any of his specific 

recommendations and even give some kind of informed or 

sensitive comment? No, your answer was: I don’t think that we 

need an Ombudsman. 

 

We heard you in Saskatoon. When confronted by some people 

who have been forced to live on social assistance, we heard you 

respond in anger by making some reference to the fact that they 

should be getting to work like the foreigners in this hotel. And 

somehow, Mr. Minister, you seem to have the uncanny ability 

to determine on sight what a foreigner is. 

 

We heard you respond, Mr. Minister, when talking about the 

“work-fare” programs that are going on in the province – and 

this would’ve occurred some time back in April or May; I guess 

it would’ve been in May – heard you respond that maybe the 

Canada assistance plan agreement of 1966 is no longer relevant, 

maybe it’s outdated. And with your wisdom as a lawyer that, 

perhaps, really it’s no longer needed . . . needs to be followed to 

the letter, and that somehow you had special insight that gave 

you and your government special permission to function outside 

of the intent of the Canada assistance plan agreement. 

 

We’ve heard you, Mr. Minister, in your now infamous speech 

to the national women’s council, making a reference to your 

supposedly humorous insights with your famous braless speech, 

and at the same time questioned the worth of people who are 

not productive by some measure that you failed to define. And I 

find those odd statements to be made by the minister who’s also 

responsible for the women’s secretariat, and who’s also 

responsible for the Employment Development Agency, who’s 

also responsible, in another department I admit, for the senior’s 

bureau and many people in  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2247 

 

Saskatchewan do not see and, justifiably, that their worth in our 

society today is related to their productivity. 

 

We’ve seen you respond without consultation, Mr. Minister, in 

dealing with the movement of mentally handicapped residents 

of North Park Centre in Prince Albert, without a lot of apparent 

consultation with people who are directly affected, and saying 

that you’ve got a plan and you’ve charging ahead come what 

may; that the plan appears to be cast in granite. And the 

concerns of many . . . And I have received a number of letters, 

and will be talking about all of these things in more specifics, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

We’ve heard you say that you’ve got a plan that’s going to 

happen by next February. And I keep hearing that people who 

are involved with the residents in North Park Centre are not 

feeling as though they’ve been consulted and had opportunity to 

input into the plans for their family members. 

 

Perhaps the ultimate expression of your sensitivity, Mr. 

Minister, occurred as a result of an exchange you and I had in 

this very Assembly some three weeks ago in which you thought 

it was the sensitive thing to do, to advise the woman whose 

uncle had written the letter to you advising you of her concerns 

for the future of that centre and whose uncle had passed away 

six months prior to that time that – as you explained, you 

thought it was the sensitive thing to do, to advise her of her 

uncle’s having passed away by saying to her: I believe you 

haven’t visited your uncle in the past six months. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member 

opposite says, get serious. And I say to you, the member from 

Saskatoon, I say to you that I am very serious. I raise these 

concerns today because they are the concerns of countless 

people across the province of Saskatchewan. I am sad to say, 

member from Saskatoon, that people across Saskatchewan 

today do not speak in very glowing terms and do not speak of 

your Minister of Social Services, the Minister of Social 

Services appointed by your Premier to carry out the plans of 

your Premier and your government – the people of 

Saskatchewan are not impressed and they are not pleased. 

 

But I submit, Mr. Chairman, that all of the conduct of the 

Minister of Social Services to date, and he has in a short period 

of time accumulated really quite a phenomenal track record, all 

of the comments and the decisions of the Minister of Social 

Services to date, in fact, meet with the approval and the 

endorsation of the Premier of this province. 

 

I note it was the Premier of Saskatchewan who appointed this 

Minister of Social Services, who has told this Assembly that 

he’s not a racist because he pays $50,000 a year in income tax. 

He has told this Minister of Social Services, I believe, to carry 

out the decisions of both of his departments exactly as he has 

done. And I don’t like to see, Mr. Minister – let me be very 

clear that I’m being sincere and serious when I say that I don’t 

like to see any member of the Assembly, on either side, be held 

up to public ridicule as you have been. And I believe that you 

and I both know that your future in the front benches of  

your government is cast in jeopardy. 

 

I believe that you have been placed into the departments that 

you have because your Premier has judged that you will follow 

the orders that he issues; that you will do it without protest and 

you will do it without conscience, Mr. Minister; and that you 

will do exactly what the Premier of Saskatchewan wants you to 

do. And so you’re carrying out the mandate that has been 

assigned to you by the Premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

You and I both know, Mr. Minister, that when these estimates 

have been completed that it’s quite likely, unless there’s a lot 

more dirty work to be done, that you will be leaving your 

ministerial responsibility and someone else will be moved in to 

take your place. And I submit that that will not work. Because I 

understand that the Premier of Saskatchewan intends for you to 

do the dirty work, and then he’ll move you on or move you out. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I think people in Saskatchewan understand 

that it is not merely your decision making that we’re seeing in 

the Department of Social Services; it is the decision making 

being made by your Premier and by your government, and they 

cannot wipe the slate clean when you are removed from your 

ministerial post. 

 

But I find it kind of interesting as I go to the estimates for this 

year, Mr. Minister, and I take a look at the cold, hard numbers, 

which on the surface seem to suggest some interesting sorts of 

things. You talked about, in your introductory remarks, the 

morale within your department. And as I reflect back to some of 

the messages that the New Democrat caucus social services task 

force heard as we toured the province in March, it’s certainly 

not consistent with the kinds of things that you’re saying in the 

House today. 

 

When we reflected on the Speech from the Throne, which said 

that your government intends to review the delivery of social 

services, it struck me as being kind of obvious that what you 

would do is to make an effort to put together some format, call 

it a task force, call it what you will, to tour the province of 

Saskatchewan and to allow the people of this province to input 

as to what would be improvements in the Department of Social 

Services. Did that happen? No. 

 

The Ombudsman came along in January and urged you again, 

specifically related to the introduction of a new child and family 

services Act, to provide for public input and to bring forth early 

in this session a new child and family services Act. And did that 

happen? No. 

 

And so the New Democrat caucus, Mr. Minister, made the 

decision that people have to have a right to have some voice 

into the review and the revision of the delivery of the 

Department of Social Services, a department which is charged 

with the responsibility of providing security to people in 

Saskatchewan. That’s in a nutshell, Mr. Minister, the 

responsibility of your department. 

 

And as we toured the province, we heard people tell us in a 

variety of different kinds of ways, and from different 

prospectives and focusing on different parts of the operation of 

the government . . . of your government  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2248 

 

department, told us several things. They said, number one, as 

the people of this province have come under increasing stress, 

so too has the Department of Social Services. They told us that. 

And I think that that’s a surprise to no one. They told us that as 

a result of that it would make sense that in these tough times . . . 

and is anyone telling us that these are tough times more than the 

government opposite. 

 

You’ve created the tough times, and it’s your strategy to use 

this tough times that you’re created to undermine not only 

Social Services but the delivery of many services in the 

province of Saskatchewan. But clearly there are tough times 

and Saskatchewan people have come to know that Tory times 

are tough times. And these are tough times, Mr. Minister, you 

keep telling us, members opposite keep telling us; these are 

tough times. And what happens? It would seem that in tough 

times the Department of Social Services should not be holding 

its own, and it clearly should not be contracting. In tough times, 

Mr. Minister, the Department of Social Services should be 

expanding to meet the ever increasing needs of Saskatchewan 

people for security and dignity. And is that happening? The 

answer is no. 

 

They told us, Mr. Minister, that we have a drastic shortage of 

social workers all across this province and in the delivery of all 

services, Mr. Minister. They told us the day in which access to 

social workers was reasonable and which people could get 

counsel with problems has come and gone. It’s difficult to get 

in touch with social workers, and when you do, the time is 

limited. And we heard that from people involved as foster 

parents or with the income security, family protection, and so 

on. We heard that a number of ways. 

 

And so what do we find when I open the book and look at the 

estimates for your department, the Department of Social 

Services? In tough times, when you say you were working to 

increase morale within your department, I find that when I 

compare your plans for this year to last year that you’ve cut 73 

staff positions out of the Department of Social Services. 

 

And I find, Mr. Minister, when I look at page 89 that there 

appears to be – and I note that you’ve made reference to this – 

an increase in the funding for the Department of Social Services 

– it’s smoke and mirrors. Smoke and mirrors, Mr. Minister, in 

the same way that it’s smoke and mirrors when the Minister of 

Health tries to have Saskatchewan people believe that there’s 

been an increase in the funding for health. And it’s not just 

shuffling the deck and moving the decks of the Titanic around 

and the smoke and mirrors – it’s smoke and mirrors, is what it 

is, Mr. Minister. 

 

You try and project . . . I see the member from Swift Current 

raising her objections opposite, and I suspect these are 

disappointing days for her, Mr. Minister. At one time she was in 

charge of this department, and I’m sure that she has some ideas 

as to how things could be done better. I would hope that she 

would pass them on. Clearly people were not as offended by the 

Minister of Social Services, Madam Minister from Swift 

Current, when you were responsible for this department, and I 

fully understand that you would be raising objections as we’re  

here to consider the deliberations of the department for the next 

year. 

 

So what does the estimates tell us, Mr. Minister? They tell us 

that you’re . . . it would seem, that you’re going to increase the 

Social Services budget by some $17 million and an increase of 

4.5 per cent – that’s what it would seem. But it’s smoke and 

mirrors, Mr. Minister – smoke and mirrors. Let’s compare 

apples to apples and look at what’s actually happened with your 

department under your charge, the Minister of Social Services. 

What we find is that of that 17 million . . . so-called $17 million 

increase, we have an item which is the payments to the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation: $13,696,000, 

nearly $14 million this year. How much last year? Nothing. It 

was a different structure, but we’ve got smoke and mirrors, 

smoke and mirrors, and there’s $14 million of the $17 million 

increase, Mr. Minister. Smoke and mirrors. 

 

(1530) 

 

And then we look at, as I go through and I do some 

calculations, I find it odd that we have fewer people, fewer 

people in your department, but paying out more in salaries. And 

I can only conclude, Mr. Minister, that there is a significant 

number of dollars coming from your department, which as a 

matter of fact are going to severance payments, severance 

payments for people who were, in effect, manipulated and 

forced, coerced into early retirement, some of whom were 

outright released. And we’ll talk more about that, specifically, 

later. 

 

And it looks to me as though your department is spending some 

$4 million, nearly $4 million this year in severance payments. 

Fourteen million dollars, property management corporation 

didn’t exist last year, we had a different structure – smoke and 

mirrors. Four million dollars of severance payments, the cost of 

letting people go. This is the cost of having fewer employees, 

$4 million, smoke and mirrors, Mr. Minister. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What does that add up to? 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well that adds up to just about $17.5 million, 

and isn’t that an amazing coincidence. But what do we find as 

well, Mr. Minister, what do we find as well when we consider 

the fact that last year your department had an overexpenditure 

of 15,929,000 – nearly a $16 million overexpenditure. 

 

And so when we compare your plans, Mr. Minister, for the 

expenditure of the Department of Social Services, as compared 

as to what was actually spent . . . I’m not talking about as 

compared to your plans last year; I’m talking about compared to 

what was actually spent. Then we have to compare that figure 

to your estimates for last year plus another $16 million: $14 

million dollars to the property management corporation, smoke 

and mirrors; $4 million for severance payments, smoke and 

mirrors – failing to recognize in this document a $16 million 

overexpenditure from your department. Again, more smoke and 

mirrors. 

 

And so what do we find, as a matter of fact, Mr. Minister,  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2249 

 

is that your budget this year in Social Services, compared to 

your actual expenditures last year – comparing apples to apples 

– there’s a drop of $16,460,260. A $16 million drop, a drop in 

your budget of 4.4 per cent in tough times. And I say, Mr. 

Minister, that that is indicative of the kind of leadership that 

you give to your department, and the kind of weight that you 

carry around the cabinet table under the direction of your 

Premier. 

 

In tough times, when the Department of Social Services should 

be expanding, a $16 million drop, over 4 per cent drop in the 

budget for the Department of Social Services. Tough times, 

when there should be more social workers to assist people to 

deal with their problems in this province, a cut of 73 positions. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I’ve made a number of statements, and I 

would like to conclude with a question to you, and I’m sure that 

you’ll take the opportunity to respond in whatever way that you 

see fit. And I would ask, Mr. Minister, in the content, in the 

context I should say, of your track record in this department, in 

the context of the number of changes that you have made at the 

top of your department, many of which are certainly not 

endorsed by people who look for caring and compassion from 

the Department of Social Services. 

 

Would you explain to me, Mr. Minister, and let me provide for 

you the opportunity to explain to the people of Saskatchewan, 

what you see in the context of these tough times for the people 

of Saskatchewan as your qualifications to serve as minister of 

the Department of Social Services and, at the same, time, the 

qualifications of your deputy minister. Mr. Minister, the floor is 

yours. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll get into 

qualifications a little later. As a matter of fact I’ll make a note 

of it. 

 

Before we get into qualifications, let us look at the example the 

NDP is setting here for us, and this is an example of what’s 

typical about the NDP. And I rarely get appalled, but despite 

what they might say, I am sensitive enough to get appalled from 

time to time. And while I was a member of the NDP, what 

appalled me was the gutter politics that they used to play, and 

they still do the same thing. They come to this Assembly 

alleging to be honourable men and women and call me almost 

everything that you can imagine, except today they haven’t 

called me a Nazi. 

 

But these are the people who think they are sensitive; who care 

about people; who think that they have the ability, the 

responsibility, the wisdom, and the qualifications to govern this 

province. And the best they can do is come here, get into gutter 

politics, and try to call people names, misquote people, and 

generally behave like members of a permanent opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, what we are doing at 

Social Services is trying to provide the best services available at 

a reasonable cost to the taxpayer without any abuse of the 

system. 

And whether it is being done in accordance of the terminology 

of the NDP, whether it is sensitive enough, that is always a 

matter of political debate. But we try to help everyone who 

needs help, seeks help, and can be helped. We try to help them. 

We try to run the whole system as efficiently as possible. And 

what really is the judge of how well we are doing at the 

Department of Social Services is not what the NDP state here in 

their rhetoric, but what the NDP tell me in Melville. 

 

Now I think there will probably be a phone call to Melville, 

Saskatchewan, after I say this, telling the NDP in Melville to be 

more partisan, to more political, to get into the gutter. But even 

the NDP in Melville are above what happens with the 

opposition in this legislature. And members of the NDP 

executive see me on the street and say to me, you know I don’t 

vote for you, but we think you’re doing the right thing; go 

ahead, don’t change, do what you’re doing. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s a lie, Grant. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Oh, you suggest that’s a lie . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the member for 

Regina North West to apologize for the statement made across 

the floor. 

 

I would ask the member from Regina North West to apologize 

for the statement thrown across the floor. Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

An Hon. Member: — A point of order, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — State your point of order. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I would like to have clarification. My 

understanding, Mr. Chairman, was that the hon. minister was 

making a statement, and he was the one that had the floor. I 

want to know what you’re referring to. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — It was clearly heard from the member from 

Regina North West, that he said “liar” across the floor. And I 

would ask him to rise and retract that statement and apologize 

to the House. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like the record to be 

checked to see if there was any comments made by the member 

from North West . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. You did not have the floor; it wasn’t 

on the microphone; it is not on the record. I would ask the 

member, for the third time, to retract that statement. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Could the Chairman please inform me as to 

what I should be retracting, please. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The member said liar across the floor. And 

I would ask the member to retract that statement. What’s the 

member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that this is a very, 

very subjective decision that you’re making here. You’re saying 

that it’s said across the floor. How do you know whether he was 

talking to one of the members here,  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2250 

 

or across the floor? The only ruling that the Chairman can make 

is order in respect to any comments, and allowing the person 

that is on his feet to make the comments. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. The member said, 

across the floor, “That’s a lie.” It is the discretion of the Chair 

to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order! The Chair uses 

discretion on unparliamentary language, and I ask the member 

from Regina North West, once more, to apologize. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask again: where in 

the record has it been stated that I’ve said anything like that? I’d 

like to know that. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The member for Regina North West has 

one more opportunity to retract the statement, that “that’s a lie,” 

and if he does not, I will call in the Speaker and let the Chair 

deal with it. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, was 

the member from Regina North West speaking on his feet when 

you suggest you heard him make the comment? And if so, I find 

it difficult to understand how you can make such a ruling. It 

does not quite meet the requirements of the procedures of this 

House for the Chair to rule on conversations that may be taking 

place on either side of the House among members. As I 

understand it, the member was not on his feet. The member may 

have been speaking. If he was in fact speaking to someone, you 

only heard a voice, sir. How can you make such a ruling on the 

basis of that, I don’t quite comprehend. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I have clearly heard the member. 

There is no more debate on it. I ask the member, I give him the 

final opportunity to apologize to the House for the 

unparliamentary language. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — If the Chairman would ask all people that 

have ever made a statement from their seats to retract their 

statements if they could be proven, then I’d like that . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’ve said there was no more 

opportunity for debate. Call in the Speaker. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Mr. Muller: — Mr. Speaker, during consideration of estimates 

for Social Services the member from Regina North West, from 

his seat, shouted the words, “That’s a lie,” which I repeatedly 

asked him to withdraw. The member has refused to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. No points of order will be 

allowed. The Deputy Speaker has raised an issue where the 

member for Regina North West has made an alleged statement. 

The Deputy Speaker has indicated that the member for Regina 

North West has said in this House, “That’s a lie.” That is the 

case . . . Order, please. . . . then that is an unparliamentary 

statement, and I would like to ask the member for Regina North 

West to please retract  

that statement. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, may I be permitted to ask a 

question of the Speaker with respect to this? Is it generally 

perceived that all members, regardless . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. That is not the issue. We are 

not going to enter into a debate. 

 

The issue is clear. The Deputy Speaker has said that the 

member for Regina North West has uttered an unparliamentary 

statement. He said, “That’s a lie.” That is an . . . order, please, 

from both sides of the House. We don’t need any promptings 

from any side of the House. Order. The member for Regina . . . 

The Deputy Speaker has indicated that the member for Regina 

North West has made an unparliamentary statement in the 

House. We are not going to debate that in the House. 

 

The member from Regina North West has an opportunity to 

withdraw that statement, and I know it’s difficult for members 

sometimes to do that. However I’m going to . . . no points of 

order. I’m afraid I can’t allow points of order from other 

members, or any other debate. 

 

Okay, just to clarify it, there seems to be an issue here whether 

or not the individual in question was on his feet. The issue here 

is not whether or not he was on his feet; the issue here was 

whether or not he made the statement, and therefore I’m going 

to give the hon. member another opportunity to please withdraw 

that statement. I ask him to think it over carefully, and I am 

going to give him the opportunity. I know he may not wish to 

do that; that’s entirely up to him. But the Deputy Speaker has 

indicated to the House that he has made an unparliamentary 

remark from his seat – granted he was not on his feet. 

Therefore, I’m asking the hon. member once more – I’m going 

to give him the opportunity to please withdraw that remark. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to rise on a point of 

order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I will not allow points of order during this 

ruling. So I’m sorry, but I will not allow a point of order. The 

member in question must make the decision of what he is going 

to do. That is the question now, and I will now ask the member 

to either withdraw the statement or not withdraw the statement. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — On a point of privilege I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My point of privilege is as follows: I’ve always understood the 

rules of this House to be, and I defer of course to you, sir, that 

when a member makes a statement – while having risen in the 

course of debate – which is called to be unparliamentary, and is 

asked to withdraw, the choices are clear: he either withdraws, or 

she withdraws, or the Speaker takes other action; the House 

takes other action. 

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2251 

 

But the rule also has always been, Mr. Speaker, that no 

statements made from a seated position are the subject of this 

kind of a disciplinary action for the very good reason that no 

matter how well-intentioned or how capable any chairperson 

might be or any speaker might be, there is no way of being able, 

with precision, to identify the member or to identify the words. 

Those are asides, and the asides have never, Mr. Speaker, with 

the greatest of respect, the asides have never been the subject of 

discipline. The statements made while on the feet of an 

individual member are always subject to the parliamentary 

rules. 

 

And I would submit to you, sir, as I take my chair, on the point 

of personal privilege, that to do so I cast no motivations or 

aspersions on the Deputy Speaker, but that to do so puts every 

member vulnerable to the identification of asides by a 

chairperson, even if the member did not make such a statement. 

And that, surely, can’t be sustained, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would just like to bring to the attention of 

the House that I’ll allow no more members to rise for any 

reason whatever. We are not going to get into a debate on this. 

 

Now in the past hon. members have been informed that 

unparliamentary language from the member’s seats will not be 

allowed. And at times, it’s true, it’s not possible to identify the 

member if unparliamentary language is made, and therefore 

nothing is actually done. 

 

However, in this case the source of the unparliamentary 

language was clearly heard and identified by the Deputy 

Speaker, and therefore, on that basis – and I would like to just 

make this one further comment . . . one further comment before 

I wrap it up – that I respect the hon. member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale; he’s a man who has served many years in this 

House and certainly deserves respect from that point of view. 

However, having said that following his argument, I think it 

should be noted that if his argument was sustained, then hon. 

members could say anything they want in these Chambers from 

their seats, and nothing could ever be done about it. Essentially 

they could not be called to task on any particular point. 

 

So having said that, the issue is clear; the hon. member from 

Regina North West has been clearly identified as making an 

unparliamentary statement from his desk, sitting, and therefore I 

will give him a final opportunity to withdraw his 

unparliamentary remark. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Out of respect for this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, I withdraw the remark that was allegedly attributed to 

me. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I am not quite satisfied with that. The hon. 

member is casting some doubt on whether or not he made the 

statement, and I don’t think that can be to be allowed to pass. 

So I would just like to withdraw the unparliamentary statement 

that he made, I just ask him to do that. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the unparliamentary 

statement that I made from my seat. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I thank the hon. member for withdrawing that 

statement. That removes the chaos and disorder which has been 

caused in the House, then I ask the House – order, please – I ask 

the House to continue in the Committee of Finance. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 36 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When we 

adjourned the committee and I was in the process of explaining 

that I’ve had people on the NDP executive in Melville – I 

believe them to be on the executive; I’ve known them to always 

be on the executive – come to me and say: as Minister of Social 

Services, you know I don’t vote for you, I don’t support you, 

but you are doing the right type of things. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s not true. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Now the member for Saskatoon South 

now says that is not true. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. All members will get 

an opportunity to rise in Committee of Finance and ask 

questions and make speeches on Social Services, so I would ask 

the members to give the minister the opportunity to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, it seems to bother the 

NDP greatly that their own supporters would believe in some of 

the common sense things this government is doing, and it 

bothers them to no end. 

 

That’s not the only contact I’ve had from their members. I had 

an honourable member of the NDP from Melville constituency 

phone me one evening, and this man was honourable. He said: 

you know, Grant, I don’t support you. And I said: yes, I know 

that. And he said: but I thought that I should give you some 

credit where credit is due. And this is how honourable this 

member of the NDP was, he said: I thought I’d phone you and 

give you credit where credit is due. I think you’re doing the 

right thing, and you should continue to do those things. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Name them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — And the members opposite say name 

their members who are speaking that way. No, I will not name 

them. They are honourable people and should not be persecuted 

by their own party for saying what they think. 

 

I quit the NDP, but I’m not going to have those people thrown 

out of the NDP for being honourable, and so I will not name 

them. There are some honourable people in that party, not many 

that you can identify, but these honourable people will not be 

identified in this Assembly. Because they were honourable, 

they gave credit where credit was due. And there is . . . 

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2252 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’ve asked members to allow the 

minister to make his comments. Everybody will have an 

opportunity to enter into the debate and ask questions. And . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Order! I would ask the member for 

Regina Rosemont to be quiet while the Chair is making a 

statement. I would ask him to allow the minister to finish his 

comments. The Minister of Social Services. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — the acknowledgement that some hon. 

members of the NDP, not elected to this Assembly, would agree 

that things that are being done in Social Services are practical 

and sensible and are encouraging me not to change from the 

policies that we are now following would disturb the NDP 

greatly. 

 

And it probably . . . These kind of people are honourable. They 

speak up. And they were probably the way I was when I was a 

member of the NDP, where I recall speaking up at a convention 

and then being beaten up by cabinet ministers who now sit as 

members of the opposition, beaten up politically for speaking 

out and taking a different view. And I realize that this is not 

directly on the topic of Social Services, however, it seems to 

bother them so much that a former member would have the 

support of existing members in doing what’s right for this 

province, and in doing what is right for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I wanted to indicate the difference in attitude and why so 

many people in this province believe we are doing the right 

thing. The NDP’s philosophy in 1986, in 1982, and years ago 

when I was part of that team was, basically, they’d go to the 

people and say: vote for us; we’ll give you more welfare. Now 

it is necessary, when necessary, the rates for welfare should be 

raised, but this should not be the only party platform of a party. 

 

What should be done is: you should go to people who are not 

self-sufficient and say to them: vote for us and we will give you 

jobs; vote for us and we will give you education; vote for us and 

we will give you training; vote for us and we will help you help 

yourself, become a full-fledged member of society, in every 

way, to the greatest of your ability. 

 

Now we acknowledge that some people who are on social 

services, at least one-third, are not capable of employment, and 

these people should be encouraged to take part in society in 

whatever way possible, even if it’s not employment. But if it’s 

being part of the community in community work and service 

clubs – in such ways – everyone should be encouraged to assist 

society to the best of their ability. 

 

But nowhere do you hear from the NDP promises to the people 

saying: vote for us and we’ll give you a job; vote for us and 

we’ll give you more education. In Social Services the NDP did 

not implement the Saskatchewan employment development 

program; the NDP did not implement the Saskatchewan skills 

development program – 2,500 people who would’ve been on 

welfare are now receiving education and training. And the great 

majority of them are single parents, 90 per cent of which  

are women. 

 

Now instead of going around with a negative attitude, this 

government has taken a positive attitude and tries to impart that 

on the people. And the people are very happy. The people of 

this province are prepared to do their part in society to the 

greatest of their ability. And they should be encouraged to do 

that. 

 

And then the members opposite say, what qualifications do I 

have to be the Minister of Social Services. Well I can tell you 

this. I am qualified to the extent that I was born in this province; 

to the extent that I grew up in this province, through good times 

and through bad times; to the extent that I was educated in this 

province; to the extent that I practised law in this province; and 

to the extent that I still live with and among my constituents 

whether they are rich or poor. That’s what makes me qualified. 

I am a human being who lives in this province, who has 

acquired some education and some wisdom, and that’s what 

makes me qualified to be the minister. 

 

And the members opposite would try to paint me as a monster 

who is insensitive. The members opposite hissed and booed and 

cheered when I came late for these estimates. They don’t know 

why I was late. The reason I was late was, I was walking down 

the hall and a man came to me and said, you’re the Minister of 

Social Services; I want to talk to you. I don’t want to talk to any 

of your officials. I’ve talked to everybody I have to talk to; I 

want to talk to you. 

 

And so I said, I will try to see you at 2:30, and I did. And that’s 

why I was in my office and not rushing down here immediately 

for the estimates. Because I was with that man in my office 

trying to figure out a way and he and his family – his wife and 

his children – could be reunited. That’s why. 

 

Now, I don’t know if that’s sensitive and I don’t know if that’s 

practical, and I don’t know if that is whatever you want to call 

it, but I’m telling you that that is the right thing to do. And I 

encourage my workers, all of them, to do their jobs, which they 

do, and to do as I have done by example today and tried my best 

to solve this man’s problem. 

 

Now you could call that insensitive. You could call it whatever 

you want. But when a man is walking through the halls of this 

legislature and asks for my help, I will take time to give him 

help. And if it’s a woman or a child or anyone in this province, 

I will take time to give them help, even if it delays the 

Assembly for two or three minutes. 

 

So my qualifications are quite clear. I care about the people of 

Saskatchewan, all one million people of Saskatchewan – those 

who supported this government and those who didn’t. I 

consider it a great responsibility. If I did not care about the 

people, then there are many, many other things that I could do 

for my own amusement. 

 

I do this, as Minister of Social Services, with pleasure. I never 

find the job too difficult. I never find the portfolio of Minister 

of Social Services to be too stressful. I do it because it is really 

interesting, and the greatest thing you could do for your fellow 

human being to help them in every way possible. And I do this, 

Minister of Social  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2253 

 

Services, out of the heart – regardless of whether or not the 

members opposite believe I have one. They tend to think I’m a 

robot or something. 

 

And as for the deputy minister of Social Services, the second 

question is: what qualifications does he have? I could look at 

his details, but if I recall correctly, he grew up in a family in 

Saskatoon that was not very affluent. His father immigrated to 

Canada and worked on the railroad. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A point of order, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Koskie: — The point of order is that we’re dealing with 

Social Services estimates. And if you can find any, any 

semblance of what the minister was leading into in respect to 

the critic and the comments that he has been saying in the last 

five minutes, any relevance – any relevance – to this here 

debate of estimates, then I ask you to make a ruling on that. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. Let the minister speak 

to the point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The question was put to me: what are 

my qualifications as Minister of Social Services, and what are 

the qualifications of my deputy? I was beginning to answer the 

qualifications of my deputy when the point of order was raised. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Having just assumed the Chair here two 

minutes ago, I did not hear the critic’s comments. I did hear the 

minister talking about what made him qualified for the position 

of Social Services minister. And on that basis I will let him 

continue, and I will keep my ear very closely to what he is 

saying to make sure that we are on the topic. Please continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I was indicating 

the qualifications of my deputy minister of Social Services, 

Stan Sajonky, who was raised in Saskatoon; his father 

immigrated to Canada, worked on the railroad – he’s of Polish 

background – worked on the railroad; he advises me he grew up 

in relatively poor circumstances. I could probably also tell you 

that . . . You know, he also told me about his family politics, 

and they were not necessarily Conservative. And he’s also 

indicated to me that, in his background, he was worked for the 

co-operatives. 

 

The deputy in question here has a certificate in accounting from 

the Reliance school of commerce in Regina; he has a certificate 

in business organization and administration from the University 

of Alberta; he has social science credits from the University of 

Saskatchewan; he has management and financial concepts, a 

course from the Building Owners’ and Managers’ Institute in 

Pennsylvania. His background is . . . He was the office services 

supervisor and accounting supervisor, and also an office 

manager, a personnel manager, director of manpower 

development at Federated Co-operatives in Regina, Edmonton, 

Winnipeg, and Saskatoon, between 1951 and 1970. 

 

In 1970 to 1974 he was the manager of operations for  

Dominion Management, Dominion Construction, Vancouver, 

B.C. He was the director of personnel services for the city of 

Saskatoon from 1974 to 1981. He was a director of ministries, 

Emmanuel Baptist Church, Victoria, British Columbia, from 

1981 to 1984. And he was the chairman of the Public Service 

Commission of Saskatchewan from 1984 to 1987. January 27, 

1987 he was appointed the deputy minister of Social Services. 

 

Here is a man who is 54 years old; has had experience in 

co-operatives, in administration and personnel administration, 

experience with the city of Saskatoon. It seems to me, has been 

. . . The director of ministries for the Baptist Church at 

Emmanuel Baptist Church in Victoria, from 1981 to 1984, and 

chairman of the Public Service Commission from 1984 to 1987. 

 

I submit, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that this man has a broad 

experience of western Canada; a broad experience of people; a 

good background in religion; a good background in accounting; 

was born . . . I don’t know if he was born in Saskatchewan, but 

he was certainly raised in Saskatchewan. And his qualifications 

should not be questioned. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. The Minister of 

Social Services, the member from Melville, in his opening 

remarks in response to our critic, indicated to this House that 

the people . . . many people in his constituency and around the 

country are saying what a wonderful job he’s doing as Minister 

of Social Services. In his remarks he said former NDP 

executive . . . or NDP executive members, even NDP executive 

members in the constituency of Melville call me up, and see me 

in the street, and say: we don’t vote for you but you’re doing a 

terrific job. We like the job that you’re doing as Minister of 

Social Services. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I suggest to this House that the minister has 

stretched the truth so far that he snapped it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I happen to visit on a regular basis with the 

executive, NDP executive, in the constituency of Melville 

because it happens to be one of my buddy ridings. And I can 

tell you and every member in this House and every person in 

this province, that that executive has never been larger, since 

this member was appointed to the Department of Social 

Services, in the history of the constituency. And the longer he’s 

representing that riding, Mr. Chairman, the membership 

continues to grow. The energy that is displayed by that 

executive to dispose of the Minister of Social Services is 

unparalleled in many ridings in this province. 

 

He talked about, in his remarks, Mr. Chairman, that he’s not . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. Let the member 

please ask his questions. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Social 

Services has talked about how he can’t name these people, and I 

have respect for that because: (a) if they are supporters, I think 

they want to remain quiet supporters until such time as they 

make the decision to go public; but  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2254 

 

secondly, I don’t believe that he understands who the executive 

members are, and that was proven when he stood up a second 

time after the ruling by the Chair and the Speaker, and he said: 

well, I believe them to be executive members. So now he’s 

backtracking and withdrawing his position with respect to who 

is telling him in his constituency what a fine job he’s doing. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that is indicative of how he is running his 

department. That is indicative in the performance of the 

Minister of Social Services that he has undertaken in this 

province. He talks about the love he has for the clients of Social 

Services. He talks about the love that he’s providing all of these 

people. All I can say is if that’s a demonstration of love, I 

would really shudder to think what a demonstration of dislike 

would be coming from that minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I don’t want to take up much more time in 

this House, Mr. Chairman, because I think far too much time 

has been taken up as a result of his comments which, I believe, 

to be sheer garbage with respect to some of the things he’s said. 

 

I will finalize my remarks, Mr. Chairman, by asking the 

Minister of Social Services what he plans to do, as a minister, to 

make the people in this province feel more secure that he is 

going to be minister, delivering services to people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, it’s not that I 

know nothing about the NDP and how their executive operates. 

I believe that . . . one year I was a member of their provincial 

council and I wasn’t absolutely certain if my memory was 

correct, but the media advised me that it was true. And so I still 

believe that one year I was a member of their executive council 

as far as I can recall. It is very unusual that the member from 

Regina North West should question my credibility and whether 

or not I’m a truthful person. This has not been done by the NDP 

in Melville constituency. I practised law for a long period of 

time, and may have been accused of many things, but I was 

never accused of being dishonest. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Doug McKee did it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — And the word “Doug McKee” is 

shouted across the way here, and if the member from Regina 

Rosemont wishes to have the floor and ask a question 

pertaining to Doug McKee, I’m prepared to answer that but I 

really didn’t hear what he had to say about Doug McKee, the 

habitual campaign manager for Lorne Nystrom, who I know 

well. And Doug McKee and I do not have bad words, because 

we haven’t spoken to each other for a long time. And we have 

no animosity at all like he does. Doug McKee does his thing, 

and he’s watching right now; he watches all the time. I say to 

Doug McKee that the question of Doug McKee, who is a very 

prominent member of Melville constituency NDP . . . and he’s 

watching right now; he watches all the time. He does his 

political thing and I do mine, and we have no animosity towards 

each other. It’s not like here in  

the legislature. In Melville things are quite fair. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Hagel: — I’m on my feet, Mr. Chairman, to ask what the 

relevance of this is to the Social Services estimates? I’ve 

listened carefully the last couple of minutes and I am grasping 

at relevance, Mr. Chairman. And would you please rule on that. 

 

Mr. Chairman: —I would like to inform the member that I 

was asking myself the same question. So I would suggest that 

the point of order is well taken. Let’s get on with the answer 

now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I accept your ruling, but I believe that 

when I’m asked a question that suggests that I am – I don’t 

recall the exact words – but the truth of what I have said has 

been brought into question, that I should be in a position to 

indicate the nature of what I am saying, why I am saying it. And 

I’m replying to the member opposite who questioned whether 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. My ruling was based on the 

matter of Doug McKee being raised. The rest of your answer, as 

far as I was concerned, was right on track, so you may continue 

along that line. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The question here is, first of all, the 

question of whether I’ve said things there that are truthful. I try 

to the best of my ability to tell the truth absolutely. Before I 

would say anything that is untrue, I would refuse to answer. 

Before I would say anything that is untrue, I would resign. I 

have never intentionally lied, and I never will. 

 

Now here is a situation that . . . we are in a dispute here whether 

or not an individual who spoke to me is still a member of the 

NDP executive or not. I haven’t looked at their current list, but 

the individual we referred to – whose name I almost slipped out 

and I shouldn’t do that – but the individual who I referred to has 

always been a member of the NDP executive, and the co-op 

board, and the credit union board, and all of those things, and 

that individual came to me and said what I told the Assembly. 

And so if they will send me a current list of their executives, I 

could check to see if that individual is still on the executive. But 

that individual was on the executive when I was there, and since 

then, and if recently that individual has dropped off their 

executive, or possibly quit the NDP as I did, I would be pleased 

to hear about it. 

 

There is no doubt about the other individual who phoned me. 

Everyone in Melville knows that that individual has always 

been NDP, and there is no question . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . The member opposite says I have two friends in Melville. 

Yes, I have two friends in the NDP and thousands of other 

friends. The question here is Social Services, not how many 

friends I have. And I don’t run for politics for the purpose of 

making friends, nor for the purpose of making enemies, but 

simply to do the best I can to operate the Department of Social 

Services for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The question that the member for Regina North West alluded to 

was: what are we going to do in Social Services  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2255 

 

to give people confidence? Well that is a very broad question, 

and I’m sure we’ll answer it over a period of time. But first of 

all, as I said when I was first appointed: we will have the 

department operate efficiently and serve the public. 

 

And we are now in the process of having staff seminars. They 

are starting now and will be continuing for the next few months. 

They will be something that hasn’t been done for a long, long 

time in the Department of Social Services; they’re called 

service seminars. And they’re called service seminars because 

we want all of our employees to serve the people of 

Saskatchewan and to serve the clientele of Social Services in 

whatever way they need assistance. The emphasis is on service; 

that’s what we are here for – from the minister all the way down 

to everyone in our department – we are hired to serve, and so 

we’re having service seminars. You cannot have good morale, 

you cannot have good service unless you have some leadership 

and show your employees how we should go about providing 

this service. So that’s exactly what we’re doing. That’s one 

example. There are many, many other examples that you will 

see as these estimates continue. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We 

appear to have gotten onto some diversionary discussions here, 

and some of that at least is initiated by the minister. I don’t 

want to elaborate on that, Mr. Chairman, but given that the 

minister has raised the topic, I think it is important to set the 

record straight and move on with some specific deliberations 

related to the Department of Social Services. 

 

The minister likes to comment upon his period of time in which 

he was a member of the New Democratic Party, and I accept the 

fact that he was. The New Democratic Party is open to 

membership from all people of Saskatchewan who are 

committed politically to trying to bring about a social structure 

in Saskatchewan, and in Canada, which operates in the best 

interests of people. And if the member pledged that kind of 

commitment then, I’m sure he was accepted as a member. 

 

I find it kind of odd, though, that he doesn’t make reference to 

the manner in which he left or was removed – and I guess that’s 

a debatable point – from the party. I understand that his 

association with the New Democratic Party was terminated at 

about the time that he sought a nomination to try and sit with 

the New Democratic Party in the Legislative Assembly, was 

rejected by the people of that constituency, and at that point in 

time became an instant Tory. 

 

So just to set the record straight, Mr. Chairman, on that issue, 

which I don’t think ha a great deal to do with what we’re doing 

here, but is certainly in response to a matter that the minister 

raised here in the House. 

 

Mr. Chairman, going back to the minister’s response about his 

qualifications, the qualifications of his deputy minister, I note 

with interest that basically what it comes down is that he says 

he cares, and so does the deputy minister. And that’s it. I note 

that neither the minister nor the deputy have any previous 

experience whatsoever with the Department of Social Services 

in delivery of its  

programs, nor do they hold educational credentials by way of 

degree having to do with studies in social development or social 

services. So for that reason, Mr. Chairman, it leads me to 

wonder, then, what the rationale is behind the number of 

changes at the upper management level in the Department of 

Social Services because it would seem that the social directives 

given to the department would not come from the backgrounds 

of the minister or the deputy minister. 

 

My question to the minister is this: Mr. Minister, will you 

please give me the names and the positions of the upper 

management people. I refer to here, people who have policy 

influence, responsibilities, or supervise significant numbers of 

people, who have either received early retirement or who, as a 

matter of fact, have been dismissed from the Department of 

Social Services during your term as minister. Would you please 

provide for me their names, their positions that they either were 

dismissed from or left through the early retirement plan that 

was dropped upon them; and also, if you would advise me of 

their salary levels, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’ll give some 

answers while the officials find the other information. First of 

all, to indicate the differences of opinion that always develop in 

this Assembly and the credibility gap that exists, it is now 

alleged that I, Grant Schmidt, at one time sought an NDP 

nomination. That is not true. I’ve been accused of a lot of 

things; I’ve confessed to many of them, but I never, ever sought 

an NDP nomination. And the member opposite is mistaken 

because I should know my life better than he knows his life, or 

better than he knows my life, in addition. 

 

And in addition I can say that in 1975 I was asked to run for an 

NDP nomination in Yorkton, Saskatchewan, and I turned it 

down, and the answer was very simple. In 1975, while I was a 

member of the NDP, like Martin Luther 450 years ago, I had 

doubts. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I would like just to make one 

comment about the proceedings over the last 10-15 minutes. 

And something that I’m noticing is that one comment begs the 

answer, and the answer is usually protracted, somewhat. And it 

instills a new element in the discussion, and then the next 

speaker seems to feel that he must respond to that. Now I gave 

the minister the opportunity to respond to Moose Jaw North’s 

allegations, and having done that I would ask all members from 

here on to please stay with the topic. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Just one more. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — No more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, with respect to 

early retirement in the Department of Social Services, there was 

123 people who . . . possibly more qualified, but 123 people 

chose to take early retirement in the Department of Social 

Services. I have a list of their names. I suppose we could send it 

over if the member requested it. 

 

And in addition, in management we . . . I’ll try to give the best 

information available here. Con Hnatiuk, deputy  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2256 

 

minister of Social Services, resigned. Mr. Martin . . . and Con 

Hnatiuk, shortly thereafter, found employment with the 

Government of Manitoba and is now the deputy minister there. 

Martin Spigelman was, to the best of my information, 

dismissed. There is a disputed case before the Public Service 

Commission at this time; the decision is not available. Mr. Dan 

Cunningham, assistant deputy . . . Mr. Spigelman is the 

executive director of strategic planning. Mr. Dan Cunningham 

resigned; he’s the assistant deputy minister. Raynell 

Andreychuk was offered a position as High Commissioner to 

East Africa and chose to take that position and resigned and has 

. . . and Her Honour, I might say, she was still a judge of this 

province, I believe, is now the High Commissioner in East 

Africa. And I’m very pleased that she was taken that position 

offered to her by the Minister of External Affairs, the Hon. Joe 

Clark, and I understand she’s doing an excellent job there. 

 

(1630) 

 

The district director of Family Services, Regina, Mr. Vic 

Wiebe, resigned. I understand he is now employed in Manitoba 

in a similar position. Ronald Heber, director of systems, 

resigned. And those are the management people that resigned. I 

believe there might have been some other management people 

at the upper management who took early retirement. I could try 

to find the details if you wish. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, was there a Howie Alberts as well 

who left the service of the department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The named Howie Alberts is employed 

by the department in the community living division. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Could you also please, Mr. Minister, outline 

some of the higher level of staff who took early retirement, 

perhaps director of administration, the director of formerly 

rehab services, and so on – people at that level. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the answer to the 

question is that other senior management people who have 

taken early retirement are Dick Baxter, who is the head of 

community living division, had a truly distinguished career with 

the province of Saskatchewan, and it has been missed, but his 

position has been capably filled by Dr. Hansen, who you might 

say was his understudy. And Dr. Hansen has done an excellent 

job filling that position since Dick Baxter retired. 

 

Art Uhren retired as director of support services. Fred Gattinger 

– or Gottinger, as we say in my constituency – has retired as 

director of Valley View. I believe he may still be serving in that 

capacity until his official retirement date. 

 

Karl Bastian, director of North Park in Prince Albert, has taken 

early retirement. Lem Boyd, director of Regina North, has taken 

early retirement. Len Soiseth, director at North Battleford, has 

taken early retirement. Mr. Roy Crebo, director of Paul Dojack 

Centre, has taken early retirement. And Graham Craig, 

comptroller, will complete his early retirement before the end of 

the year,  

or at the end of the year. They don’t all necessarily retire at the 

same time, so Mr. Craig has taken early retirement, and it will 

be effective at December 31, 1987. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you’ve obviously lost a lot of 

expertise from your department over the last few months. 

Would you please give me the figures for each of these 

individuals, and I refer then to Messrs. Hnatiuk, Spigelman, 

Cunningham, Ms. Andreychuk, and Messrs. Wiebe, Heber, 

Baxter, Uhren, Gattinger, Bastian, Boyd, Soiseth, Crebo and 

Craig. 

 

Would you please advise me, Mr. Minister, how many years 

each of those individuals has served in the department; and will 

you also tell me, Mr. Minister, how much it is costing the 

department for them to leave? And for those who are taking 

early retirement, what is the total cost for each individual, the 

cost to the department for their severance package? And for 

those who were dismissed from their positions or removed from 

their positions, Mr. Minister, will you tell me how much it cost 

the department to settle to terminate their employment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, probably I should 

correct some misapprehension that may have been caused by 

the member from Moose Jaw North when earlier he indicated 

that $4 million had been spent on early retirement and 

severance. In the discussion that carried on during the course of 

the afternoon, I had forgotten to answer that part of his 

question. The answer: the $4 million that the member refers to 

is actually not $4 million for early retirement and severance. As 

far as we have calculated to date, the early retirement and 

severance total is $925,130. 

 

The balance of the $4 million is for new positions in the Young 

Offenders branch. As you know, Young Offenders has been 

newly brought into the department as part of the changes the 

federal government has made, and this has created an onus on 

the province of Saskatchewan to provide new young offenders’ 

facilities and more staff, and Young Offenders took up part of 

that $4 million. Earned increments to staff, both in-scope and 

out-of-scope, took up part of that. Child care increases – which 

the member opposite has called for and have been implemented 

– in foster parents took up part of that $4 million. 

 

The portion of the $4 million allocated to early retirement and 

severance: of that sum, $197,621 was for severance pay; the 

balance was for early retirement. In early retirement, because in 

the government overall there will be a down-sizing in the 

number of positions, the saving is not immediate, but over the 

next four or five years the taxpayers will have a substantial 

saving. We feel that we can operate the department more 

efficiently with better management and with fewer people in 

some areas. 

 

With respect to the severance pay of $197,621, the sum was 

required to be paid due to the contracts of the individuals. Some 

of these management people had standard contracts. Some of 

them had been with the government since the time that the 

members opposite were government, and we had to honour 

some degree of commitment that had been made earlier to these 

people. We felt the expenditure of $197,621 would be easily  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2257 

 

made up in better management. In the case of one individual, 

who I will not name, I felt that that individual had cost the 

government more than his weight in gold and that, therefore, 

changes should be made. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, is it to be expected that when 

we’re standing here in estimates, and I ask you a question 

which has a factual answer, that you will provide that answer? 

Can we operate on that assumption in these estimates, please? 

 

Let me repeat my question to you then, Mr. Minister. I will 

debate the $4 million figure with you. Your reference to having 

directed some of that to child care just doesn’t wash, because 

the fact of the matter is that when you calculate the amount 

spent on salaries in your department last year and the amount 

spent this year and you prorate that to the number of positions, 

there’s a difference of $4 million in the budget. 

 

Now I did not ask you how much has been spent to date. If I 

did, let me clarify that. I’m asking you how much it is costing – 

either has been spent already or will be spent? I understand 

from what you’ve said that there is at least one court case 

pending, and that may cost you more than you intended to 

spend; I don’t know. So I quite understand. You haven’t . . . 

some of these people have not left; they’re going to be leaving. 

You haven’t paid those out yet. 

 

Will you please give me straight goods for straight questions, 

Mr. Minister? Do I need to go through these again? Or can you 

– for each of these individuals I asked you how many years they 

have served in the Department of Social Services? Your 

department, Mr. Minister, appears to have been gutted at the 

upper levels and not replaced with what I would consider highly 

competent management at the ministerial or deputy ministerial 

level. 

 

I would like to know, and I think the people of Saskatchewan 

would like to know, Mr. Minister: what is the experience of 

these people that you’ve named me here – and I’ll go through 

them again if you like; how many years have they served in the 

Department of Social Services, and how much will it cost in 

total for each individual to have the separation of their 

employment from the Department of Social Services under your 

ministry? 

 

Will you please answer that very specific question to me, with 

very specific numbers about years of experience and very 

specific dollars as to what it is going to cost in total, this year, 

for the Government of Saskatchewan to have them leave the 

employ of your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I don’t think I 

should drag the name of his friends through the mud in this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I’m sorry, I had difficulty 

understanding your answer. It seemed to lack a number of 

numbers. And would you please repeat that answer for me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I will send a list of all of 

the 123 people who have opted for early retirement.  

The list does not contain the day that they started employment 

with the government, so we will not be calculating how many 

total years these people have had with the government. Possibly 

at the next retirement banquet such statistics might be available. 

 

But I don’t consider it a good expenditure of the taxpayers’ 

money to have the calculations done as to when each of those 

individuals started, and complied, and calculated, so that you 

can have some sum that adds up to a certain sum. I don’t 

consider that a good expenditure of the taxpayers’ money. 

 

I will send you a list of all 123 people . . . (inaudible) . . . have 

that information, but I’m not going to go and find out when the 

123 people were actually hired. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I did not ask you about 123 

people. I will count on the delivery of that information that you 

provided. And I would ask you, when you respond to answer, to 

tell me exactly when you intend to have that in my hands. 

 

Let me repeat my question more specifically then for you, Mr. 

Minister, because as I have said before, the people of 

Saskatchewan are of the opinion that you have gutted the upper 

managements of the Department of Social Services. Will you 

tell me specifically . . . I did not ask for a grand total 

expenditure; I did not ask you for grand total years of service. 

Let me repeat a series of questions. I will say them together if 

this saves time, or if it is necessary for you to follow, I’ll do 

them one at a time. Which is your preference, Mr. Minister? 

 

An Hon. Member: — One at a time. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — One at a time, okay. Then we’ll do it one at 

time, Mr. Minister. 

 

You pointed out that the deputy minister, Con Hnatiuk, is no 

longer in the employ of the Department of Social Services. How 

many years has Con Hnatiuk worked in the Department of 

Social Services; what has it cost, or will it cost, in total for your 

government, for your department, to sever Mr. Hnatiuk’s 

employ with the Department of Social Services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — With respect to Mr. Con Hnatiuk, if you 

insist . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I insist. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — You insist, you say. I will tell you the 

situation with respect to Mr. Hnatiuk. 

 

Mr. Hnatiuk was with the government for many, many years 

and rose to the position of Deputy Minister of Social Services. 

The government did not have confidence in his ability to 

perform the task of deputy of Social Services in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and some of the problems that I found were that 

Saskatchewan does not have an Indian child care agreement, 

which was costing us . . . and other provinces do, which is 

costing us millions of dollars per year. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, why is the member on his feet? 

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2258 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, I asked the minister a very 

specific question, and I would like an answer to that specific 

question. The question, Mr. Chairman, as you had heard was: 

how many years has Mr. Hnatiuk been in the employ of the 

Department of Social Services and what has it cost, or will it 

cost, in total for the Department of Social Services to sever their 

employment relationship with him. I would appreciate it, Mr. 

Chairman. It would serve the interests of the review of the 

Social Services estimates, if the minister would answer specific 

questions with specific answers. I ask for your support, Mr. 

Chairman, in directing him to do that. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The point of order is not well taken. The 

Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we can find out 

exactly when Mr. Hnatiuk became employed with the 

Department of Social Services. But I recall that when I came 

back to Melville to practise law in 1971, he was with the 

Parkland Community College at that time, and then shortly after 

that Mr. Hnatiuk went, I believe, to CORE Services. I recall that 

when my wife was teaching in Melville he was a social worker, 

in about 1973-74, so he would have started about 1973-74 with 

the Department of Social Services. My wife recalls him being a 

social worker when she was a special education teacher there. 

 

So that would give you an indication of how long he had been 

with the Department of Social Services. We found that we did 

not have a child care agreement because the deputy had not 

asked for one and really hadn’t pushed the matter. There were 

other problems that I found in the department that I felt were 

costing the taxpayers money, and therefore we felt that we had 

to make a change of the upper management, and we did that. 

 

The question is of what the cost is . . . it is a question of what is 

the cost or what is the saving. I did not deal in this matter as 

deputy ministers have contracts with the Executive Council and 

deal with Executive Council, so you could possibly ask the 

question in the Executive Council estimates. I estimate that the 

management improvements will save the province millions of 

dollars. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask that you listen to the 

question I ask, and I would ask that after I do that, you would 

direct the minister to respond to the question that was asked, 

please. 

 

Mr. Minister, the questions I’m asking are not particularly 

difficult questions. You were the one who chose to come into 

this Assembly today for Social Services estimates. The timing 

was entirely your choice. You came into these estimates today 

knowing exactly what kind of questions you should anticipate. 

If you didn’t anticipate these kinds of questions, then you are a 

more foolish man than many people give you credit for being. 

 

I ask you again, Mr. Minister, to give me some statistical, 

numerical information which is not hard to retrieve. Surely – 

surely a department which is managing the taxpayers’ dollar 

with care and control, as you pretend, knows exactly to the 

penny how much your early  

retirements and your dismissals of employees in your 

department cost. Surely it is not difficult for your department to 

say: employee “X” has worked in this department for “Y” 

number of years. These are not difficult questions. 

 

I ask you again, Mr. Minister: will you tell me how many years 

Con Hnatiuk had worked in the Department of Social Services? 

Will you tell me to the dollar, in total, what it will cost your 

department to sever the employment relationship with Con 

Hnatiuk in the Department of Social Services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’ll ask the page to come, and I’ll send 

over a copy of the early retirement list of people, the date they 

retired, the severance pay paid, the holiday pay paid, and all the 

123 individuals are on the list. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Then, Mr. Minister, I assume that you’ve 

retained a copy of this for your own desk. Am I correct, Mr. 

Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Then, Mr. Minister, it 

will not be difficult for you to tell me in this Assembly, on the 

public record, how many years Con Hnatiuk served in the 

Department of Social Services and, to the penny, what it has or 

will, in total, cost your department to sever the employment 

relationship? Will you answer that very specific question for me 

right now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the answer is no, I 

will not. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, this is remarkable. How is it 

supposed to be in the best interests of the service of the public 

of Saskatchewan to come into estimates of a department, and to 

ask specific questions about dollar expenditures related to a 

department, and a minister has the gall to stand in this 

Assembly and say, I will not tell you how much we spent, or 

plan to spend, on this specific expenditure. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I direct my question to the minister, what – let 

me reword this because clarity seems to be one of the 

difficulties we’re having here, Mr. Minister. Will you tell – not 

will you – please, Mr. Minister, how many years has Con 

Hnatiuk served for the Department of Social Services? And to 

the dollar, how much has or will be spent by the Department of 

Social Services to sever his employment relationship with your 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The answer to the first question, Mr. 

Deputy Chairman, is: too long. The answer to the question: how 

long will he serve in Manitoba? The same answer: too long. 

The question is: how much did it cost? It was a great saving to 

have him go to Manitoba. I told you that in an individual’s case 

and in this individual’s case I felt that he had cost the taxpayers 

his weight in gold. You can phone him up and ask him how 

much we paid him to leave, and you can phone him up and ask 

him how much he weighs, and you can calculate it yourself. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you told us in this Assembly not 

so long ago that it is for your amusement that you serve as 

Minister of Social Services. You told us about the caring heart 

that you have, and I assume, in making those comments, if you 

want to be believed, Mr. Minister, that you have to conduct 

yourself in such a way. You are  

  



 

September 2, 1987 

2259 

 

making a farce of this estimates review and I ask you the 

question again . . . these are not difficult questions, and you 

have an opportunity, Mr. Minister, to get your act together and 

quit looking like a fool in this Assembly. Will you tell me how 

many years Con Hnatiuk worked in the Department of Social 

Services, and how much money it has, or will, cost your 

department to severance your employment relationship? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Despite what I have said, I did like Con 

Hnatiuk. As a person I did like him; I didn’t dislike him 

personally. I felt that there was a need for a change. I don’t 

really want to speak any more about Con Hnatiuk. The man is 

working in Manitoba. It clearly sends a message as to where his 

heart is. The man could possibly serve well there if his heart is 

in it. Personally I did not dislike him. I don’t doubt that he 

probably dislikes me, but I did not do it as a matter of malice to 

change deputies. I got along on pleasant terms with him, but I 

felt that the change had to be made, and I did make the change. 

And I am not about to discuss Mr. Hnatiuk any further. Let him 

do his job in Manitoba and be done with it. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 

 

 


