













































October 8, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 8, 1987 

 

 

3195 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Tusa: — I have the privilege this afternoon to 

introduce to you Mr. David McNeil, who is the Clerk in the 

Alberta Legislative Assembly. David McNeil is visiting with us 

today and tomorrow. Please join with me in welcoming Mr. 

McNeil to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Effect of Free Trade Agreement on Two-price System for 

Wheat 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Premier, and it deals with the proposed free trade treaty with the 

United States and Saskatchewan agriculture. 

 

Mr. Premier, can you confirm that this proposed free trade 

treaty will in fact wipe out the two-price system for Canadian 

farmers for wheat? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The treaty, Mr. Speaker, says three things 

with respect to wheat and the pricing system for wheat in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The two-priced wheat, as we have it today, means that 

consumers in Canada pay more for wheat domestically than 

they do . . . than international customers, and as a result there’s 

about a $280 million benefit that goes to farmers. Under the 

new agreement that $280 million benefit would come directly 

from the federal treasury as a direct payment to farmers across 

the country. 

 

Secondly, the people who consume the wheat, Mr. Speaker, 

consumers here — whether it’s bread or wheat or others — 

cookies and doughnuts, or anything else that is manufactured 

from grains, would receive the benefit of $280 million as 

consumers, parents and others, that they don’t receive now. 

 

Secondly, the whole question of processing and manufacturing 

would be improved because processors would have access to 

North American competitively priced grains so that they could 

expand the processing of their goods and services and, indeed, 

sell them not only into Canada but the United States and world 

wide. 

 

So there’s a combination of effects, $280 million benefit to 

consumers, the same amount of money going to farmers from 

the federal treasury — $280 million — new jobs in terms of 

processing and manufacturers of processed foods not only here 

but throughout the United States and Canada, which obviously, 

Mr. Speaker, is of great benefit in terms of new jobs in 

agriculture processing here Saskatchewan and other places. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister . . . A new question, Mr. 

Speaker. I remind you that just over a year ago your party came 

before a parliamentary committee that was recommending 

increases to the domestic price of wheat, the two-price system, 

and I quote, you said: 

 

Significant and much needed assistance to farmers would 

be the result. 

 

Mr. Premier, can you explain how the loss . . . First of all, the 

price wasn’t raised, and now the price is being reduced. Can 

you just explain how that is . . . Could you just expand on how 

that is good for Saskatchewan farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I said, Mr. Speaker, and maybe I can 

come at it another way. The $280 million that Canadian 

consumers used to pay, they won’t have to pay now. That same 

amount of money will be allocated to farmers by the federal 

government directly, in addition to, Mr. Speaker, any deficiency 

payments or anything else that takes place. 

 

Now the hon. member from Regina North East says that money 

will come from taxes. Well would he rather have it come from 

taxes which takes from the wealthy, or would he rather it come 

from families who pay for bread and pay for all kinds of things 

in two-price wheat? And he doesn’t realize that a two-priced 

wheat is a tax on the poor in this country, where taxes generally 

take from those who have income, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a classic NDP position. They would rather tax the poor by 

charging them too much for food than they would tax with 

high-income people and pay directly to farmers. Now you can’t 

have it both ways young fella, I mean, if you want to take a 

look at both sides. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, what it does is increase processing and 

manufacturing of Saskatchewan-based and Canadian-based 

grains in Canada, so in fact we can make more processed 

products and export them, not only just the raw commodity but 

bread and doughnuts and spaghetti and all the pasta products 

and everything else can be manufactured right here as opposed 

to being manufactured some place else in the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, you say that the government is 

going to compensate the farmers. I ask you: when and where 

did the Prime Minister of this country say that publicly, and 

what are the details, such as how much compensation will there 

be, the dollars and cents; when will it be paid out; how will it be 

paid out; and will it be a one-time payment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the amount of money that 

the farmer get today — and we asked for that increase in the 

amount of money as we did ask for the  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3196 

 

deficiency payments, which has been substantial, as the hon. 

member knows, going to farmers from the public treasury — 

the amount that farmers get today from consumers . . . And I 

remind the NDP, all consumers in Saskatchewan, the poor and 

others, paid for two-price wheat and higher-priced bread. That 

will change now, so the poor get a benefit. 

 

That contribution by the federal government will be exactly 

what it is today, and it will be an ongoing payment, Mr. 

Speaker, above — above — any deficiency payments of 

western grain stabilization or anything else. It’s in addition to 

any other payments that are going on today and will be the 

equivalent to the amount that the two-price system that is 

families across Saskatchewan and across Canada had to pay for 

two-price bread. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I asked you . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Is the hon. 

member asking a supplementary or a new question? 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary question. Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I 

asked you: where did the Prime Minister of this country say that 

publicly, and can you produce the documents to me later this 

day with the facts on them to the specific questions that I have 

asked? 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The Prime Minister has said to all the 

premiers in Canada — and you can phone perhaps, if you 

would, to the Premier of Manitoba, Mr. Howard Pawley, and 

ask him if this is the case; you can ask any other premier in this 

country — that that’s indeed what will happen. 

 

I mean, to be fair, the hon. member didn’t believe there would 

be a deficiency payment either. He said, well tell me when it 

will be. And we said, it will be just after the election, and you’ll 

receive it, and even the hon. member received it. 

 

We will be receiving the compensation as stated by the Prime 

Minister, Mr. Speaker, and it will be a benefit to all of Canada 

— all of Canada — in terms of jobs, lower-priced food for 

consumers, and the same kind of money going directly to 

farmers from taxpayers, which means that you get the money 

from the more wealthy rather than from the poor, as the NDP 

would always like to see it happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

American Investment in Canada 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I again hear the rhetoric coming 

from across the floor with no substantial facts, not said publicly. 

I will wait and see, and I think that Saskatchewan people will 

wait and see, the results of that. And I know the half-truths that 

are being told, and I’m waiting to see the results. 

 

New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, the proposed  

treaty removes a number of restrictions on American 

investment. My simple question is, and I expect a simply 

answer: does that Act of the treaty include American investment 

in Saskatchewan farm land? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, under the Canadian 

constitution we can control and tighten up the supplies of 

potash and manage them; we can control the sale of farm land; 

we can control the sale of oil. We have that ability to control 

our resources, Mr. Speaker. There is nothing on a trade pact that 

affects on Canadian constitutional sovereignty, whether it’s 

provincial or federal. 

 

And I would say, to the on. member, with respect to farm costs, 

you now start asking farmers if they’d like to pick up a half-ton 

truck at $4,000 off what they picked it up yesterday. You ask 

them about farm chemicals. You ask them about the parts and 

the services that they can buy on a national and international 

market that they can’t get today, and they are looking at 

thousands and thousands of dollars of savings every year as a 

result of the fact that there’s no tariff between two countries that 

we trade with today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would like the 

hon. member please to indicate if it’s a supplementary or a new 

question. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. We 

have looked at the agreement, what we know of the agreement, 

balanced it out, heard the rhetoric, and decided that the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I’m sure hon. members 

are having difficult hearing the question, so I ask for your 

co-operation in allowing the member to ask his question. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, we have weighed out as much as 

we know of this agreement, and many reasonable people have, 

and the general feeling is that the minuses far overweigh the 

pluses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — As you will know, The Saskatchewan Farm 

Ownership Act protects farm families and residents with few 

exceptions, protects them from American investment with the 

possibility of buying up farm land and have farmers as tenant 

farmers or hired hands on their own land. Can you tell me what 

section of this Act, this proposed free trade agreement, will 

protect The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act — what 

section? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, there is 

nothing in the trade agreement in GATT, General Agreement 

on Tariffs and Trade, multilaterally or  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3197 

 

bilaterally, that impacts on the sovereignty and the 

constitutional power of a country or a jurisdiction within the 

country. Now the hon. member, if he wants to review GATT 

law, he can bring himself right up to date and right up to speed 

on that. Every time Canada, for example, has entered into a 

multilateral trade arrangement with countries all over the world, 

they all know, as they do in Europe and the common market 

and we do in this deal, that we have the constitutional right and 

the constitutional jurisdiction to control our resources and to 

control our farm land and to control our potash and to control 

our oil; and, Mr. Speaker, they know that in Quebec, they know 

that in Manitoba, and believe me, they know it here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Revenue Sharing Payments to Municipalities 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the Minister of Urban Affairs and it deals with the latest 

example of his government’s incompetence. The interim supply 

Bill which was passed by this legislature on September 28 

failed to include enough funds for the Urban Affairs department 

to make its normal revenue sharing payments to many of 

Saskatchewan’s urban municipalities. These municipalities 

have been left scrambling to arrange their interim financing 

until you can get your act together. Can the minister explain 

how it is that he forgot to include revenue sharing payments in 

the last interim supply Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe . . . first of all 

it’s really unique how they got off the topic of free trade 

because even at the recent SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) regional conference they were 

talking free trade, and I believe that out there they understood a 

little bit better than they do on the benches opposite. 

 

But none the less, with regard to the question, Mr. Speaker, we 

didn’t forget anything. It’s common the appropriation is for 

one-twelfth. If the member is saying that had we arbitrarily 

decide to add to it to cover for those quarterly payments — and 

it’s not like the urban municipalities didn’t receive any, they did 

— why don’t they just pass the budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 

minister who seems determined to compound his incompetence 

with evasion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, you know, I know, 

anyone that knows anything about provincial financing at all 

knows that you can have whatever money you require to meet 

your commitments, whether it’s monthly or quarterly, through 

interim supply Bills. This Assembly has passed four interim 

supply Bills without delay — each one in one day. Whatever 

funds you required, whatever funds you required you only had 

to ask for. You only had  

to ask. And I ask you again: how do you explain your oversight 

in not asking for enough funds in the last interim supply Bill to 

meet your commitments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I guess all I can say is this: 

we are in the 91st day of the session. A normal session — on 

the 93rd as my colleague points out — a normal session, as 

everybody knows, is about 70 days. Now we’re into 23 extra 

days. I don’t know what it costs to operate this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, somewhere in the area of 80 or 90 or $100,000 a day 

— that’s $2 million. I wouldn’t mind so much the democratic 

process continuing if the members opposite were to ask those 

questions once instead of asking the same question day after 

day after day and delaying the passage of this budget, and not 

even allowing the Urban Affairs estimates to come to this 

Assembly because of the repetitive questions that they are 

asking opposite as we’re doing estimates in other departments. 

 

I explained it fully in our regional conference with SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) the other day 

— totally acceptable. They understand the delay. The delays 

rests with the opposite benches. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I’m going 

to ask the minister to focus on reality for just a minute. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — If you want to meet y our revenue 

sharing commitments, I can assure you that you will have the 

complete co-operation of this side of the House to pass an 

emergency interim supply Bill to cover up for your mistake on 

September 28. 

 

And I will simply ask you this: will you ask the Minister of 

Finance to introduce an emergency interim supply Bill today or 

tomorrow so that you can make these much needed revenue 

sharing payments to Saskatchewan’s urban municipalities? And 

if not, why not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — If the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, are 

asking us to trust them, I’ve got news for them. It’s simpler than 

that. All they have to do is pass the budget. We’ve been trying 

to do that for some 83 days — 83 days over and above the 10. 

 

And now we’re into a point where extra dollars of about $2 

million, because it’s the same questions going on and on. And 

as I explained to SUMA, I sat in this legislature for 73 days 

before I was even asked a question. And that’s the amount of 

interest, Mr. Speaker, that they claim they have in the budgets 

of the Urban Affairs. And I would rather plead with them to 

let’s get on with it, let’s pass all the estimates, let’s pass the 

budgets. It’s an inconvenience to my people out in Urban 

Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3198 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, you know, I know, everyone in this provinces knows 

that what you’re saying is simply not true. Whatever money you 

need fur urban municipal . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. We’re having difficulty 

hearing the question. I ask the hon. members to please allow the 

hon. member from Regina Victoria to put his question. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to ask 

you, why are you using this political charade to force 

Saskatchewan urban municipalities to borrow additional 

moneys at a time that their budgets are already hard pressed, 

just to cover your political agenda? Why are you doing that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, let’s clarify something. As of 

the end of October every urban municipality had every penny 

that was due to them, so let’s not cloud the issue and say that 

they’re not receiving their funds. 

 

Now it’s the next quarter that we’re talking about, and because 

of the appropriation that was allowed being one-twelfth, I 

would rather see the trust of the benches opposite coming 

forward to pass the budget by the end of this month so that we 

can pay everybody what they’re waiting for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, you can hardly blame 

urban municipalities for thinking that something has gone 

wrong when they’re not receiving the money that they normally 

expect at this time, according to past practice. Are you now 

saying that contrary to that past practice that you have changed 

the practice and that you have decided to slow down the 

schedule of payments to urban municipalities? And if so, why 

did you not communicate that before the fact? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Minister, we have passed now, what, 

four appropriation Bills? And the members opposite, if they 

were so concerned with it as they debated these Bills month 

after month as they came by, if they were so concerned and if 

they were so trustworthy, why didn’t they stand up at the time 

of the appropriation and say, who don’t you increase it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, and I direct 

my question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

will you explain to this House, on behalf of your red-faced 

Minister of Finance, why you were able in the first interim 

supply Bill to have a schedule to provide the quarterly 

payments in addition to the one-twelfth, but you weren’t able to 

have it in this latest interim supply Bill, which would have been 

the normal thing to do, and therefore municipalities are having 

to borrow money and increase taxes on their ratepayers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, if indeed my Minister of 

Finance is red-faced, it’s only because he’s trying to contain 

himself because we’re off the topic of free trade and talking 

about something that should have been resolved months ago 

and isn’t. 

 

And it’s simply, Mr. Speaker, there are very few urban 

municipalities out there that are suffering to the extend that the 

members opposite claim. It’s true, it’s an inconvenience. But 

the inconvenience is because of the slowness of progressing 

through the estimates in this House. We’re 23 days overdue. If 

they drag it on for another month, we’re going to be 43 days 

overdue. And are they then going to claim that they’re doing 

their best and that we should trust them — boloney. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Appointment of Chairman of Crown Management Board 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Premier. On September 25 you announced the 

appointment of Wolfgang Wolff as the first-ever, full-time 

chairman of the Crown Management Board. My question, Mr. 

Premier, is: what is his salary and what budget has been set up 

for his office, the expenses, travel expenses, and staff? What’s 

his salary, and what’s the budget for his office? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that 

the opposition will move to Regina City Council revenue and 

then on to salaries of individuals from trade when, Mr. Speaker, 

they are holding up this House, costing the taxpayers, $90,000 a 

day because they won’t pass the estimates. And then they stand 

up and say, what’s the new chairman going to be worth. 

 

I’ll respond to questions of salaries like I always do, in 

estimates or in Crown corporations because, I mean, that’s how 

we normally do it. But you take up the time of this House in 

question period, as the most important issue of the day, asking 

about somebody’s salary. I mean, you must all be asleep at the 

switch. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I can 

only say, Mr. Premier, that you must have got the $90,000 

figure from your Minister of Finance. And all I can say in his 

defence is, it’s not out as far as his last estimate that he gave us. 

It’s only out by about $90,000. 

 

Mr. Premier, I would remind you that your government has 

been preaching restraint, and it has been cutting programs to a 

variety of different groups, and yet in the past few months 

you’ve created two new full-time positions — a full-time 

chairman for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and now 

a full-time chairman for the Crown Management Board. You 

deny that the former PC minister is making 100,000-plus as 

chairman of the Potash corporation; and do you deny that Mr. 

Wolfgang Wolff will be making an equal salary as chairman of 

the Crown Management Board? 

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3199 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have to put this in 

context. We have an historic agreement on the constitution on 

Meech Lake that is being debated. We have an historic 

watershed agreement on trade that will affect the lives and the 

jobs and income generations for years to come. We’ve got 

potash trade that is hundreds of millions of dollars. And, Mr. 

Speaker, what do they ask? They ask if in fact we have paid 

people to work in Crown corporations, or we have full-time 

chairmen. Mr. Speaker, it tells you how small and how far 

behind the NDP are when it comes to national, provincial, and 

international policy. You’re right out to lunch! 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I will answer the questions with respect 

to those in Crown corporations and governments in the usual 

fashion, but not in question period, Mr. Speaker. This is 

supposed to be important issues of the day, and they go back to 

Regina city council, which is the highest taxed city in all of 

Canada, and they wonder about if they can get more money, 

and they sit over there and won’t pass the budget. They’d spend 

$90,000 . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I can only say in response to that tirade, 

Mr. Premier, that I hope you remember some of this new-found 

punctuality when it comes to the date when the session is called 

next year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 

you said we should have put it in context. I couldn’t agree 

more, and I have an impeccable source. In 1983 Mr. Wolfgang 

Wolff headed up your government’s Crown corporations review 

commission — a study, I might add, which cost the taxpayers 

$400,000. One of his recommendations was: a chairman of 

commercial business corporations should be selected only from 

qualified representatives of the general public, and appointed 

for one-year, renewable terms by cabinet. 

 

When Mr. Wolfgang Wolff studied the Crown corporations, he 

clearly was not recommending the appointment of a full-time 

chairman. I ask you, Mr. Premier, can you tell us why Mr. 

Wolfgang Wolff had a sudden change of heart, and did it have 

anything to do with the size of the salary which went with this 

position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, can you really believe this, 

Mr. Speaker, that we are here in this legislature — costing the 

taxpayers $90,000 a day — to ask and ask and ask about the 

decision to appoint a full-time chairman to a corporation? Can 

you believe that — $90,000? 

 

They’re worried about a salary of $90,000 a year. They spend 

that every day in this legislature — every single, solitary day. 

On top of that, Mr. Speaker, they would allow Papco to lose 

$91,000 a day, Mr. Speaker, and they wouldn’t fix it, and that’s 

going to be the new leadership of this province and of this 

country. If that’s the new  

leadership, will for heaven’s sake, Mr. Speaker, that takes us 

back not only 10 years, but it takes us back centuries, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s why they’re going to sit over there for a 

long time to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Department of Revenue 

and Financial Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 

to amend The Department of Revenue and Financial Services 

Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 34 — An Act to 

amend The Prescription Drug Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday, the last time, 

Mr. Speaker, the last time this Bill was before the House, I was 

interrupted by the passage of time and unfortunately had to 

adjourn the debate to a further time. 

 

The other day when I was speaking on this particular Bill, Bill 

No. 34 — An Act to amend The Prescription Drugs Act, I was 

reviewing the promises of the Government of Saskatchewan 

and discussing whether, in fact, in examining the commitment 

that this government has made to the people of Saskatchewan, 

whether we can trust any future commitments. And I was 

examining the vast difference between the commitment or the 

promise, and the performance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now with regard to The Prescription Drugs Act and the 

conditions that exist at this time, when a person goes to a 

pharmacist for to fill a prescription the person, under the Act as 

it is presently written but not practised, pays about $3.95 

prescription fee. Now what this government proposes under this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, is to change its position to what is 

presently existing and being practised at this time. And now 

when a person goes to obtain a prescription from a pharmacist 

in, I suppose, 99 per cent of the cases, if not all of them, 

prescribed by a doctor, that person will have a deductible of 

$125 — $125. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you have to frame that against this 

government’s commitment back in 1982 to make Saskatchewan 

number one in health care in Canada. And in addition to paying 

$125 deductible for prescription drug service in Saskatchewan, 

now a person is required to advance the payments — the 

payments have to be made  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3200 

 

in advance. And additionally, this government, under this 

legislation, and what they’re currently practising is to bring in 

an absolutely new 20 per cent deterrent fee on prescription drug 

service. 

 

Now the Premier of this province parades himself around this 

province at great expense, telling the people that he is opposed 

to free drugs. And the headlines that I showed the other day 

with regard to the Premier’s statement on this indicated clearly, 

in the Premier’s own quotes, that he was opposed to free drugs. 

Well drugs have never been free in the province of 

Saskatchewan; there’s always been some type of charge. 

 

But the implication is that people are abusing the prescription 

drug service, and clearly that they were ordering all kinds of 

drugs because they’re free. But that is not the case, Mr. 

Speaker. The case is this, that if a person requires a prescription 

drug — and that’s what this Bill deals with, this Prescription 

Drug Act — if they require a prescription drug, they go to their 

doctor, a qualified medical practitioner, and that medical 

practitioner prescribes a drug. They take their prescription to 

their drug store, whichever it may be, and a qualified 

pharmacist fills that prescription. So there is no abuse by the 

recipient of the prescription. I reject the idea that there is any 

abuse by the recipient of the prescription. 

 

If an abuse has occurred, or if, and I’ll be generous, if an 

oversight has occurred because a doctor prescribed something 

he shouldn’t have prescribed, or maybe inadvertently prescribed 

a drug too often to one of his patients, then maybe there is a 

fault there. And this government should address itself to that if 

there is in fact a problem there. 

 

But I have not heard this government say that there is a problem 

in that area. Therefore, for the Premier to go about this province 

saying that the people of Saskatchewan are abusing drug 

service, that he is opposed to free drugs for the people of 

Saskatchewan, is inaccurate. 

 

And when we examine the commitment of this government in 

any number of areas, as I have mentioned before, Mr. Speaker, 

areas such as: never again would we have a gasoline tax — now 

we have a gasoline tax of 7 cents a litre. 

 

We will reduce income tax by 10 per cent, they said before the 

election. Well since then, Mr. Speaker, we have two boosts in 

income tax by way of the new flat tax brought in by this 

government. 

 

They said they would give us the best health care in Canada, 

and they have done away with the school-based dental program 

for children, including most of the people that operated that 

plan efficiently over a number of years. And they say they’re 

for number one health care in Canada. Every move this 

government has done in the field of health care has detracted 

from their promise of the best health care in Canada. 

 

And we have to examine their commitment before and after. 

We have to test their sincerity. And it is being tested in 

Saskatchewan now, and it’s reflecting itself out there,  

because people are talking about this government’s lack of 

commitment, lack of sincerity with regard to health care 

programs in Saskatchewan, one of which is prescription drug 

service. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is intellectually dishonest for a party such 

as the Conservative Party to make promises of that nature 

before an election and to blatantly break those promises after an 

election. This has been demonstrated time and time again, not 

only in the field of health care but in the field of finance and 

other areas. 

 

When a government says to you before the election, the debt of 

this province will be in the neighbourhood of $598 million, and 

after the election they tell you the debt is $1.2 billion, you have 

to question what a government of that nature will do. They have 

honed this intellectual dishonesty to a new sharpness in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the government says that this is a good drug plan they 

brought in — their replacement for the prescription drug plan 

that was there when we were the government. Well there’s a 

number of authorities have commented on this, Mr. Speaker. 

And I have one here — the Star-Phoenix this summer 

commented on the matter. And the heading of the editorial was 

“New drug plan poses dangers.” And it begins: 

 

There is a high degree of urgency surrounding creation of 

a committee by the provincial government to handle cases 

where costs of crucial medications will be too high under 

the revamped prescription drug plan. 

 

They go on in this editorial to talk about subjecting people to 

severe hardship under the new drug plan rules. And another 

paragraph near the end of the editorial states, Mr. Speaker: 

 

It is self-evident that the committee that the Health 

minister was promising earlier this week should have been 

created before the drug plan changes were even 

announced. 

 

The order in which things occurred, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

government brought into effect the conditions, the new plan. 

Then later they brought in the legislation which would allow 

them to put the conditions into effect. Then later after that, not 

having seen that there would be problems with the legislation, 

they brought in their answer to the severe hardship cases that 

occurred. And these cases occurred from all over the province. 

They were legion in the paper, as little as a month ago — cases 

reported from Saskatoon, Regina, Moosomin, other places in 

the province. 

 

And it’s interesting to watch the Minister of Health in dealing 

with health care issues, and particularly this issue of 

prescription drug service. The Minister of Health is being 

reported in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, July 29, 1987, and it’s 

headed, “Committee to decide unique drug cases.” 

 

And in that report it was referring to the petitions filed in the 

House Tuesday, which the NDP said had more than 9,000 

signatures. You will recall the day, Mr. Speaker,  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3201 

 

when members in this House each tabled hundreds and 

hundreds of names on a petition, totalling over 9,000. 

 

And what did the Minister of Health say about those petitions? 

Well, it says in the article here: 

 

The minister discounted some of them by saying they were 

obtained under false pretences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a copy of the petition here, and I’m going 

to read it into the record because the Minister of Health says 

these were obtained under false pretences. It’s entitled “Health 

care petition.” 

 

To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

in legislature assembled: 

 

The petition of the undersigned residents of Saskatchewan 

humbly showeth: 

 

That it is not in the public interest for the Government of 

Saskatchewan to undermine medicare in our province; and 

 

That it is not in the interest of Saskatchewan children and 

Saskatchewan families for the Government of 

Saskatchewan to weaken the children’s dental plan; and 

 

That it is not in the interest of Saskatchewan seniors and 

Saskatchewan families to impose arbitrary, unfair, 

expensive changes to the comprehensive and universal 

prescription drug plan; and 

 

That growing hospital waiting lists have reached alarming 

levels causing great hardship to Saskatchewan people; and 

 

That the Government of Saskatchewan’s threat to impose 

unfair and arbitrary limits on insured medical services, 

including chiropractic care and physiotherapy, constitutes 

an unwarranted erosion of health care services in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the 

Government of Saskatchewan to stop its policy of eroding 

and undermining medicare in Saskatchewan, and as in 

duty-bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 

Followed by signatures, names, and addresses. And over 9,000 

names were signed to this. And I’ll tell the Minister of Health 

right now, Mr. Speaker, that there are more names coming, 

more names. The people out there in Saskatchewan, outside of 

this Assembly, are still concerned about this matter. And the 

Minister of Health will be hearing more about this. 

 

(1445) 

 

But for the Minister of Health to stand in this Assembly and say 

that these names were obtained under false pretences is an 

insult to the people of Saskatchewan, a bald-faced insult to the 

people of Saskatchewan who saw  

that petition, who read it and signed it in good faith. 

 

And I’ve talked to many of the people that have signed these 

petitions or have obtained names on these petitions, and it’s 

very interesting the reaction they get when they take these 

petitions around. And I suggest the Minister of Health owes the 

people of Saskatchewan an apology for suggesting that those 

names were obtained under false pretences because that was 

done in good faith by the citizens of Saskatchewan in the form 

prescribed by this Assembly for petitions. Yet the Minister of 

Health says, false pretences. 

 

Well that, Mr. Speaker, shows a kind of arrogance which is not 

honoured in Saskatchewan, a kind of arrogance which people 

will not accept for any extended period of time. And the 

Minister of Health and his Premier may go around for a while 

saying that this is obtained under false pretences, but sooner or 

later they’ll pay for that arrogance. 

 

I think I recall once, Mr. Speaker, someone saying that if you 

have a government made up of angels, and if it has a huge 

majority, sooner or later they’re going to get arrogant. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this government is losing on that proposition, because 

to begin with they’re certainly not a government of angels, and 

they’re certainly arrogant when they say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, your signing of this petition, honestly and 

forthright in a form prescribed by this Assembly, is false 

pretence. The Minister of Health owes an apology. 

 

So what happened? The Minister of Health brought in his 

system. His system didn’t reduce the price of drugs. They still 

pay $125 deductible, or $75 if they’re a senior. They still pay 

the money up front, and they still pay the new 20 per cent 

Progressive Conservative deterrent fee. They still pay that — 

the largest deterrent fee ever introduced in this province by 

anyone. They still pay that. 

 

So the Progressive Conservative government’s response to this 

very critical situation, where people are put in difficult financial 

circumstances, has not lowered the price. It just says, we’ll 

draw it out longer and make the pain a little longer for you. So 

it really hasn’t solved the problem. All it’s done is put off to 

another day the problem for the voters of Saskatchewan. 

 

I received a lot of letters on this matter, Mr. Speaker, and I have 

one here from my own constituency. I don’t know this person, 

never met this person, and if the Minister of Health — well I 

guess it’s not necessary to give the Minister of Health a copy 

because he’s already got a copy. I got the copy, he got the 

original. And it’s from a person in my constituency, and she 

says: 

 

I am writing in response to the Saskatchewan 

government’s decision to change the Saskatchewan drug 

plan. My husband and I returned to Saskatchewan last fall 

after completing our graduate work at the University of 

British Columbia. Our decision to return to our home 

province was due in part to our feeling that we owed 

something to the people of Saskatchewan, and in part 

because the excellent umbrella of social programs existing 

in Saskatchewan. 

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3202 

 

The person states that she suffers from bronchial asthma and 

requires substantial drugs to keep that condition in check. These 

drugs cost approximately $90 a month at the current prices, or 

$1,080 annually. These figures do not include dispensing fees 

— uses the drugs every day. These drugs are necessary. 

 

The cost of these drugs will be a great hardship for us as 

my husband and I are currently paying off debts incurred 

while we were graduate students, including two 

Saskatchewan student loans, (and she has a side comment 

here) unlike some who have defaulted on these loans. 

 

I feel that I may be forced to cut down on the amount of 

drugs taken in order to make them last longer. The result, 

as any knowledgeable medical doctor can tell you, would 

be more frequent attacks, chronic ill health, and my 

asthma would no longer be under control, and there is a 

chance of increased hospitalization. 

 

And I think the Minister of Health should understand the 

complications that arise when the people start making the 

medical decisions that are made by the doctor. And instead of 

calling them medical decisions, they call them economic 

decisions because they cannot afford these drugs, so they cut 

back on the amount of the drugs they take. The consequence of 

this, as the Minister of Health will be aware, is when you are 

unable to prevent the advance of the disease or the condition, 

eventually that person will be occupying hospital beds, and this 

person lives in Saskatoon. 

 

And that brings me, of course, to the question of critical 

situation with regard to hospital beds in Saskatoon. The most 

ever people waiting on waiting lists to get into hospitals in 

Saskatoon — over 11,000 people, Mr. Speaker. Can you believe 

that? Over 11,000 people waiting to get into hospitals in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Never before in the history of Saskatchewan — or at least in my 

experience in Saskatchewan, and I would think it would be in 

the history of Saskatchewan — have we had that many people 

waiting to get into hospital in Saskatoon. 

 

And on an almost weekly basis the Minister of Health brushes 

that off; he has excuses. And he says that he has plans which 

he’s putting into effect, but the hospital waiting lists are still up 

there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And some of these people that are waiting to get into hospital, 

their condition may be worsened by view of the fact that they 

start making medical decisions when they should leave the 

medical decisions up to the doctor. And the reason they’re 

making these decisions is because the Minister of Health now 

charges them 125 deductible. He says they must pay it up front, 

and he imposes a new Progressive Conservative deterrent fee on 

the prescription drug plan in Saskatchewan. 

 

I have another letter from a lady that I do know in Saskatoon 

Westmount constituency, and she suggested her drug, which 

previously she would have paid about . . . well the prescription 

fee for will probably be somewhere  

between 15 and $75. This was back in June. And she was 

unsure as to the consequences of the government’s plan, but this 

is just before the government hastily put its July 1 plan into 

effect. 

 

July 1 — what an embarrassment for a government that says 

that they’re going to make Saskatchewan number one in health 

care. On the anniversary, on the anniversary of medicare, they 

bring in their prescription drug plan. What a contrast, and the 

people of Saskatchewan know it. That’s why thousands and 

thousands and thousands of them have signed this petition that I 

referred to earlier. And I’ll tell the Minister of Health there’ll be 

more. 

 

Now I have another letter here, and I’m sure that the Premier 

need not be reminded of this, and the Minister of Health, 

because he got a copy as well. And even the MLA got a copy, 

and this is the sole Conservative MLA for Saskatoon got a copy 

of this one. And it’s interesting that this person lives in his 

constituency, Saskatoon Mayfair, and the irony of it is the 

person lives on Broadbent Avenue. 

 

But this person’s concerned about how this government is 

ramming the prescription drug plan down peoples’ throat. These 

bunch of witch-doctors, these bunch of witch-doctors are telling 

the people to doctor themselves. And they are, because they 

have to make economic decisions. They can’t afford this new 

20 per cent Progressive Conservative deterrent fee on 

prescription drugs. 

 

Well this person writes, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, and it’s 

the member from Mayfair. He’ll soon be the sole PC member in 

Saskatoon. Now there’s a question whether he is. There’s a 

vacancy there, which incidentally this government is not filling 

because they know they’ll lose it. Just on this issue alone, Mr. 

Speaker, just on the issue of prescription drugs alone, they’re 

going to lose Eastview, to say nothing of several other issues. 

The blatant misrepresentation in budgeting in this province of 

Saskatchewan will cause them to lose that by-election. And this 

issue alone will cause them to lose Eastview by-election. 

 

And this person here will probably be out to get the Minister of 

Science and Technology in the next election because she’s 

pretty concerned. She says: 

 

Dear Premier: I am tired of being complacent. I am tired 

of feeling defeated and cynical. I am tired of being told 

that I have lived beyond my means. But more than 

anything, I’m tired of watching the foundation of 

Saskatchewan human services being taken apart piece by 

piece. I feel pushed too far. And in time to come, the 

Government of Saskatchewan will realize Saskatchewan 

has been pushed too far. My only fear is for the extent of 

destruction that has and can occur in the meantime. 

 

And this was one day, one day before the government brought 

in its prescription drug plan, its new prescription drug plan, 

which says you’ve got to pay a deductible, you’ve got to  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3203 

 

pay your money up front, and you’ve got to pay that deterrent 

fee. 

 

And this person is, you know, strikes me as must be an 

intelligent person. They write an intelligent letter. And this 

person is a health care professional — states in the letter. Don’t 

take my word for it, get the Premier’s letter, or get the Minister 

of Health’s letter and have a look at it. It’s there. And they go 

on to talk about a number of things in the health care field: 

 

The revised dental plan and the deductible for 

prescriptions will prove to be a real hardship for a low 

income families. 

 

And that’s true, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It would cost you a lot less to ensure prescriptions are 

filled than to treat the patient in hospital. 

 

Now this person, who’s a health care professional, has come to 

the same conclusion as the person in the first letter who’s trying 

to tell the Minister of Health, who will not listen, that — just 

like this person said here — that: 

 

It will cost you a lot less to ensure prescriptions are filled 

than to treat the patient in hospital. 

 

Well that’s wishful thinking because in Saskatoon you don’t get 

into the hospital unless the ambulance wheels you in — almost. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are other letters. I have a letter here 

from a constituent who’s a senior citizen. This person has 

Parkinson’s disease and a heart condition — elderly person. 

They received their medication for 30 days — this is in August 

— 30 days and it cost $339.05. And this particular person said, 

under the previous prescription drug plan, which was brought in 

by a New Democratic Party, that would have cost $11.00 — 

now costs $339.05. 

 

She waited over 30 days. When I was talking to her, she 

had waited over 30 days. I called her back after I received 

the letter. She’d waited over 30 days and had not got her 

refund on the rebate from the provincial government. This 

just shows you how efficient this plan was operating. 

 

The government had not planned. They thought there 

would be no hardship to people. That shows you what 

elevated thinking does to people. They’ve been up, 

elevated in the ivory tower so long they can’t understand 

that there are people down there that are on very little 

income. 

 

(1500) 

 

At the beginning of the debate on this issue about prescription 

drug, every time we’d mention that, the Minister of Health 

would jump to his feet and he’d say, oh, but those people are 

covered under social welfare. Well not everybody in 

Saskatchewan is on social welfare yet. Mind you, there’s double 

the amount on social welfare now that there was under the 

previous administration, and they’re covered. I’m not 

complaining about them; they’re covered. I’m not getting letters 

from them. 

I’m getting letters from people that are senior citizens on 

limited income, not on welfare. I’m getting letters from health 

professionals. I’m getting letters from Mayfair constituency and 

other places in Saskatchewan, and they’re all telling me there’s 

problems here. 

 

And before this lady got the rebate on her $339.05 bill, which 

was 31 days later when I talked to her, she had received her 

next bill from the druggist for $262.27. And the Minister of 

Health doesn’t have a plan — doesn’t have a plan to handle 

these hardship cases. 

 

When he does come out with a plan, doesn’t lower the price of 

drugs, Mr. Speaker, just puts off the day of reckoning to these 

people who are under additional stress. And I read between the 

lines in these letters and people I talk to — I read between the 

lines. They’re under additional stress and worry because of the 

situation they’ve been put into. They’re not abusing the 

prescription drug plan. I don’t believe their health professionals 

are abusing the prescription drug plan; I believe the 

Government of Saskatchewan is abusing the prescription drug 

plan, and the sooner they realize that the better. I don’t know 

whether they will be able to realize it. 

 

I received some other concerns about this, another letter sent to 

the Minister of Health, and it was from a union. And I know 

that the Minister of Health will immediately discount this. He 

will immediately discount this letter, but I want to read this 

letter into the record because I’m sure the Minister of Health’s 

copy is already in the garbage. But this union was good enough 

to send it to all Saskatchewan MLAs, and it says: 

 

Dear Mr. Minister: I am writing on behalf of the members 

of Local 3 of the Communication and Electrical Workers 

of Canada. We strongly urge your government to 

reconsider the changes to the prescription drug plan. Many 

of our members have young families and I’m sure that will 

find the reality of paying for prescription drugs a definite 

hardship. Changes in the plan will also affect a number of 

CEWC employees who are presently receiving pensions. 

Some of these people are on fixed income and may have to 

do without prescription drugs. 

 

Saskatchewan led the way in health care, and your 

government is dismantling health care system that has had 

world-wide recognition. Again, we urge your government 

to restore the prescription drug plan and return to a 

commitment to the best health care for all Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

And it’s signed by the president of the local. I don’t suppose the 

Minister of Health kept that one. He must have thrown a lot 

away in order to get the burden of worry off of his mind, 

because he’s paying no attention. The Minister of Health is 

paying no attention to this issue. He’s floundering around. He 

brings in a plan. He has nothing to deal with the hardships. He’s 

late bringing in the legislation. But he’s certain there with his 

hand out to get the money from the people of Saskatchewan. 

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3204 

 

Here we have the news item about another petition that was 

presented, and it was The Voice of the Handicapped. And you 

recall, Mr. Speaker, they were in the legislative Chamber one 

day and presented a petition with 2,800 names, and this is the 

handicapped people of Saskatchewan. And my heart goes out to 

these handicapped people who have burdens that we know 

nothing about here — burdens that we know nothing about. 

Many of them, because of their handicap, are on limited or very 

low income. They are hit right between the eyes by the Minister 

of Health. 

 

I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, whether you’ve ever been in a 

slaughterhouse. I have visited a slaughterhouse, and I’ve seen 

them slaughtering cattle, and that’s exactly what the Minister of 

Health is doing to the handicapped people of this province. He’s 

pole-axing them right between the eyes. That’s what the 

Minister of Health in this province, and his Premier who 

supports him fully, is doing to the handicapped people of this 

province. And they should be ashamed — they should be 

ashamed of themselves. 

 

Many handicapped people signed this petition. The Minister of 

Health stands in this Chamber and says: got the petition under 

false pretences. And I read the petition. It’s on the record. But 

the Minister of Health is ignoring the handicapped people of 

Saskatchewan. He’s pinched down on them, and he’s kicking 

them, and now he’s hitting them right between the eyes. 

 

Well I don’t know what will make the PC Government of 

Saskatchewan stand up and pay attention to what’s going on, 

but I have something here that may make them sit up and take 

notice. It’s a letter to the editor from somebody in Regina, and 

it’s July 3, a couple of days after this government brought in 

their new prescription drug plan: $125 deductible; advance 

payments — it has to be paid in advance; and the new 20 per 

cent Progressive Conservative deterrent fee — the first ever in 

the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

July 3 this person says — and it’s in the Leader-Post, and if the 

Minister of Finance who’s studiously studying his books there 

wants to know who this is from, I’ll send a copy over to him, 

and I’m sure he’ll want to check this person out. 

 

It is true that we in Saskatchewan have become so 

uncaring that we let the people we elect change the whole 

direction of Saskatchewan without expressing our 

displeasure at the way they choose to do this? 

 

And she goes on: 

 

It does not matter whether people voted NDP, Liberal, or 

Conservative (as I did). 

 

This lady says “or Conservative (as I did).” 

 

Everyone has to let all MLAs know their feelings 

 

And this person goes on: 

 

It is very hard for me to write this against the people I 

worked so hard to elect. 

 

Here is a person who was a Conservative — I take their word 

for it — writing, and they’re upset with this government. 

They’re upset because this government has the arrogance to 

stand in this Chamber, the Premier, the Minister of Health, and 

other members on the front bench, time after time in trying to 

defend themselves on the issue of prescription drugs and the 

very amendments they’re bringing in. They try to defend 

themselves, they have no plan except to get more money for the 

Government of Saskatchewan to tax the people more in every 

way. They have no sensitivity. They have no sensitivity to the 

needs of handicapped people; they’re ignoring them. And 

they’ve done it not only in this way but other ways. 

 

They embarrass themselves, if they can be embarrassed, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They embarrass themselves by suggesting that 

these petitions were obtained under false pretences which are 

opposed to their changes in the prescription drug plan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, and I might remind the member from 

Mayfair who is among the diminishing Conservative members 

from Saskatoon and he’ll be the only one there, the only one 

there in Saskatoon after the next provincial election or perhaps 

when the by-election is called. And I suggest the government 

call a by-election on this issue. This would be a good issue to 

test your plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I would encourage them to do that. And I 

promise them I won’t even go into Mayfair except to go home 

to bed, and I won’t campaign against them. I’ll just let the 

forces of nature take over in that by-election, and there’ll be a 

tide sweep the Conservative candidate out of Eastview like 

you’ve never seen before. And you’ll get people from 

Lakeridge, and you’ll get people from Lakeview and all those 

areas over there, and they’ll be hammering the government over 

the head on this issue. 

 

I ask the Premier, I plead with the Premier, on behalf of the 

handicapped people of Saskatchewan, on behalf of the people 

on low and fixed incomes: please call a by-election in 

Saskatoon Eastview and make it on this issue. This is one of 

your key, central issues. The Premier has said it’s the number 

one issue with him. The Minister of Health says it’s the number 

one issue with him. I plead with you: call that by-election in 

Saskatoon Eastview, and if you win that by-election, we’ll keep 

quiet about this issue — we’ll keep quiet about this issue. 

 

But to the member from Mayfair whose constituent, who lives 

on Broadbent Avenue, sends in a letter telling the government, 

the Minister of Health, that they don’t like the way he’s 

handling the health care plans in Saskatchewan — it’s time for 

serious reflection by the only remaining Conservative in 

Saskatoon, the member for Mayfair, to save his own skin. Just 

to save his own skin in the next election, I would suggest that 

you disavow yourself from the Premier and his policy on health 

care. Stand up and do it loudly and, Mr. Minister, I have some 

respect for you personally, you can do that in this particular 

debate. Because the soon I sit down, the sooner you’re going to 

be able to vote on this issue. 

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3205 

 

And I cannot support this Bill, and I want to hear from the 

member for Mayfair, and I want to hear him condemn — 

condemn the Conservative Tory plan for deterrent fees on 

health care, for deductibles on health care, for paying up front. 

And I want him to side with me on this issue, with the 

handicapped people of Saskatchewan who are being hurt by this 

government’s actions in this area, and the low income people in 

Saskatchewan who are not on welfare but are on lower fixed 

income who are being hurt by this plan. And I sit down in the 

hope that the member from Mayfair will rise and support this 

Bill. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s not my turn. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — And I . . . oh, don’t worry. The member 

from Mayfair, he says it’s not his turn. Well your turn’s 

coming, Mr. Member, and I think it’s just a question of whether 

you want it in the belly or the back. You’re going to get it, and I 

would suggest you take it facing the music. Face it like a man. 

And you’re going to get an opportunity on this Bill. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I cannot support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had delayed rising in this 

House because I thought from the comments made from the 

member from Mayfair that he was very anxious to get into this 

debate and to give the arguments for his government as to why 

they are eroding one of the corner-stones of medicare. 

 

I also would like to hear from the member from Regina 

Wascana who is talking not from his own seat but from 

someone else’s seat, but who very seldom gets into the debates 

that take place in this House. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I hear the Minister of Health speaking from another 

chair over there, and I would ask the Minister of Health to 

reflect and look at the words that he used yesterday in estimates 

and contemplate the accuracy of those words because they’ll 

come back to haunt him, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill cannot be discussed or debated in 

isolation of the total health care services that we have here in 

this province. Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I want to 

do this afternoon is to go back a little bit in the history of this 

province and the history of Canada. And I think it is not that far 

back that some of the members opposite don’t remember, or 

should remember, at least. 

 

When Saskatchewan, and later on Canada, made the decision 

that we wanted one of the most comprehensive health care 

programs in all of the world, we said it couldn’t just be 

hospitalization, and not just visits to your doctor, but it was 

agreed upon that a health care system would be based on four 

principles, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those four principles, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, are: accessibility, comprehensibility, 

universality and  

publicly funded. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to speak to these because a 

health care program without a drug program or a severely 

restricted drug program impedes us from implementing that 

comprehensive health care program that we all had hoped we 

would have by now. 

 

I will be the first to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, be the first to admit 

that when we left the government in 1982 we still had a long 

ways to go in order to get a health care system that we were all 

looking after or seeking for. But when the people of this 

province heard the present Premier of the province say, we will 

build for you the number one health care system in all of this 

country, they, Mr. Deputy Speaker, took him at his word. They 

felt that he was totally committed to a comprehensive health 

care system, but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess when one looks 

at the record of the last six or seven years, one has to come to 

the conclusion that that was only a statement made to get him 

and his party elected. Because they certainly have not been 

committed to a comprehensive health care system, a 

comprehensive health care system, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which 

includes a fundamental dental care program which is accessible 

to all the people. 

 

We had, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a good start on a dental care 

program that was second to none in all of Canada, and I think 

I’m not wrong in saying second to none in all of the world. I 

don’t think you would have found a better dental care program 

than what we had here in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we were working towards a very good . . . we had a 

good . . . we were working towards an excellent drug care 

program in this province. 

 

I want to say to the members opposite, just remember what 

happened to the party that brought in deterrent fees and 

utilization fees in this province. They, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 

. . . as the former member Davey Steuart said of Prince Albert, 

we are an extinct species, and we should be protected. 

 

I’ll say to the members opposite, and I’ll say to the member 

from Weyburn, that if they continue on the path that they are 

going in eroding the health care system in this province, they 

will need protection because they are going to be the extinct 

species of this province in a very short time. 

 

And I’ll tell you . . . I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

member from Weyburn hasn’t learned. It took them almost 50 

years, it took them almost 50 years to get back into power again 

and I’ll tell you once they . . . once the people get through with 

them, once the people get through with them in the next 

election, it’ll take at least another 50 years before they will ever 

get power again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I have indicated . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Allow the member to 

make his comments. 

 

An Hon. Member: — But he’s not making sense. 

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3206 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the only reason that the 

member from Weyburn can say that I don’t make sense is 

because he doesn’t have a commitment to a comprehensive 

health care program like I do and the members on this side 

have. Therefore when you speak about the principles, the 

principles of medicare, of accessibility, comprehensibility, 

publicly funded and universal, yes that doesn’t make sense to 

those people because they will deny such a program to the less 

fortunate of this province. 

 

They are concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about protecting 

those who financially can well afford to pay for all the extra 

costs that they have implemented, particularly in this drug 

program. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the colleagues on this side of the 

House, my colleagues on this side of the House, have already 

indicated that our health care programs in this province are 

being eroded. 

 

Now a week goes by, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where I don’t get 

phone calls, or I don’t get a letter in my constituency office, or 

letters in my constituency office, of people complaining that 

they simply have to go without the drugs that they are being 

prescribed to them by their doctor. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the Minister of Health says, oh, but everybody’s covered. Pretty 

well everybody’s covered. 

 

I think our leader made the point. Why do you ask people to go 

begging to the government for their health care programs and 

their health care costs when that is not necessary? What they 

have done here, under this particular Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is said to the unfortunate, if you are on low income and you 

don’t qualify for public assistance, then you must go begging to 

his committee to see whether or not you could qualify in order 

to get the drugs that their doctor is prescribing for them. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is unacceptable in this day and ago, and it 

shows the insensitivity of this government, the callousness of 

this government to the unfortunate people of this province. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that is going to come back to haunt those 

people on the other side. You can only push people around and 

ignore people, and sever the fortunate people and ignore the 

unfortunate, for only so long. And people will come to their 

senses and say, hey, lookit. We were fooled once. We were 

fooled twice. But never, again, never again. 

 

And I think in the last election it was . . . if the democratic 

process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, had worked the way it usually 

works, those people would not be on that side of the House. 

They would not be on that side of the House. They would be 

sitting here, and we wouldn’t have to be debating today a drug 

program which takes such terrible tolls on those people who can 

ill afford, either financially or otherwise, to pay for those drugs. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say that in the city of Saskatoon 

— and I’m very proud of my city of Saskatoon — but we have 

a very serious situation, and again it pertains to the health care 

system. It’s one of the fundamental corner-stones of the health 

care system, that  

our people have accessibility to our hospitals. 

 

And it’s not that the government, as the government says, well 

we’re going to have restraint because the economy is down, 

potash prices are down, wheat prices are down. 

 

And as the Minister of Health said last night — so erroneously 

again, so erroneously again — when you people were the 

government, oil was the highest, was the highest it ever has 

been. How? And I will say to the Minister of Health, do you 

know what the average price of a barrel of oil was from 1971 to 

1981 — $10.49 a barrel. What was it from 1982 to 1985? Over 

$27 a barrel. Two and a half times what it was from ’71 to ’81. 

 

And yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what happened when these 

people came into power, these mismanagers, these callous, 

insensitive people? They ran up a huge deficit. But, Mr. 

Speaker, they spent the money. They spent the money, and who 

did they spend it on? Well they spent it on people like 

Pocklington, their friends. But they didn’t have money for 

health care. Now they don’t have money for a drug program, 

but they’ve got the money for the Hills at $200,000. But no, 

they don’t have the money for the drug plan. They’ve got 

money for Schoenhals, and I’m told over $100,000 a year. But 

the poor people, the ones who are making less than $15,000 a 

year — what does the Minister of Health say to them? Tough 

luck. Come begging to my committee and we may exempt you. 

We may exempt you. 

 

And if the Minister of Health says that there are only a couple 

dozen people who are being injured by this Act, then I say to 

the Minister of Health he is so out of touch with the reality that 

exists out there that it’s a pity that he doesn’t get out of his 

ivory tower every once in a while and recognize that not 

everybody lives on the kind of salary that he gets. And that it’s 

tough out there for a lot of people — a lot of people. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why then did this government bring 

in this Bill. Was it that the civil service, the Department of 

Health recommended it? Absolutely not. The Department of 

Health did not recommend that. And if the Minister of Health is 

honest with the people of Saskatchewan, he will admit that. 

Where did it come from? Where did this suggestion come 

from? It came, Mr. Speaker, from the Executive Council. That’s 

where it came from, and they have to accept full responsibility 

for it. I don’t think they should go back to the Department of 

Health, or those people who used to be in the Department of 

Health and now are working well for other governments and 

have top-notch jobs in other governments, they can’t lay the 

blame on them. They’ve got to lay the blame solely on 

themselves. They are not committed to a total comprehensive 

health care program. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, chip by chip, brick by brick, if 

these people remain the government, they are gong to 

undermine, they’re going to erode that comprehensive health 

care program that our pioneers and the people who came before 

us worked so hard to build. They sought after and worked after 

and thought, some day, some day we’re going to have a total 

comprehensive health care program that will take care of all of 

our people. You don’t have to go begging to the rich. You don’t 

have to go  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3207 

 

begging to a panel, a review panel that the Minister of Health 

sets up, in order to get the drugs that your doctor prescribes for 

you. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you talk about health in this 

province, you talk about a sacred thing. These people, the 

people of Saskatchewan, have been known the world over as 

the initiators, the originators of hospitalization and medicare. 

And they don’t take very lightly a government that touches that 

program. 

 

And particularly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they don’t take very 

lightly to it when, on the campaign trail, time and time and time 

again the members opposite and the present Minister of Finance 

indicated and promised, we will take off those deterrent fees on 

the drug plan. What did they do? What did they mean by the 

deterrent fees? Well the $3.95 prescription fee that they had to 

pay. So what did they do? They now say to a number of people, 

we’re not going to even allow you, because financially you 

can’t afford it, we’re not even going to allow you to be able to 

have accessibility to those drugs that your doctor prescribes to 

you. 

 

I say to the Minister of Health, that is the height of callousness 

and insensitivity that we can find anywhere in this province. 

And I say to the Minister of Health, you’re going to pay the 

price, and your government is going to pay the price for that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could, and I will, go on at some length 

on this particular Bill because I think it is a very, very important 

Bill. My members, my colleagues on this side of the House, 

have already alluded to many examples of people who are 

suffering from the action that was taken by this government on 

July 1. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only individuals, but the 

media, the news media and the Star-Phoenix were concerned. I 

see a headline here: new drug plan opposes dangers. Dangers 

for whom? they weren’t talking about dangers to the 

government of losing the next election. That may well happen. 

But they were talking about the people out in Saskatchewan, 

those people who are on very low incomes who can’t qualify 

for social assistance and who simply can’t afford to buy those 

drugs that are prescribed to them by their doctor. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, last Monday night, last Monday night 

before I left for Regina to attend the session on Tuesday, I got a 

phone call at my constituency office, and the lady said to me — 

and I will not use her name — but she said to me, Mr. Rolfes, I 

was at the pharmacy today and I had to go without my drugs. 

And I said, why? Well she said, the cost was 50 bucks; I just 

don’t have that kind of money; I just don’t have that kind of 

money. And I say to the Minister of Health, if he thinks that that 

individual should come before his panel and beg for eligibility, 

she probably won’t do it. She’s a proud individual. She doesn’t 

like begging. But it’s not her; it’s not her choice, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that she can’t afford it. It’s not her choice that she’s in 

the low income. And why should this government determine as 

to who should be beggars and who shouldn’t. 

In this day and age, Mr. Speaker, that is simply unacceptable. 

And what nonsense do we have when you see a headline, and I 

can’t read the whole headline, Mr. Speaker, because it mentions 

the name of the MLA, so I will simply read the title and 

substitute his name, “(MLA from Torch River . . . from 

Thunder Creek, I meant. The MLA from Thunder Creek) 

foresees lower drug prices.” One of the things that he says is 

this: 

 

(The MLA) said the changes will actually spur druggists to 

cut, not increase, drug prices because now that they have 

to pay more of the costs for drugs, consumers will be 

closely watching drug prices. 

 

What the member is saying here is that druggists and 

pharmacists have been gouging the people of this province, and 

that there isn’t competition out there. That is absolute nonsense. 

That is absolute nonsense, and the drug prices are competitive. 

The pharmacists out there know that, and to say that because 

what the government has done will actually be a benefit to the 

people out in Saskatchewan is the most ludicrous argument that 

I’ve heard in trying to support this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, going on, how this Bill and how the action of the 

government has affected certain people — another headline in 

the Star-Phoenix, August 5, “Ailing man runs out of 

prescription drugs.” Subtitle, “His doctor is working to have 

him admitted to hospital.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, how . . . That’s the irony of this whole thing. How 

do these people figure they’re going to save any money if this 

guy should go into a hospital? And as my member from 

Westmount indicated, when in Saskatoon you just don’t have a 

choice. You don’t get in unless you’re dragged in by an 

ambulance — you just don’t get in. But in, let’s say, in any 

other centre, maybe, how do they think that they’re going to 

save money if people out there can’t afford the drugs that they 

need that are prescribed to them by their physician and end up 

in the hospital at 2, 3, $400 a day? How is that going to save the 

government and the people of Saskatchewan any money? It’s 

not going to save you any money. That’s just a false economic 

decision that was made by the government opposite, and it 

doesn’t make sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another headline, “People hurt by changes to drug 

plan now given a break.” First the government is going to hurt 

them, and then the government says, well now we’re going to 

set up this panel for you so you can come begging to the 

government for eligibility. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I didn’t get one of the forms that you have 

to fill out. I’m going to ask the Minister of Health to provide me 

with one, but I am told that the form that you have to fill out is 

very technical. And that the individual . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I’m glad that the Minister of Health . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the Minister of 

Health intervened because I was talking to his executive 

assistance this afternoon and she told me that. If she is wrong, 

you better hire some staff that know what they are  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3208 

 

doing. I talked to . . . I won’t mention the name. I will give it to 

you in private, of your executive assistant. I don’t blame her 

because I think she was correct. 

 

She said, and my point, Mr. Speaker, was this. My point was 

this. Again, again, Mr. Speaker, the government faults 

economy. If the forms are very technical, who has to fill them 

out? And his executive assistant told me usually the doctor has 

to fill them out. The doctor has to fill them out. I wasn’t going 

to mention this, Mr. Minister, but since you brought it up, the 

doctor has to fill them out and the pharmacist has to fill part of 

it out, and then it goes before the panel. 

 

And I say to the member opposite, every time an individual has 

to go to a doctor to get the form filled out you pay that doctor 

through MCIC (Medical Care Insurance Commission) for doing 

that. That is not saving any money. For the price that you pay 

the doctor to fill out the form the individual could have had the 

drug supplied to her. Again I’m saying to the minister opposite 

that I think you should, before you implement some of these 

things, you should have a look at the effects that these decisions 

make — the hardships under drug plan’s eyed — eyed by the 

minister in setting up his plan. 

 

I want to, Mr. Speaker, I think the problem we have here is 

headlines like this should never ever appear in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Minister of Health — I can’t read the name — 

Minister of Health, “. . . denies man died due to drug plan”. 

Just, Mr. Speaker, the title itself, just the title itself I think is an 

insult to this province, and an insult to the Health department, 

and an insult to the people of this province. 

 

And I think the member from Riversdale said it very well in this 

House when he asked the question of the Minister of Health, 

and the Premier, when he said . . . when the Minister of Health 

disputed that any people at that . . . there aren’t thousands of 

people who are being affected. And the minister . . . the 

member from Riversdale said, “I don’t care if it’s 25 or one, it’s 

one or 25 too many. As if one life was less important than a 

thousand,” said the member from Riversdale. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that is the fundamental difference between 

that side and our side. Life to us is precious whether its one or 

25 or 100. But as long as members opposite — doesn’t affect 

one of their cronies, one of their buddies, one of their 

supporters, then it’s immaterial. The less fortunate don’t 

support us anyway so what do we care whether they suffer. And 

this particular drug plan that they are putting in has hurt the less 

fortunate and the poor people the most. 

 

Now here’s another one, “Premier questions wisdom of free 

drugs”. Mr. Speaker, I hope you don’t rule me out of order, but 

I’ll tell you when I saw his behaviour today in question period, I 

think he must have access to free drugs because he was so 

irrational, so emotional that I could . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

I’d like to ask the hon. member to continue but to get back on 

the topic which he was doing . . . 

Mr. Rolfes: — I was, Mr. Speaker, I was talking about drugs 

and as it applies to everybody else. I’m simply saying that 

accessibility, Mr. Speaker, is very important. Some people are 

more accessible, have more accessibility to drugs than others 

obviously, by their behaviour, and as my colleague says, also 

certainly more susceptible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I want to say is simply this. Accessibility to 

drugs, prescribed drugs particularly, must not be impeded. This 

Bill will do that. It is an economic Bill. It works against the 

poor because financially they can’t afford it and members on 

this side simply can’t support that kind of action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our critic of Health when she spoke in second 

reading, outlined I think very aptly, very succinctly, and very 

capably why we are opposed to this Bill . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, you certain have. The minister from 

Weyburn asked me if he has timed the reading. I hope he has a 

book with lots of pictures in it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And both of his crayons sharpened. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — And as my colleague said, and both of his 

crayons sharpened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill affects so many people in this 

province that I hope the government, before we come to the end 

of second reading, comes to its senses and withdraws the Bill 

— simply withdraws the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from Mayfair has 

indicated, thousands and thousands of people have signed the 

petition against these Bills: the dental policy, the drug program, 

and the drug Bill. And the people are simply saying, look, Mr. 

Premier; look, Executive Council; come to your senses; be 

sensitive to the needs of the people out there; recognize that 

you’re hurting a lot of individuals; withdraw those Bills; change 

your policy; and be the caring and sensitive government that 

we’ve expected of governments here in this province. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, if they do that, they may have a 

chance, they may have a chance to heal some of the wounds 

that are out there and undo some of the hurt that they’ve caused 

by their policies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can only read another headline, “Prescription 

drug policy pinches family’s budget.” And here is a family, Mr. 

Speaker, that is making less than $15,000 a year. They have a 

child that suffers from asthma and is allergic, and they have a 

drug bill of $137 a month. And the Minister of Health says, 

well it’s tough, you know, but under our guide-lines you don’t 

qualify — 15,000. 

 

A cabinet minister over there makes over four times that 

amount, over four times that amount. George Hill makes over 

15 times that amount. Is it, Mr. Speaker, so inconceivable that 

these people don’t recognize or don’t understand why people 

out there are suffering? I suppose if you’re in the upper bracket 

of income, you know,  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3209 

 

paying a few extra dollars will make little difference. 

 

Here’s another one, “Family struggles to pay the $1,700 of 

child drugs.” Another, “Can’t afford drugs, says ailing man.” A 

36-year-old man suffering from asthma and severe depression 

saying he’s unable to manage up front monthly drug bills of 

$112 under the revised prescription drug plan. 

 

An unemployed Saskatoon man has decided to stop 

buying drugs he needs to combat asthma and severe 

depression. Now he’s hoping (this was the beginning of 

October) that one appeal on Friday to the prescription drug 

review panel and a second next Wednesday to a 

Department of Social Services appeal board will give him 

the breathing room he needs to change his mind. But he 

said in an interview, it’s unfair and he shouldn’t be put in 

this position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s an embarrassing situation for a lot of these 

people. We have made beggars of them, and we’ve said that 

they don’t deserve the same kind of health care that others in 

this province enjoy. 

 

I thought we had passed those days. I thought when Emmett 

Hall in 1962 brought in his comprehensive medicare program to 

the federal government that we were by those days. I thought 

when he reviewed it again in 1981, I thought Emmett Hall had 

convinced all the governments that what we need is a 

comprehensive health care program, a corner-stone of which is 

a good drug program. I thought we all had supported the 

principles of medicare, but obviously we haven’t. 

 

Obviously this government makes promises that it believes in a 

health care program, but when it comes to power, it chips away 

brick by brick on the good health care program we had 

established. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill cuts at the very heart of what so many 

people have worked for for so many years in this province. I 

will not disappoint people like Tommy Douglas. I will not 

disappoint people like Woodrow Lloyd. I will not disappoint 

people like Allan Blakeney. I won’t disappoint people like 

Emmett Hall. No, I won’t disappoint them. I won’t vote for this 

Bill. I think that this Bill is the beginning of the chipping away 

of a comprehensive health care program that so many people 

have worked for. 

 

(1545) 

 

I say, shame on those people opposite. I say, you deserve 

everything you get the next time around. And I tell the members 

opposite, I don’t think there will be very many of you around. I 

know the Deputy Premier won’t be because he’ll be in his 

heaventh appointment. But I’ll tell you, for the rest of you, you 

won’t be around because the people of this province simply 

aren’t going to put up with that nonsense and they’re not going 

to put up with unbroken promises. Mr. Speaker, I can’t support 

this Bill and I won’t support it. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I look at 

the Bill, I understand that the people of Saskatchewan who, 

prior to July 1 when purchasing required prescription drugs, 

prior to July 1 would be paying a minor dispensing fee in order 

to receive those drugs, that those same people will now be 

paying up to $125 if they are below the age of 65; and they will 

be paying up to $75 if they are above the age of 65 for their 

prescription drugs. And that once they have paid those amounts, 

they can then make application to the government and they will 

have 80 per cent of all additional costs reimbursed to them by 

the government. So in other words, they will pay $125 for their 

prescription drugs this year, plus an additional 20 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of speakers on this side 

who have given reasons for opposing the Bill. Some have done 

so, or all have done so very eloquently, and I want to give my 

reasons for opposing this Bill. And I don’t want to reiterate, 

necessarily, what other speakers have said. I don’t want to 

cover the same ground that they have covered. But it’s perhaps 

necessary that this may come to be the case. 

 

The reason that I feel strongly about participating in this debate 

and making my comments known is because so many of my 

constituents have raised concerns to me about this plan, about 

the kind of effect it will have on them. Many of these 

constituents are people with health problems; people who need 

the prescription drugs which are prescribed for them by 

qualified medical practitioners in this province. People need 

these prescription drugs to treat various illnesses. And they 

have the faith in their doctor that in fact they need these drugs 

and that these drugs are necessary for their health. It’s for those 

reasons, because so many of my constituents feel strongly about 

it, that I rise to speak at this time. 

 

I want to say, like my colleagues before me, that I too oppose 

this Bill very strongly; that the whole New Democratic Party 

caucus opposes the Bill. And the reason that we oppose the Bill 

is a very fundamental one of philosophy. We believe that health 

care is a right. We believe that health care, the whole health 

care system, should be universally accessible to all without 

qualification. We believe that health care is a basic necessity. 

We believe that health care should not come down to a decision 

on the part of some people as to whether or not they have the 

money to be able to afford the health care that they need. 

 

And let’s make it clear in this case that the health care 

component, that is to say prescription drugs are required. By 

definition prescription drugs are prescribed by doctors, 

prescribed because people have certain illnesses; they feel that 

certain drugs will help treat those illnesses. 

 

But we believe that health care is a right that should not be 

compromised by charges or fees. We do not believe in user 

fees. We do not believe in deterrent fees. We believe that 

people’s access to the health care system should be free and 

unrestricted. 

 

And we believe that Saskatchewan people, and certainly the 

many constituents that I have talked to also share this  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3210 

 

commitment to health care — a commitment that health care is 

a right, that health care is simply not a privilege, a privilege for 

those who can afford health care, that health care, regardless of 

income, is available to all. 

 

We are of the very strong opinion, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government’s actions in this particular Bill are cruel and 

unjustified, that it betrays the right of Saskatchewan people to 

proper health care, that it betrays their right to full health care, 

that it betrays a very fundamental right that has been established 

in this province, and that is that health care should be available 

universally to all. We believe that the government has betrayed 

those commitments, those traditions, and those practices of the 

past. 

 

We think that the government is being very short-sighted in this 

particular Bill. It stands that if people who require access to 

certain prescription drugs are denied access to those drugs, y et 

they require those drugs to treat a specific problem, if that 

problem then goes unattended, if that problem is then not 

treated because of lack of access to drugs, to prescription drugs, 

it follows that the care that they should be receiving may be less 

than adequate. It follows that certain illnesses may in fact 

become complicated. It follows that those complications may 

lead to additional medical and health care. It follows that if 

additional medical and health care is required that there will be 

greater costs to our health care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I’m saying simply is that if you do not treat a 

problem as quickly and as efficiently and as effectively as 

possible, then there is every possibility that the problem will get 

worse; and if the problem gets worse, that even greater care, 

even greater expense must be forthcoming in order to deal with 

what might have been in the first instance a simple problem. 

 

As an illustration of that, Mr. Speaker, I want to point to a 

communication that I received from a doctor. And she points 

out that a woman came to her office with two children; they had 

been referred by their family practitioner. These two children 

were diagnosed as suffering from ringworm and she prescribed 

certain medicine to treat that ringworm. 

 

Now you and I know, and most people know that ringworm is a 

contagious type of disease, that is to say it can be easily spread 

to others. And therefore if one person has ringworm it becomes 

important to treat that so that the disease cannot then be 

transmitted or spread to others, because if others then also 

experience that disease, then instead of one person with 

ringworm you have two people with ringworm and it spreads. 

 

So here is a case where it’s very important to make sure that 

there’s adequate treatment at the outset so that we do not 

compound the problem — that we do not multiply the problem. 

And I think importantly, too, if we’re concerned about dollars 

and cents, that we do not set the wheels in motion by denying 

access to drugs, that we do not set the wheels in motion so as to 

have even more people visiting their doctors, to have even more 

people visiting hospitals, to have even more people requiring 

the drugs. 

 

And this is a case of where there were numerous other  

children in the home. One of these two children also attended 

school. The doctor was concerned that the drugs be in fact 

provided so as to reduce the risk of infection for others; that is 

to say, both in the family and others in the school. And I think 

this is a legitimate and a proper concern on the part of the 

doctor. She went to the point of asking the public health nurse 

to check out the other family members to ensure that in fact 

they had not been infected, and the like. 

 

But when it came to the drugs which were necessary to treat 

this particular problem, it was ascertained that the mother did 

not have, was unable to provide the necessary funds to be able 

to buy those drugs. As I understand it, this is not a family on 

welfare and we know that those who are on welfare and receive 

welfare payments are treated as they were before by the 

government, at no expense. That is to say that they can still 

receive prescription drug plans without cost because it’s 

recognized that they do not have the money. 

 

But there are other people in our society who perhaps do not 

qualify for welfare, who are nevertheless very poor, who do not 

have the disposable cash at any given point in order to be able 

to buy the drugs that they need. And it appears that this is the 

case in this instance e- that the mother did not have the case 

available with which to buy the drugs. 

 

As it turns out in this particular instance, the doctor had access 

to sample drugs provided by drug companies and their 

representatives in this area, and she was able to give them those 

drugs so as to ensure that there would be no spread of the 

infection, so as to ensure that the problem would be cleared up 

as quickly as possible. 

 

But I ask you, Mr. Speaker, if the doctor did not have those 

drugs available, what could have happened in this case? It is 

very likely that the other children in the family could have 

become infected. It is very likely that children at school could 

have become infected, simply because the mother in this case 

did not have the drugs or the money for the drugs that were 

required to treat the problem. 

 

And so when I say that the government is being short-sighted, 

what I am saying is that the government needs to recognize that 

treatment deferred may result in greater problems down the 

road and may result in greater charges to the health care system. 

This is just one isolated example, and I’m sure that the medical 

people in this province, in this problem, have pointed out and 

will continue to point out instances of where drugs need to be 

taken, drugs need to be prescribed in order to avoid further 

complications, in order to avoid further problems, in order to 

avoid further charges to the medical care system, to the health 

care system in this province. 

 

And so it is our feeling that whatever savings the government 

may feel that they’re making in the short run, that because it’s a 

short-sighted response to a dilemma that they have posed, 

because it’s a short-sighted response, we may see greater 

charges, we may see greater costs in the future. 

 

And I speak not only of financial costs to individuals, I speak as 

well of health costs. Why would we put forward  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3211 

 

a Bill that would restrict people’s access to prescription drugs, 

and which means that some people, because of their financial 

circumstances, must be denied prescription drugs, and which 

may extend for them illnesses and problems that they have; may 

increase for them the suffering that they’re experiencing as a 

result of an illness? Why would we want to do that to anyone in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And so when I say that the government is being cruel and that 

the actions are unjustified, I mean to say that the effect of this 

Bill will be to create a situation where some people’s illnesses 

will not be treated, and they will unnecessarily suffer longer 

than they need to because they do not have the access to 

prescription drugs. 

 

The government is short-sighted in so many ways, Mr. Speaker. 

And we try to bring this to the attention of the House, and we 

try to bring this to the attention of the public. And I won’t go 

into all those other things because we are restricting ourselves 

to the drug Bill. 

 

(1600) 

 

But perhaps it’s not short-sightedness. Perhaps it’s 

incompetence, is the proper word. To saddle future taxpayers 

because of short-sighted decisions today is incompetence. To 

take a position today that we’re going to try and save a few 

dollars, recognizing that it may provide additional costs in the 

future, is simply more than short-sightedness, it’s a matter of 

incompetence. 

 

And a government that knows this and has access to all the 

research in the world and has access to qualified advice, for 

them to take this position simply to make some short-term cuts, 

I would submit, is an incompetent government. 

 

In saying what I’ve said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to 

recognize that all rights that we have and all rights that are 

recognized by society need to be balanced by society’s ability 

to honour those rights. That is to say, to have rights without 

society’s ability to pay for those rights if those rights involve 

costs, is rather hollow. So therefore rights are meaningful and 

take on meaning only when society can afford those rights. 

 

What the government is saying is that to a certain extent we can 

have rights in prescription drug care, but we cannot continue to 

have full rights in our health care system to prescription drug 

plan, to prescription drugs, because we are of the opinion that it 

will save us some money. 

 

And when you look at that, when you look at that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you begin to recognize that the amount of saving in 

this particular case is projected to be about $26 million this 

year, and likely will be about $34 million next year, what the 

government is in effect saying is that, in order to save $34 

million, we are going to compromise a right that Saskatchewan 

people have enjoyed over the years. 

 

What they are saying is that we can not afford to continue to 

offer the best prescription drug plan in North America because 

of a cost of $34 million. 

Now given the fiscal situation that we find ourselves in, and the 

fiscal situation is a sorry one indeed, when it comes to the 

question of budgets and deficits, Saskatchewan is in a very dire 

situation — a mess, would be an appropriate word. And I need 

not go into all the actions of the government that have resulted 

in the kind of situation we have now. Suffice it to say that we 

have a fiscal situation that requires attention, that government 

needs to be prudent even if they were not before, but that it 

needs to be prudent in its expenditures. 

 

Having said that, I want to raise the question, do we not have 

$34 million from some other source? Are there not other cuts 

that can be made? Are there not other revenues that can be 

realized to the extend of $34 million so that we might continue 

to offer the very best prescription drug plan in North America? 

Or are we in such desperate straits, and are the government’s 

priorities so wrong-headed that we must, for the sake of $34 

million, now begin to dismantle not only a drug plan but, in 

concert with other actions of the government, begin to 

dismantle what was surely the best health care system in North 

America, if not one of the best in the world? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — And I ask, are there not savings to be 

made elsewhere? Can the government not cut back on its 

extensive political advertising? Can they not cut back on the 

expensive and extensive political patronage appointments 

which cost us all money? The questions have been raised in lieu 

of the fact that we have a full-time president for the 

Saskatchewan Potash Corporation, why in addition to that do 

we also need a full-time chairman of the potash corporation, 

who really wasn’t qualified except that he was a former 

minister in this House? Would that money have not been better 

spent in dedicating it towards the health care system so as to 

ensure that we can continue to provide the very best health care 

system in North America. 

 

We would say that we can afford the prescription drug plan as 

people knew it before July 1; that it’s important that if we are to 

maintain the right of universal access for all Saskatchewan 

people to our health care system; that it is important to ensure 

that the sacrifices must be made elsewhere if our concern is to 

find $34 million out of a budget of many billions. That’s the 

kind of commitment that we have towards health care. We do 

not see that kind of commitment from the government opposite. 

 

We maintain the position that cuts to our health care system, 

that cuts to government generally, should not come at the 

expense of the sick, should not come at the expense of the poor, 

should come at the expense of others who are better able to 

afford. What the government is saying is that the government 

will save $34 million, and that $34 million must now be paid by 

individuals in this province, individuals who need prescription 

drugs. 

 

That, in our view, is a step backwards, a step back to a time that 

health care was a privilege, a time when health care could only 

be accessed by those who could afford the health care system, a 

time when proper health care, to the extent that it was available, 

could be provided to all  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3212 

 

those who had the means to afford that. But that if you did not 

have the means to afford that, you were provided with a second- 

or third-class health care system. You were relegated to the 

poor houses, you were relegated to the emergency wards of 

hospitals — hardly the place to provide proper health care, a 

place perhaps to provide emergency care, but no more than that. 

 

And we all know, even if the government sometimes fails to 

realize that, that health care is more than a matter of immediate 

curative care, health care is more than a matter of dealing with 

immediate emergencies, health care also means an early 

diagnosis of problems so as that we can help people to treat 

their illnesses in a timely way so as to avoid future sufferings, 

so as to avoid future expense. 

 

I fear, Mr. Speaker, in generally examining the Bill before for 

us, in the context of the number of actions lately by the 

government, that the government is beginning to emulate the 

British system of health care — the National Health Service in 

Great Britain — a system where successive governments have 

starved that system of necessary funds, meaning that those who 

are not satisfied with the National Health Service because the 

health service could no longer respond to all of the needs in 

society; it meant that those who were not satisfied but who 

could afford other alternative private arrangements have simply 

abandoned the National Health Service. It’s meant that if they 

have the money, that they can afford access to doctors who are 

not under the National Health Service; they’ve received the care 

that they need. 

 

But it’s also meant that those who could not afford that higher 

level of care have been left with a National Health Service — 

because of government policies — that is less than adequate, a 

health service that’s in bad need of infusion of operating dollars 

and capital dollars. It’s resulted in a system where there is now 

in Britain a two-tiered health care system, that is to say, good 

care for those that can afford it, and less than adequate care, 

long line-ups, long waiting lists, less than adequate access to 

medical care for those that cannot afford the price of first-class 

health care. 

 

And I fear that this government is moving us in that particular 

direction, that the government is looking at the British 

experience and the British model, as they seem to in a number 

of other things now. I only need remind you, Mr. Speaker, that 

the government has had extensive consultation with British 

officials on how to privatize aspects of government operations. 

 

But I would just remind you, or I would say that it now appears 

that the government’s direction in this particular Bill and in the 

context of many other Bills now before us dealing with the 

health care system and in the context of Health estimates and 

the kinds of expenditures that the government is devoting 

towards health care, that we are now beginning to see the 

symptoms. 

 

We are now beginning to see the symptoms of the sickness that 

pervades the British National Health Service. We are seeing 

here in Saskatchewan long waiting lists, long line-ups for 

medicare care. We are seeing reduced access to necessary, 

fundamental aspects  

of health care such as prescription drugs. We are now seeing a 

deterioration of dental care for children. 

 

And I fear that this particular Bill and the others that are now 

before us are symptoms of the disease that affects the British 

national health care system, and are an indication that the 

government wants to move in that particular direction. And I 

fear for our future at the government’s direction, for that future 

can only be found in our dark past, can only be found in a past 

where access to health care depended on your ability to pay for 

that health care. And that’s why I say it’s a major step 

backwards. 

 

This Bill looks backwards, and this Bill takes us backwards to a 

time that not very many of us want to go back to. Perhaps those 

who are privileged and wealthy, and who the Conservative 

Party seems to represent very well — extremely well in this 

legislature — perhaps this Bill has no great meaning because 

whatever the case they can afford those prescription drug plans. 

 

And perhaps the government is not speaking for the all of the 

people of Saskatchewan on this one. In fact, I would submit, 

after listening to my colleagues, after reading the papers, after 

talking to my constituents, that the government is speaking for 

very few people in Saskatchewan and seems to be speaking for 

its own ideological vision and seems to be speaking for the 

privileged few and the wealthy in this province who can afford 

the new drug plan, but is speaking for very few others in this 

province. 

 

It’s such an irony, Mr. Speaker, that at a time that our Premier 

talks about Saskatchewan leadership, talks about world-class, 

talks about how we will lead the world in . . . when it comes to 

trade, how Saskatchewan will be recognized everywhere for the 

fine work that the Premier insists that he’s doing . . . 

 

The Premier has gone so far as to say that the trade deal which 

was signed by the federal government and the American 

government is the most significant event in history — not just 

Canadian history, not just North American history, but is the 

most significant event in history. 

 

And it is ironic, Mr. Speaker, that at a time that the Premier 

talks about Saskatchewan leadership — even if we think that he 

is misplaced — but at a time that he talks about leadership, his 

Minister of Health, who in effect is saying that, yes, we might 

have had the very best prescription drug plan in North America, 

now says, follow us. Follow us because we dare to be ordinary. 

He says, follow us because we dare to be no better than anyone 

else; a Minister of Health who says, follow because we aspire to 

be second place. 

 

(1615) 

 

What an irony it is, Mr. Speaker, to have a Premier one day 

talking about leadership and putting Saskatchewan on the map, 

and to have a Minister of Health the next day or the same day to 

say, follow us, we want to be in second place. 

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3213 

 

This is a remarkable contradiction, Mr. Speaker. It’s also a 

remarkable turnabout, a remarkable turnabout from the rhetoric 

and what must now be perceived to be rhetoric and the words of 

the members opposite just a few short years ago when they said, 

we must improve medicare. When the Minister of Finance, the 

member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, said that we have criticisms 

of the prescription drug plan as it’s currently being run by the 

New Democratic Party government in this province, and we 

will guarantee you — guarantee you — and we will provide 

you with a written guarantee and a certificate that we plan to 

invest more dollars in that prescription drug plan; that we plan 

to invest more money in that prescription drug plan because we 

believe that the drug plan should be improved. Well what 

manner of improvement is this, Mr. Speaker, what manner of 

improvement is this? 

 

And even if the specific guarantee of the Minister of Finance, 

the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, were not shared in that 

exact form by the members opposite, certainly all of the 

members opposite, all of the members opposite promised 

improved medicare. 

 

And I’m not sure, and the people of Saskatchewan are not sure 

now, what was meant by improved medicare because we seem 

to be taking steps backwards. Improvement to me, and 

improvement to many people, means that you take steps 

forward. To say that, well, we’re spending more on health care 

than anyone else — and we know that that’s a reflection of 

juggling of books and is not a real statement of fact — to say at 

one time we’re going to be number one in health care 

expenditures in Canada and now to say, well we can’t afford 

prescription drug plans, we must restrict access for children to 

dental care, we must take a number of steps so as to reduce 

health care spending, how do these statements coincide. How 

can these statements be read together? How can there be any 

belief in this government? How can there be any belief in their 

members when they said we want to improve medicare? But 

now we’re seeing them taking these steps to, in fact, dismantle 

medicare. 

 

They will have a powerful lot of explaining to do with their 

constituents, with the people of Saskatchewan, that how it came 

to be that one day that they can say we want to improve 

medicare and now we want to dismantle medicare; that we want 

to make medicare something a little bit less than it used to be; 

that contrary to the past where they felt that the medicare 

system needed greater expenditure, they are now satisfied with 

long waiting lists for our hospitals, long line-ups for our people. 

They have a powerful lot of explaining to do. 

 

I fear, Mr. Speaker, as do the people of Saskatchewan now — 

and I think that that’s now reflected in this party’s standing in 

the polls — that when they said things like, we want to improve 

medicare, that those were simply words — words with a very 

cruel meaning. 

 

It’s ironic, ironic, Mr. Speaker, that we have a Premier who in 

1982 said, there’s so much more that we can be, so much more 

that we can be. What he didn’t say was that we can be so much 

more broke and in debt. He didn’t say we can be so much more 

unemployed. He didn’t say we  

can be that much poorer. He didn’t say that we can be so much 

more bankrupt. He didn’t say those things. 

 

And he certainly did not explain that we would be so much 

more like others when it comes to our health care system. We 

wait for the Premier to stand in his place in this legislature to 

say that, my vision of Saskatchewan includes a health care 

system that is clearly the best in Canada, that is clearly the best 

in North America. What we hear the Premier saying is, well 

ours is as good as Manitoba’s. Well what might be good for 

Manitoba has never been good enough for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have always dared to be leaders. 

The people of Saskatchewan have always dared for first place. 

The people of Saskatchewan have struggled hard to provide the 

very best health care system in North America. And we want to 

hear the Premier say those words if he wants to take us to a time 

and to a place where we will again have the very best health 

care system in North America. 

 

We don’t want to hear him say, well it’s as good as Manitoba. 

We don’t want to hear him say, well we’re trying to do the best 

we can. We don’t want to hear him say that there must be some 

logical reason for all these long waiting lists. We don’t want to 

hear him say that we can’t find $34 million somewhere else to 

pay for the prescription drug plan. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan want to hear our Premier say, we 

want to be first in health care. We want to hear him say that, 

and we want those words to have meaning. We don’t want any 

more hollow and cruel rhetoric as we’ve heard in the past from 

the Progressive Conservative Party about how we’re going to 

improve medicare, but the actuality is that they set out to 

dismantle medicare. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there may well be some value in the 

Premier’s trips to Ottawa, to New York, to Atlanta, to 

Michigan, to I don’t know how many different places the 

Premier has gone to in the last few months. There may well be 

value in the Premier’s trips to all those places. 

 

And I think the public probably appreciate that the Premier is 

spending so much time out of the province, dealing with those 

weighty matters that are of concern to Saskatchewan. I think the 

public probably appreciates that. And the public understands 

that it’s necessary for a Premier to make trips out of province to 

represent Saskatchewan’s viewpoints elsewhere. 

 

But I am now of the opinion, especially after listening to my 

constituents, that the public of Saskatchewan would appreciate 

it even more if the Premier were to stay at home and the 

Premier were to begin to deal with significant problems within 

Saskatchewan; that the Premier were to begin to dedicate some 

of his energies and some of his intelligence and some of his 

attention to problems before us, problems in the health care 

system. Challenges before us, a challenge as to how to provide 

the very best prescription drug plan in North America, as it was 

before, and find the money to pay for that system. Those are the 

kinds of challenges that Saskatchewan people are saying we 

would now like to see the Premier begin to deal with. 

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3214 

 

Free trade is not the only issue for Saskatchewan people. Potash 

is not the only issue for Saskatchewan people. Health care is 

also an issue for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — So I urge the Premier, as my 

constituents are now doing, I urge the Premier to come home. I 

urge the Premier to begin to listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan. I urge him to use his office and his talents to 

begin to understand what is troubling Saskatchewan people 

today. 

 

And he may well have a finger on that pulse, but he has only 

got that finger on the pulse part way, because if the Premier 

continues to insist that free trade is the only problem, he is 

wrong. There are very many thousands of people in 

Saskatchewan that are deeply troubled, deeply concerned, about 

the direction of health care in this province. They want the 

Premier to be here. They want the Premier to begin to pay 

attention and to start turning his mind to those challenges before 

us. 

 

At the very least, Mr. Speaker, the people would hope that the 

Premier would instruct his Minister of Health to improve the 

Bill that’s before us. If there’s no going back to before July 1 

when we had the very best prescription drug plan in all of North 

America, could you at least turn quarter-way, or half-way, and 

provide for some exemptions in that Bill, so as to exclude the 

elderly who are more dependent on prescription drugs than any 

other group in our society? Could you not at least have some 

sympathy for the children of this province, so that whatever 

other challenges and problems may be faced by Saskatchewan 

people, we know that the children of Saskatchewan will be 

covered by the prescription drug plan; that we need not worry 

or concern ourselves about children suffering unnecessarily 

through illnesses because their parents cannot afford 

prescription drugs. 

 

Are those not some small measures that the government can 

take to improve this extremely poor, this extremely bad Bill 

before us? 

 

I hope that the Premier would instruct his Minister of Health to 

begin to look at those special problems, those problems faced 

by certain groups in Saskatchewan, so that we might all rest a 

little bit easier at night about the kind of care that’s being 

provided for senior citizens, about the kind of care that needs to 

be provided for the children of Saskatchewan. I think we might 

all rest a little bit easier. 

 

That is not to say that we will not continue to oppose this Bill. 

We believe very strongly, as other of my colleagues have said 

and I have said, that it’s a wrong Bill. It’s a Bill that denies the 

right of access to medical care, to health care. And we will 

oppose that strongly, and we will continue to oppose that 

strongly. It’s a Bill that takes us back to a time when people 

who had the money could afford good health care, and those 

that could not got less than adequate health care. And those are 

the Dark Ages that we never want to return back to, Mr. 

Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, maybe we can be first again. I know that after the 

next election we will be first again. When it comes to health 

care, I can unequivocally state that after the next election, with 

a New Democratic Party government, that health care will again 

be restored so that health care in Saskatchewan will again be 

recognized as being number one in North America — the kind 

of health care system that Saskatchewan people have become 

proud of, the kind of system that they used to take great pride 

in. And that’s the kind of system that we want to restore, Mr. 

Speaker 

 

Until that time we hope that the Premier can show some 

leadership, come home, come to his senses, begin to listen to 

the very real concerns of Saskatchewan people about the 

problems, the problems that are posed by this particular Bill, 

and the problems that are posed by other actions of the 

government — whether it’s in their spending plans or whether 

it’s in other Bills, the problems that are posed for Saskatchewan 

people in the area of health care — and ask our Premier to 

please come home, please begin to listen, please begin to 

respond in that particular area to the needs of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

That, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, is the best that we can hope for. 

That, perhaps, is the best that we can hope for. We know that 

things will be different in three or four years after the next 

election, but in the meantime we implore, we implore, as the 

people of Saskatchewan do: please, Mr. Premier, please come 

home, please listen, please begin to respond to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I cannot support this Bill, Mr. Speaker. It is a very bad Bill, and 

it’s a bad Bill for all of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join my 

colleagues on this side of the House in opposing this cruel Bill 

34. I was a little bit slow getting to my feet, as was one of my 

colleagues before, because we want to give the government 

every opportunity to stand up in this House and defend this 

incredibly bad, cruel, callous, and hard-hitting Bill. But will 

they stand up? Not a single one of them has stood up and tried 

to defend this Bill, tried to explain it, tried to tell the good 

people of Saskatchewan or their own constituents, the good 

people of their own constituency, why it is that they think that 

this amendment to The Prescription Drugs Act is a good 

amendment. 

 

(1630) 

 

This Prescription Drugs Act amendment, Mr. Speaker, just flies 

in the face of the Progressive Conservative Party’s, later the 

government’s, commitment that they were going to eliminate 

the dispensing fee for prescription drugs — eliminate. How in 

the world is changing a maximum dispensing free from $3.95 to 

a 20 per cent flat fee, how is that eliminating it? Perhaps we 

should be spending more money on dictionaries. Perhaps if we 

were to give some dictionaries to the members opposite, to the 

government, perhaps they would start to understand what the 

word “eliminate” means. 

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3215 

 

But in the meantime, what we have to do on this side of the 

House is try and show the government how cruel it is, how 

hurtful this amendment is, and how it affects not only the 

constituents of Regina North, my constituency, but how it 

affects the constituents of the Minister of Finance, the member 

for Lumsden, and the member for Melfort, and I could go on 

and on, but I’m not going to name every constituency. But the 

changes that are being proposed in this Prescription Drugs Act 

surely affect the citizens of all of Saskatchewan, and it is not 

restricted to just Regina or just Saskatoon or just Cudworth or 

just any other town or village or hamlet or farm that you care to 

name in this province. 

 

A 20 per cent deterrent fee, coupled with $125 per year 

deductible, is hitting Saskatchewan taxpayers, Saskatchewan 

citizens incredibly hard. Of course, Mr. Speaker, it is hitting the 

people that are on fixed incomes and very low incomes much 

harder than it is hitting the wealthier people, but it is 

nevertheless hitting everybody in Saskatchewan. Sooner or later 

we all require some prescription drugs. 

 

The unfortunate part is that for some Saskatchewan people, and 

a good number of them, they require prescription drugs on an 

ongoing basis. I’m referring to diabetics, asthmatics, that sort of 

thing, people with high blood pressure that requires medication, 

require that medication not for one day or one week, but they 

require that medication on an ongoing basis, in many instances 

on a permanent basis to control their problem. In the case of 

diabetes they need the insulin and the syringes and the test 

strips — they need that daily just to survive. We’re talking of 

survival, not just enjoying good health. We’re talking survival. 

 

For people that have high blood pressure, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

talking also of their survival. You may get away without taking 

your medication for a day, two days, a week, a month, but you 

know that surely if you ignore your high blood pressure 

medication that sooner rather than later you are going to wind 

up with very, very serious health problems. And I’m of course 

referring to heart attacks, strokes, that sort of thing. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, would incur in many, many instances 

tremendously more costly care for those people than simply 

providing the prescription drugs at a nominal dispensing fee . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

I thank the member for Weyburn for blessing me. You may 

have to several times. I’m fighting a cold and perhaps a flu. I 

need some prescription drugs, but can’t afford them as one of 

my colleague says. No, fortunately that’s not the case in my 

case. I could afford it, but will struggle through. 

 

The changes in The Prescription Drugs Act, Mr. Speaker, are a 

sign of a cash-starved government — so starved for cash that 

they’re going to tax sick people $34 million a year. That’s all 

they’re going to save — $34 million a year. To bring it into 

perspective, the oil industry, has had over $1.7 billion in royalty 

tax holidays and other tax exemptions since the Conservative 

government took office in 1982. One point seven billion dollars 

represents 50 times the cost, the savings, to The Prescription 

Drugs Act — 50 times. 

The member for Weyburn chirps as if that’s insignificant. It 

may be insignificant for an oil company to have to pay an 

additional $34 million a year, or for the oil companies 

collectively to, but it is not insignificant for the people of 

Saskatchewan who require prescription drugs. 

 

Many of those people, I remind the members, many of the 

people require heart medication in an ongoing manner. There’s 

a wide range of medical reasons why people would require 

prescription drugs. There’s just as many good reasons why the 

prescription drugs should be provided at a nominal dispensing 

fee. 

 

The member for Regina Victoria, my colleague, outlined a 

two-tier health care system that Great Britain has. I will get into 

that more later. But what we have here in Saskatchewan now is 

clearly the development of a two-tier health system. I have 

constituents in Regina North that are telling me that they are not 

taking their medication as prescribed because they do not have 

the money. No other reason, they simply do not have the 

money. 

 

It comes down for some of them — one case I will be outlining 

in a little while — it comes down to an instance where the 

person has a choice between prescription drugs or food. 

Prescriptions drugs may win some days, but they certainly don’t 

win every day, because starvation is just as sure a death as not 

taking prescription drugs. 

 

I asked the Minister of Health to review this one situation, and 

of course he turned it over to his review committee and the 

answer that came back is, this lady will only have to pay the 20 

per cent up-front cost of her drugs. 

 

I’m going to get into that example now because the members of 

the government are chirping. They think this is an insignificant 

case, but I want to tell you there is a single lady, a pensioner in 

Regina North, whose total pension income and total income 

from all sources is $495 a month — $495 a month. 

 

From that she has to pay her rent; she has to pay her power bill 

or else it will surely be cut off — we’ve seen examples of that; 

she has to pay her water bill or the city of Regina will cut off 

her water supply; she has to pay her heating bill or SaskPower 

will cut off the natural gas; she has to pay for her telephone; and 

she has to pay for prescription drugs. The thing I neglected to 

mention that she has to also pay for out of this $495 a month, 

Mr. Speaker, she has to pay for her food. 

 

The one additional fact that I want every government member 

to hear is that in this instance the heart medication, high blood 

pressure medication and arthritis medication, the total of the 

prescription drugs that this lady requires every month, the 

up-front cost, is $359 a month. 

 

And I ask any of the members across . . . Even the great 

mathematical wizard, the member from Melville, could not 

possibly tell this lady, this constituent of mine, how on $495 a 

month she could pay up-front costs of $359 for her drugs plus 

meet her rent bill, plus meet her power bill, plus meet her water 

bill, plus meet her heat bill, plus her  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3216 

 

telephone, plus food. It is just plain impossible. 

 

That’s why my colleagues and I are standing up and we are 

speaking as loudly and as forcefully as we possibly know how 

against this devastating Bill, this Bill 34. 

 

It is inconceivable . . . Mr. Speaker, there are a couple members 

opposite saying, it doesn’t make sense. I now they can’t 

understand what it’s like to have to struggle from one pay 

cheque or one source of income until the next pay cheque. They 

don’t understand that — clearly they don’t understand it — 

because if you had any understanding of what it’s like to be 

struggling to survive and to be poor in our society today, you’d 

be dealing with the poor people a whole lot differently than you 

are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons stated for those changes in the 

prescription drug plan has been that people are somehow 

abusing the use of prescription drugs, somehow abusing it. I 

find that absolutely ludicrous, because I ask, when’s the last 

time you went to your doctor and said: hey doc, I want some 

prescription drugs. What for? What for? Nobody does that. 

Nobody does that. And it’s ludicrous that the government is 

blaming the people of Saskatchewan that require prescription 

drugs in an ongoing basis, and they’re blaming the people that 

need those drugs for quality of life, and in some cases for life 

itself. They’re blaming those people for abusing the drug 

system. 

 

I remind the Conservative government, doctors prescribe the 

medication. Doctors prescribe the medication. The College of 

Physicians and Surgeons have parameters whereby they 

supervise the medical profession. A doctor would simply not be 

able to practise medicine in Saskatchewan, in our province, for 

any extended period of time if that doctor were abusing those 

prescription rights. If a doctor were wrongly prescribing 

medication, the College of Physicians and Surgeons would life 

the doctor’s licence; indeed . . . I’m not sue whether to say it 

happened in the past year, but certainly within the past two 

years there was a doctor in Saskatchewan that the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons ordered to go back to university and 

take a refresher course. There was a reason for that. The doctor 

had graduated some considerable number of years ago and had 

simply not kept abreast of what was going on. The point I’m 

making is that the College of Physicians and Surgeons, Mr. 

Speaker, do police the doctors. We could argue and get into a 

debate unto whether they’re incredibly effective or not, but 

that’s not the point I’m wishing to make. 

 

The point I’m wanting to make here today is they do follow 

their own profession and, if there’s a problem, the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons deals with that problem. And back, 

directly back to the prescription drugs, it’s the doctors who 

prescribe prescription drugs. If the drugs are not needed, the 

doctors have no business prescribing drugs. And I don’t think 

there’s any significant number of doctors that like writing 

prescriptions just for the sake of writing prescriptions. Doctors 

get paid for the visit, and they get paid whether they prescribe 

you drugs or not. 

 

So it’s really a misnomer, it’s a misnomer to say that 

prescription drugs are being abused. They are being abused in a 

negative fashion today. They are being  

abused by people such as the one I outlined — the instance I 

outlined where a constituents on $495 total income and $359 

per month up-front drug costs — the prescription drugs that the 

woman is using are being abused because she is not taking the 

medication in the manner that the doctor prescribed. She is 

indeed doing without some medication. She is in the process of 

self-diagnosing what she can withdraw of her medication on a 

daily basis, because for her the choice is take her drugs and 

starve to death, or eat and endure some pain and some medical 

risks. And those risks are very, very real in this case. I only 

hope that we can open the eyes of the Minister of Health, open 

the eyes of the government; in time that they can deal with this 

serious matter before my constituent winds up in the hospital or 

in a nursing home, and I don’t want to see either. 

 

(1645) 

 

She’s currently struggling along and living independently, and I 

wish her all the best. I hope that she can do that for many, many 

more years yet, but with this change in The Prescription Drugs 

Act it’s kind of like the straw that broke the camel’s back, and I 

fear for this constituent of mine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, taking drugs . . . and if you have drugs that are 

prescribed, you take one pill a day for a month; then you don’t 

have money and you know that somehow that one month is 

going to have to last you two months. You’re not gong to take 

every pill every day for the month. You’re rather going to have 

it — it’s just like if you are a week from pay-day and all you’ve 

got is macaroni in the cupboard — you’ve got a box of 

macaroni — you don’t cook the whole box of macaroni and 

gorge yourself one day, be uncomfortably overstuffed on 

macaroni only to starve for the next five or six days until you 

have some income to pay for some more food. The same 

principle holds true with the prescription drugs. 

 

These are some of the problems. I spoke of problems for 

diabetics, Mr. Speaker. The cost, the cost . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. I believe the 

member from Regina North is on his feet and is firmly 

recognized as being in the debate. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for bringing some 

order to the House from the members opposite. Diabetics 

require treatment daily. They need insulin, they need needles, 

and they need test strips. There’s two methods of testing. One is 

a blood test, and the other is a urine test. What this government 

has done is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why don’t you tell me about it? 

 

Mr. Trew: — The member for Souris-Cannington asks me to 

tell him about it. Well, Mr. Speaker, I am trying to tell him 

about it, and I will continue. 

 

It would be nice if the member for Souris-Cannington would 

join the debate, would get on your feet, would try and defend 

this Bill, but you can’t. That’s why. We have given you 

opportunities, and indeed when I am done you’ll have an 

opportunity. I challenge any one of you that’s got the courage to 

stand up and tell Saskatchewan  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3217 

 

people how your grab of $34 million from sick and elderly 

people, how that is going to help them. You can’t tell them. It’s 

just like the tax bills — can’t speak on them either, because you 

know they’re indefensible. 

 

You know that you’ve heaped taxes upon taxes upon taxes on 

not only the well people, but in this instance, in the case of this 

Prescription Drugs Act amendments, this Bill 34, you’re now 

imposing a tax on sick people, and you can’t defend that. 

Nobody can defend a tax on sick people. I defy you to. You just 

can’t do it. It’s impossible. 

 

Diabetics, Mr. Speaker, instead of paying a $3.95 maximum 

dispensing fee are now forced to pay the 20 per cent up front. 

The cost of test strips is around $22 per month for the test 

strips. That’s significantly up from $3.95 maximum that it was 

before this amendment has been introduced. That is 

fundamentally unfair. What we’re saying to diabetics is, it’s 

your fault for being a diabetic — it’s all your fault. You chose 

to be a diabetic. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that that is just not so. I know that 

there isn’t a diabetic anywhere in the world that said, ah, come 

on, I want to be a diabetic; I want to be sick; I want to need a 

shot of insulin every day; or I want to need to take a pill every 

day, or I want to have to poke a needle in my arm every day. No 

diabetics say that. I just wish, I just wish that one of the 

members opposite would stand up and tell the diabetics why 

their costs have so dramatically increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, part of why I’m spending so much time on the 

diabetic question is I have another constituent who happens to 

be a student at the University of Regina. This young man, after 

the changes in the student loan program, is more than $1,500 

short this year of the money that is going to be required for his 

tuition and his cost of living. And his drugs, Mr. Speaker, and 

his drugs. 

 

This change significantly adds to his deficit financing, and I 

ask, how is he supposed to do it? The student loan has been cut. 

He can’t get enough money to live on. The bursary program has 

been cut. How is this man supposed to go to university? And on 

top of this, you hit him with another whammy. You hit him 

with the cost for being a diabetic, that has multiplied at least 

five times. It’s just insane. Words escape me to describe how 

callous and how idiotic this particular Bill is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In many ways this is a small amount of money, in that we’re 

only talking $34 million per year that the government is talking 

about saving. But it is hurtful in that the $34 million is all saved 

at the expense of the sick people and the elderly that require 

drugs on an ongoing basis and the diabetics that need the drugs 

just to live. That’s what’s so hurtful about it. That’s why the 

members opposite can’t get up and defend it. They can’t speak 

to this thing. It is indescribably the hurt that this Bill is going to 

cause. 

 

We have got a two-level health care system as a result of this 

drug Bill, two levels, one for those who can afford the drugs 

and another one for people who cannot. We’ve got situations 

where people have to make a hard choice between food and 

drugs. That’s an incredibly hard choice that is just very hard to 

imagine what life must be like  

doing that. 

 

As a result of this Bill 34, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got also the 

situation where druggists are becoming bankers. Some of the 

members opposite have suggested that sick people that require 

prescriptions to be filled should go to the druggist and ask for 

credit — and ask for credit. Well druggists aren’t bankers. I 

don’t think they should be. I don’t think it’s fair to ask . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The member responsible for 

SaskPower says, make up your mind, they’re not collecting 

power bills. Off in the world — never, never world of power 

bills when what we’re talking about is The Prescriptions Drugs 

Act. As my colleague from Moose Jaw says, malice in 

blunderland — that’s what we’ve got. 

 

Mr. Speaker, druggists are being asked to extend credit to sick 

people. Sick people are being forced to go, in many instances, 

to the druggist and say to that druggist, Mr. or Mrs. or Ms. 

Druggist, if you do not extend me the credit for these 

prescription drugs, I can’t take them. I don’t have the money 

today. Pay-day is two days from now or pay-day is tomorrow, 

but I don’t have the money today. People are forced into doing 

that, they’re forced to beg for money. 

 

And the Minister of Health takes great joy, he’s got a grin from 

ear to ear about this, he thinks it’s really cute. I’m sure that 

there’s a great many of your constituents who will tell you just 

how cute it is when you get the courage to call an election. 

They’ll ell you how cute that is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my grandmother was part of the original group 

that studied health care delivery systems across the world. That 

dedicated group of individuals studied the health care in Great 

Britain, in the Icelandic . . . pardon me, in the Iceland and the 

Norwegian countries, Scandinavian countries. They studied the 

health care systems of New Zealand and Australia. They 

studied the health care system, such as it is, in the United States 

of America. Studied them all, and came back with 

recommendations to the CCF government of the day on what 

the health care system should be like for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they took the best that we could see from all 

across the world, made it into one unique health care delivery 

program that put Saskatchewan first — first in medicare — the 

first province in Canada to have a complete medicare system. 

Saskatchewan did that. The CCF did that. The forerunners of 

the NDP did that. We are rightfully proud of that. 

 

Our leader happened to be minister of Health when that Act 

came in. And he is rightly proud and will take his place in 

history and in the history books as having been the minister of 

Health when medicare was introduced, and having seen that 

medicare was expanded as the province could afford it over the 

years. Mr. Speaker, that’s a heritage that we on this side of the 

House are incredibly proud of. 

 

I think that rather than dismantling medicare and creating a 

two-tier health care system, we should be rather building upon 

what our forefathers and foremothers gave and brought — and 

perhaps when I say “brought” I  

  



 

October 8, 1987 

3218 

 

should say “gave” because they gave more than simply the 

ideas; they were giving of themselves in a sharing, in a very, 

very sharing way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those people, those pioneers, if you like, of our 

medicare system wanted our health care system to be equally 

accessible whether you were a pauper or a millionaire. It would 

not matter. You would get the same health care treatment — 

pauper or millionaire. 

 

It must have been comforting for those people to have seen the 

system that they had developed over the years, the system 

where health care was widely accessible, where there were no 

deterrent fees, where indeed there was no charge as there is in 

other provinces, an annual charge for health care. We didn’t 

have that because that annual charge, whether it’s per family or 

per individual, is yet another tax on the people. Rather than 

having that health plan charge, we made it part of the total tax 

picture, and it was funded out of the general revenues of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we have the government going back to a charge per family 

of $125 per year. They say it’s in the form of a deterrent. But, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s even worse — even worse — and I’m 

against them imposing a $125 charge on families, and I would 

certainly be standing up and decrying that moment. I’m against 

that, but this is even worse because this $125 deductible is 

deducted from the sick people. It’s deducted from people that 

because they’re sick some of them are unable to go to work for 

short periods of time, or it may be long periods of time. 

 

But there’s a large number of Saskatchewan citizens that do not 

have a big bank account or big credit union savings account 

because the taxes have been heaped upon them and heaped 

upon them and heaped upon them; the wage freezes have been 

imposed upon them, and they’ve watched — many of us in this 

province have watched our savings dwindle under the 

Conservative government rule. So this $125 deductible per 

family is just totally unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It being 5 o’clock, this House now stands 

recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


