













































August 25, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 25, 1987 

 

2043 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Salaries of Crown Corporation Executives 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question was to 

be to the Premier, but in his absence I will address it to the 

Acting Premier, or Deputy Premier, and it has to do with the 

government’s restraint program. And in the course of the last 

several months now you’ve been trying to persuade 

Saskatchewan people that Saskatchewan can’t afford an 

adequate prescription drug plan, and that it can’t afford a 

school-based dental plan, and that it can’t afford the salaries of 

hundreds of civil servants who have been fired from the 

government payroll. And I want to know how that restraint 

program has been extended to some of the highest paid people 

in the public service, namely the executives of the various 

Crown corporations? 

 

I wrote the Premier nearly three months ago asking for salary 

and fringe benefit information, and he wrote back to me, in 

effect, declining to give me the information. My question to the 

Acting Premier is: — will you agree to release information 

about the salary and fringe benefits of the Crown corporations 

so that the Saskatchewan public may know whether these 

people are also participating in restraint, or are you afraid to do 

so? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in the normal course of 

events, the answers to those particular questions are given in 

Crown Corporations Committee. The Crown Corporations 

Committee, unfortunately, hasn’t been able to sit this session 

because there has been, it would appear, a bit of an impasse as it 

relates to quorums and committees, and so the committees have 

never been struck. I understand that recently there has been an 

understanding reached between the members on the rules 

committee relative to the quorum question. And it is my 

intention later today to file notice of motion to deal with the 

question of quorum so that we can get those committees in 

place. 

 

I might also add, Mr. Speaker, that the long-standing practice as 

it relates to executive remuneration in the Crowns is that the 

executive group and the total, if you like, the aggregate sum of 

the salaries of the executive group, has been provided in Crown 

Corporations Committee. And that has been the long standing 

practice, and I haven’t yet heard any compelling argument to 

change that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well I want to give you a compelling 

argument, Mr. Deputy Premier, because people in 

Saskatchewan are being asked to swallow a pill that they’ve 

never had to swallow before in the name of restraint. They’re 

being asked not only to pay higher taxes but to accept a much 

lower level of public service. So the situation in 1987 . . . 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

I’m assuming that the member’s question is a supplementary, 

because he didn’t indicate. And making that assumption, I must 

indicate to him that the preamble is getting somewhat long and 

to put his question, please. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — You’re right, Mr. Speaker. I’ll come to the 

question. Do you not feel, in light of what I have said, Mr. 

Deputy Premier, an obligation this year to tell the Saskatchewan 

people what the salary position of senior Crowns is as 

compared to what it was last year; to show the public that the 

government is fully participating in its own restraint program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think a fair comparison 

can be made. If you compare the aggregate sum of the executive 

group of each Crown last year as compared to this year, I think 

that comparison can be made quite easily. And I know that the 

hon. member knows that, and is quite capable of making that 

calculation. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you saying, 

Mr. Deputy Premier, that you refuse to provide specific 

information about the salary and fringe benefits of each of the 

Crown corporation executives? It’s not enough just to give us a 

lump sum and say, there, that is restraint. Everybody should be 

participating in this program. And therefore I ask you whether, 

in view of this whole situation, you won’t release that 

information to show that these people’s salary and fringe 

benefits are also being cut, along with everything else in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hone. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve answered 

the question. The question has been raised in the past in Crown 

Corporations Committee. The answers, as I’ve explained, have 

been given in the way that I’ve explained in the Crown 

Corporation Committee. 

 

And I can only speak for those Crowns that I’m responsible for, 

Mr. Speaker. And I personally would continue with the 

long-standing practice of providing the aggregate sum of the 

executive group, providing that information, Mr. Speaker. And 

I’m sure that the hon. member is quite capable of making his 

own comparisons and doing what he will with the information 

that he gets from making that comparison. 

 

Salaries of President and Chairman of PCS 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question also for the Acting Premier. My question will be more 

specific and deal with some comparisons, and I want to ask a 

question about the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, which 

in 1986 lost $103 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, can you confirm that the new president of 

PCS, Mr. Chuck Childers of Chicago, has signed a contract 

with salary and fringe benefits and other  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2044 

 

special provisions which total more that $200,000 a year? And 

if so, can you tell us how you can justify the size of 

compensation of that package when you’re telling everyone else 

in Saskatchewan as a taxpayer, that they have to practice 

restraint? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m not familiar with the contract that 

the member is presumably waving over there, but I think that a 

fair comparison would still bring Chuck Childers in at a lesser 

rate than David Dombowsky. And so, Mr. Speaker, I invite the 

hon. member to raise that very question in Crown Corporations 

when the officials are there, when the minister is there, where 

he might have that information at his fingertips and where the 

fair comparison may properly be made. I don’t have the 

information here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, don’t you agree . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Is it a supplementary 

you ask? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, it’s a supplementary question, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, don’t you agree that at a time when you’re 

expecting and you’re forcing people to pay several hundred 

dollars a month in prescription drug fees, that you should be 

obligated to tell the people of Saskatchewan whether you’re 

requiring people like Mr. Childers to equally exercise the same 

kind of restraint as you’re asking senior citizens and people 

with families whose children are not going to get dental care 

any more because of the cuts that you have made to the dental 

care program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, we expect from the 

opposition this particular line because we know that they don’t 

understand how important it is to have the best possible people 

that we can get into, particularly the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, which did lose several millions, I think, what, 

153 or something like that, millions of dollars, in the last year. 

Wasn’t it 153? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they think that we should run this 

corporation on and on for ever with the fat that existed there 

and continue to lose rather than to turn it around. So if we’re 

going to get the kind of people that we must have to turn that 

corporation around, we’re going to have to pay to get people 

out of the industry, with knowledge of the industry, at a 

competitive rate. And I think that’s reasonable to expect that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Having said that, we have got, I believe, one of the best from 

the industry for less than they had in David Dombowsky, who 

knew nothing of the industry, absolutely zip. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. I remind the minister that during the time of David 

Dombowsky the potash corporation made a profit every year 

and paid dividends to the treasury. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, my new question 

deals with another senior executive of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I’ll allow the member 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would want 

the minister to be able to hear my question. My question deals 

with the former cabinet minister, Mr. Paul Schoenhals, that this 

government, soon after his defeat in the 1986 election, 

appointed him as the first time ever full time chairman of the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan at a salary and benefits 

which are well over probably $100,000 a year. Now at that 

time, Mr. Minister, you justified this expense with the claim . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I’m afraid the hon. 

member’s preamble is getting a little long. I realize it’s a new 

question. That doesn’t allow anybody to have a two-minute 

preamble. Now I would just remind the hon. member of that 

and ask him to shorten his preamble. And also I’d like to ask 

the hon. members to my right to please allow him to put his 

question. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was about to 

get to my question, and my question is: Mr. Minister, in light of 

the fact that you justified this expensive appointment in saying 

that you needed desperately a full-time chairman of PCS 

(Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan), how do you justify now 

the announcement carried in the newspapers that Mr. 

Schoenhals has been appointed to the advisory board of a major 

insurance brokerage company from Ontario? And if he is a 

full-time chairman of PCS, why does he have time to take on 

yet another such responsibility, or are you just developing a 

way in which to just make another patronage payment to one of 

your friends? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think Dr. Lloyd Barber 

is the full-time president of the University of Regina, and I 

know that Dr. Lloyd Barber sits on many boards, including the 

Bank of Nova Scotia and several others. It’s not an unusual 

thing, Mr. Speaker, for enterprises around the country and 

around the world to go for talented people, people with some 

excellence about them, to be representatives of their particular 

boards. 

 

And I don’t know, I’m not familiar with the insurance 

brokerage outfit that you talk about, but I would, had they asked 

me, I would have recommended Mr. Schoenhals. I certainly 

wouldn’t have recommended it to the member opposite, and I 

notice that they didn’t offer it to any of them. 

 

Salary of SPC President 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the minister responsible for SPC, and this is a 

question that has been asked before in this house, Mr. Speaker, 

and there’s been no information forthcoming. 

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2045 

 

I want to know if the minister can tell us what the salary and 

fringe benefits, including special pension benefits, is for the 

George Hill appointment to the SPC corporation. And I want to 

know if he can confirm that the total dollar value is in the 

$200,000-a-year range for this past president of the PC Party 

and past campaign manager for the Premier. And if that is the 

case, how can he justify that salary level in a period of restraint? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the question has 

been asked before and answered before. So I think I’ll answer it 

in the same way this time, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact, I 

answered it in response to a question from the member for 

Saskatoon Fairview when I said that I would be more than 

pleased to deal with that particular question in Crown 

Corporations Committee. 

 

And I will deal with it in the way that we have traditionally 

dealt with that question in Crown Corporations ever since I can 

remember, since first being elected in 1975, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think that’s the proper forum for those questions to be raised 

and I’ll be more than pleased to deal with them at that time. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it true, Mr. 

Speaker . . . I want to ask the minister whether it’s true that 

there is a special contract with Mr. Hill or with some other 

company or whatever, on his behalf, which pays him a salary in 

the area of $200,000. And I want to know whether the minister 

will be prepared to table all the contracts that may be relating to 

Mr. Hill and his employment with SPC, or with some other 

government body – because I understand he’s also getting 

money from the Souris Valley Basin Authority. I want to know 

if the minister will table that information in this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that Mr. 

Hill is not being paid by the Souris Valley Basin Authority – 

not. That’s simply not true. And I would guess, Mr. Speaker, 

that that’s an indication of the accuracy of all of the information 

that that particular member has. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the answer to the question has not changed. 

Raise the question in Crown Corporations Committee, which is 

the forum where all of these questions have been raised in the 

past, which is where they’ve been answered in the past in the 

way that they are traditionally answered. And I’ll be more than 

pleased to deal with them in that particular forum when, Mr. 

Speaker, we can deal with the matter of quorum on committees 

and get these committees in place so we can, in fact deal with 

the very questions that are being raised by members opposite. 

 

Rehiring of Bruce Campbell by SPC 

 

Ms. Simard: — This is a new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, is it not correct that the SPC corporation through 

contract rehired Mr. Bruce Campbell, who was the individual 

who Mr. Hill was hired to replace? Is it not correct that he was 

rehired back on SPC to do the job that Mr. Hill was hired to do? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer this 

question because again the member is totally – totally – off base 

with that particular suggestion, Mr. Speaker. And she does a 

disservice, not only to Sask Power and president George Hill, 

but she does a terrible disservice to Mr. Bruce Campbell, who 

has been a professional engineer in the service of Sask Power, I 

think, for 33-odd years, and done an excellent job. 

 

One of the things that Mr. Bruce Campbell has done in the last 

several years that he’s been with Sask Power is do all of the 

work-up, engineering work-up, towards the pre-feasibility of a 

thing called the Wintergo project. The Wintergo project is the 

single best hydro project left to be done in Saskatchewan. And 

he has a lot of knowledge about the Wintergo project, and he is 

back on a contractual arrangement with Sask Power, working 

specifically on the Wintergo project to see if and when and how 

it might fit into Sask Power’s future plans. 

 

There is nothing – nothing, Mr. Speaker — that would indicate 

anything dark or sinister about that. We are capturing this guy’s 

expertise and knowledge – I think right and proper. And I think 

that members opposite do a terrible disservice to Mr. Campbell 

by suggesting otherwise. 

 

Grants to Buffalo Narrows Pharmacy Ltd. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, on Thursday last the 

member from Athabasca asked a number of questions about 

loans and grants to the Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a la-Crosse, and La 

Loche pharmacies, and I told him I’d get the information. I have 

it, and I’d like to report it to the House and to the member 

today. 

 

In 1984-85, as the members knows, there was a loan to the 

Buffalo Narrows pharmacy from the northern Saskatchewan 

economic development revolving fund of $120,000, a loan to 

establish a pharmacy in 1984. In 1985-86, and if my memory 

recalls correctly, the member was supportive of this. They 

expanded into La Loche and Ile-a-la-Crosse, and another loan 

of $128,400 was taken out by the Buffalo Narrows pharmacy. 

 

At that time they also qualified for a $60,000 grant from the 

Northern Economic Development Subsidiary Agreement. That, 

of course, is the one I explained a few days ago to the member 

in the House, where there’s a condition of being established for 

two years, and if you aren’t established for that period of time 

you would pay some of that back. That loan was broken down 

as follows, with $39,500 to La Loche, and $20,500 to 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. 

 

Added to this, for clarification, it is not peculiar that the 

Department of Health will sometimes pay to small hospitals a 

fee for provision of professional pharmacy consulting services. 

And to that extent, in 1985-86 the said pharmacy got $30,000 

from the Department of Health. In ‘86-87 they got 45,500 from 

the Department of Health, and to the end of the eighth month of 

’87 they’ve received 13,750. 

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2046 

 

So to recap for you, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

No, I think he asked a number of questions . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. I’d ask the minister to briefly wrap it up because he is 

getting . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I would be more than pleased to. There is 

a number of figures there, and for ease of the member opposite, 

as of this date, Mr. Speaker, Buffalo Narrows Pharmacy Ltd. 

Has received $248,400 by way of loans; $89,250 over the three 

years for contractual arrangements with the Department of 

Health, and $60,000 on the conditional grant from NEDSA 

(Northern Economic Development Subsidiary Agreement). I 

should say that all loans at this time are in good standing. 

 

Cuts in Regina Health Department Services 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the Minister of Health. Your government’s decision to chop 

$7.4 million in provincial government grants to the city of 

Regina this year has forced the city’s health department to cut 

staff and services. A number of positions, including public 

health nursing positions, cannot be filled, thanks to your 

cut-backs. 

 

I wonder if the minister can explain why city health department 

services to the public, including the children in our cities, have 

such a low priority with your government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I might say a simple answer to the 

member’s question, Mr. Speaker. The amount of money granted 

from the provincial Health budget to the city of Regina, and to 

the city of Saskatoon for that matter, those two cities which 

conduct their own public health service was exactly the same 

amount as was granted to them in the year previous. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, you can try and shift the blame. You can duck the 

responsibility all you want, but the buck stops with you, and it 

stops with your government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Regina city council has had to deal with 

a $7.4 million cut in provincial grants this year because of the 

decisions made by your government. That was a decision of 

your government, and it’s the responsibility of your government 

to take heed of the cuts that follow your decisions. 

 

And I ask the minister this: the work of city health departments 

in Regina and Saskatoon is preventative in nature and avoids 

more expensive problems in the future. Why are you so 

short-sighted as to think that by cutting preventative health 

programs today, you will somehow save the taxpayer money in 

the future? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answer, the Department of Health and the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and as it relates to the health grants to the city of 

Regina and to Saskatoon, are exactly the same grants that were 

there last year, the money that went to the city for that specific 

purpose. The city of Regina, the other cities and other 

municipalities in this province, will make their decisions based 

on the moneys that they have and the tax base that they have 

and so on – various decisions across their total administrations. 

 

What I have seen recent days in the press . . . I’m sure everyone 

else has been watching what the operation is, and what’s been 

happening with the city of Regina. I would suggest that some of 

what they’re doing, and some of the things that are happening 

in the city administration is a result of the legacy left by that 

member when he was a city councillor and the kind of decisions 

that he took at that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I might 

say that his charges were answered by the people of Regina 

Victoria. 

 

Regina’s medical health officer has also expressed concern that 

on top of cuts in provincial grants to the city, you have dumped 

a large new work-load on the city’s public health nurses. She 

points out that the elimination of the school-based children’s 

dental program will require city public health nurses to spend 

more of their time teaching children about dental hygiene – 

something that the dental plan workers used to do. 

 

How do you justify cutting provincial grants to Regina and 

Saskatoon, and then dumping this new work-load on their 

public health nurses – public health nurses that are already hard 

pressed to do the job that they’re doing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of things, Mr. Speaker. Points 

of clarification. The member raises numbers as it relates to that 

total amount of reduction in terms of the dollars that went to the 

city of Regina, specifically Regina. I’m informed that the 

reduction to the city of Regina – everything, from Urban 

Affairs, all of the other departments across, and with Health 

remaining the same as what it was before – is less than 4 per 

cent. So the member is suggesting some numbers here which I 

submit are not altogether accurate. 

 

As it relates to the suggestion by Dr. Hutchison – and I saw that 

same report – that the city health nurses may be required to do 

more teaching of children as it relates to their dental hygiene 

and so on, I would suggest that there was a misunderstanding 

there, and I believe Dr. Hutchison would say so. Now, because 

there is within the Department of Health and the dental plan still 

dental therapists who will do just that, in terms of the teaching 

of dental hygiene within the schools of Saskatchewan . . . And 

that will happen in Regina, as it will in Meadow Lake, and 

Davidson, and all other communities in this  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2047 

 

province. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 34 – An Act to amend The Prescription Drugs Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Prescription Drugs Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 

 

National Railway Dispute 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

wonder if I might have leave of the Assembly to deal with rule 

39. Rule 39 of yesterday, as you know, Mr. Speaker, was 

thought to be, in fact, urgent and pressing, and so we agreed 

yesterday to deal with that – all members in this House agreed 

yesterday to deal with that particular motion. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, it’s become even more apparent how 

urgent and pressing that particular rule 39 was, and is. Today 

it’s been reported that grain shipments are being hampered 

already, being lost. It’s been reported that Ipsco’s going to be 

facing forced lay-offs because of the rail strike. Potash 

producers are worried and are totally at the mercy of the rail 

strike. I understand that the New Democrat federal leader is in 

support of what the federal government is doing and, should 

negotiations fail, supports more drastic action. 

 

Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, indicated in the media this 

morning that the reason that yesterday’s motion wasn’t dealt 

with to its conclusion was, they ran out of time. With those 

things in mind, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if we could, be leave of 

the Assembly, go directly to public orders . . . public bills and 

orders, adjourned debates, item no. 13, and deal with this 

motion, Mr. Speaker, immediately, and send the strong, 

unanimous message to Ottawa that must be sent in the 

circumstances. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 

Order, please. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Regina Heavy Oil Upgrader Project 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

rise in this Assembly this afternoon with . . . It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure to speak to this motion, for a couple of reasons. 

I guess the first reason would be that it is a motion that I will be 

able to move. It is a motion of my own choosing. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it is also a motion that is a kind of a 

follow-up from an opportunity that I had last Tuesday to  

speak on private members’ day, namely dealing with the topic 

of diversification. 

 

For the sake of the House, I would take this opportunity now to 

read this motion into the record, and it states thus: 

 

That this Assembly commend the efforts of Premier 

Devine and of the NewGrade Energy corporation in 

making the Regina heavy oil upgrader project a reality, in 

creating thousands of jobs for the citizens of Regina and of 

Saskatchewan, and in contributing to the diversification 

and enhancement of the local economy. 

 

And this motion, Mr. Speaker, is seconded by my colleague 

from the constituency of Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the heavy oil upgrader represents a significant 

milestone in our province’s economic development. And I can 

say that with a little bit of feeling, Mr. Speaker, because a few 

days ago, myself, and many of my colleagues, and certainly 

some of the members opposite, had the opportunity to go to the 

upgrader site and, on a tour, actually inspect what we are 

talking about. Needless to say, we were all impressed. A 

massive project, Mr. Speaker, a massive project of $700 million 

worth of investment. 

 

A marvel of engineering, I might add – a marvel of engineering 

and technology that basically I have to admit I didn’t 

understand much of what I was seeing. It just kind of boggles 

the mind when you think of what is going on. It’s a massive 

project in itself. And as well, Mr. Speaker, the NewGrade 

upgrader is also a very, very important step in diversifying 

Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say that for two reasons. Firstly, building the 

upgrader enables us to utilize a resource we could not really use 

before, and that resource being heavy oil. And I’ll talk about 

that in just a minute. 

 

But secondly, in helping to construct the upgrader, many 

Saskatchewan companies are gaining skills and experience in 

new areas. And they are using these skills to expand the size 

and the scope of their operations. That is diversification. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the upgrader’s ability to process heavy oil gives us 

an economic boost in more ways than just one. As I have 

already mentioned, we will soon be able to use our vast reserves 

of heavy oil, of dirty oil. And that, Mr. Speaker, is important, 

extremely important, because 96 per cent of the reserves of oil 

in western Canada are of the heavy crude variety. In 

Saskatchewan alone we have 25 billion barrels of heavy oil in 

reserve. Mr. Speaker, I did not say millions, I said billions – 25 

billion barrels – which is many times the entire light crude 

reserves in all of North America, in our entire continent. That is 

the massive amounts of reserve that we have. And up until this 

time, unfortunately, it has been crude oil that is of the heavy 

variety. 

 

But the potential, Mr. Speaker, has always been there. Because 

heavy oil cannot be processed by ordinary means, it has stayed 

in the ground; it has been useless.  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2048 

 

We have not been able to harness all of the economic activity 

that could be associated with that. 

 

And there’s always been talk, Mr. Speaker, of doing something 

about processing, about building an upgrader. The members 

opposite have literally talked the idea to death when they were 

back in government. But they were too busy; they were too 

busy buying potash mines; of buying dry holes in the ground; of 

paying up oil companies for drilling dry holes. And then they 

were always there to worry about these other things, rather than 

to seize the opportunities that were there, the opportunities that 

heavy oil presented to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess it took vision. It took vision to act. And I 

suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite had, 

and still have, their cloudy vision – a cloudy vision that would 

probably need some form of a cataract operation in order to 

clear their vision. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when the people of Saskatchewan saw the 

leader of the Progressive Conservative Party back in 1982, they 

recognized something; they recognized in this leader as a man 

of vision. They saw someone who can, could, build a heavy oil 

upgrader, a man who believed in our potential. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, do you know what the NDP did back in 

those days? They’re doing exactly what the Regina member of 

Regina West is doing – they laughed. The NDP in those days 

laughed and said, you can’t do that. They said, you won’t do 

that. Well, Mr. Speaker, our Premier thought that Saskatchewan 

could do it and, much to the chagrin and dismay of members 

opposite, today we have seen that we have done that. 

 

The upgrader is well on the way to completion. And as I speak, 

Mr. Speaker, there are many hundreds of construction workers 

busy working on the upgrader site. And there are many 

hundreds more across the province, across the province, 

working for companies who are now supplying materials for 

that project. 

 

And we owe this activity to the willingness and co-operation of 

three major partners in this project. Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is 

because of our government, it is because of the federal 

government, and it is because of our province’s Federated 

co-ops, that we have worked together as a unit – all three parties 

– that this project is now being built. It’s not that the 

negotiations were always simple. There were times when it 

looked gloomy. It looked at times as if there were obstacles that 

could not be overcome, but perseverance prevailed and the 

project is being built. 

 

All three partners realized that there’s so much more that could 

be gained from building the upgrader. There were the thousands 

of jobs that could be created. Mr. Speaker, by this fall there will 

be almost 2,000 people working on that upgrader. Add to this 

the 1,000 or so permanent jobs that are being created right now 

– permanent jobs – out in the oil patch, out in the oil fields 

across the province because of this upgrader. 

 

But that’s not all, Mr. Speaker. You can add to this 100 

permanent jobs – more than 100 – 125 permanent jobs  

that will be created at this upgrader. And there are literally 

thousands of jobs right now being sustained by the $370 million 

worth of contracts that have already been let to companies 

throughout Saskatchewan, helping to complete the construction 

of this upgrader. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I just came across a newspaper 

article from the Regina Leader-Post of August 24. I’ll just read 

a sentence or so to suggest to you the impact that this upgrader 

is having on the job mentality out in the field, where it says: — 

 

Unfortunately we have exhausted the supply and availability 

of welders in Saskatchewan. 

 

Currently about 100 welders from outside the province (of 

Saskatchewan) are employed on the site; most (however) of 

the . . . (other) laborers are from Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that the impact of this 

upgrader is not something in the future, it’s something that’s 

here, and it’s something that’s now, and it’s something that the 

people of Saskatchewan appreciate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I cannot overestimate or overstate, Mr. 

Speaker, how important this upgrader is to our province’s 

economy, and especially to the oil industry. As I’ve already 

mentioned, heavy oil is difficult to process. So in the past, what 

happened to our heavy oil? Our heavy oil was basically going to 

make asphalt – a low value product, little value added. And the 

major purchaser of this heavy oil was the United States, and if 

they didn’t want asphalt, they didn’t buy any. So what 

happened to our oil? What happens to may reserves that we 

have? It stayed in the ground. It didn’t do any good for 

anybody. 

 

But now we will be able to use it for more than just asphalt. We 

will produce light synthetic crude oil that can be refined into 

every type of like kind of an industry; for example, diesel for 

the motors, gasoline for the motors, and so on. Mr. Speaker, we 

will even be able to sell off, for profit, many of the 

contaminants that originally made this oil so undesirable, and 

namely, as an example, I can use the sulphur as an example that 

is a by-product now of this process and will be able to be sold. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the upgrader represents a stable, continuous 

market for 50,000 barrels a day of Saskatchewan medium and 

heavy crude oil. That will give our oil industry a tremendous 

confidence because they will know that there is a market for 

their product. There is a market that will make it worthwhile to 

explore and to develop the various properties that they have. 

And likewise, our province’s natural gas industry will also 

benefit from the NewGrade heavy oil upgrader. 

 

In order to refine the heavy oil, hydrogen is needed. Lots of us, 

and most of us in this House, have a little bit of chemistry 

knowledge from our high school grade 12 that we know that 

you can get hydrogen by combining water, steam, and natural 

gas. And that’s what we’re going to be doing. And natural gas, 

the amount that is going to be used is astronomical, in my 

estimation, with 7 billion  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2049 

 

cubic feet of natural gas per year in this upgrader – a substantial 

new market for natural gas producers. 

 

And together with increased oil industry activity, this should 

generate for the provincial economy, for the provincial coffers, 

at least $60 million in royalties each – another benefit, another 

benefit, Mr. Speaker, of diversification. 

 

But the oil and gas industry is not the last industry that will 

benefit over the long term. By building the upgrader next to the 

Consumers’ Co-operative Refinery, we have not only saved 

one-third of the total cost of building such a structure, but we 

have helped to secure a source of supply for the refinery and, 

indirectly, for farmers and consumers across the province and 

western Canada. As I mentioned previously, the total cost of 

this structure is somewhere in the neighbourhood of $700 

million. Had we not gone the route that we have taken and 

consolidated it and put it together with what we have already 

existing on the present refinery site, the cost could well have 

been in excess of 1.2 or $1.3 billions. 

 

(1445) 

 

And as events of the past have shown, Mr. Speaker, it is 

important that we can count on having a steady, 

reasonable-priced source of petroleum. And when we talk about 

benefits, it should be remembered that construction companies, 

manufacturers, retailers, real estate companies are all benefiting 

from the money that is being spent on the building of this 

upgrader. And while the Regina area is seeing a great deal of 

this activity, it can also be felt across the piece, across the 

province. In fact, throughout western Canada we can feel the 

effects of this building of the upgrader. 

 

And as I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks, Mr. 

Speaker, many Saskatchewan companies are expanding their 

operations and learning new skills because of the upgrader. 

These skills and new abilities will stay with them long after the 

upgrader has been built, long after the experts from Texas and 

so on have left, gone back home, and left their resources, have 

left their knowledge, their skills, their technology with us. This 

is something that is going to stay with Saskatchewan, and 

something that we will be able to build upon. And they will use 

this new capacity, this new knowledge, to grow and expand . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The hon. 

member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to ask you now to move your 

motion without any further remarks. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 

already read the motion into the records, and I so now move, 

and turn it over to my colleague from Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it gives me a 

great pleasure to rise in this Assembly, not only to support but 

as well to second the motion put forth by my colleague, the 

member from Rosthern, a motion, Mr.  

Speaker, that commends the efforts of our Premier and the 

NewGrade Energy Inc. for their dedication to a project that will 

enhance the lives of Saskatchewan residents, and indeed the 

future of this province, for decades to come. The project I am 

speaking of, Mr. Speaker, is of course the Regina heavy oil 

upgrader project. 

 

To emphasize the magnitude of the project and also, Mr. 

Speaker, to clarify the challenge of processing heavy oil, I 

would like to share with the House some facts. Mr. Speaker, 96 

per cent of western Canada’s petroleum reserves are in heavy 

oil. And to give you an idea of the role Saskatchewan plays in 

that picture, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you that the province alone 

has 25 billion barrels or more of this valuable resource – 25 

billion barrels. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a lot of oil. 

 

But we’re also aware, Mr. Speaker, that heavy oil isn’t easy to 

transport, that there aren’t many uses for heavy oil, and that’s 

where the challenge comes in. The challenge is there for us to 

refine and to upgrade that heavy oil into a state that you and I 

can put into substantial use. The state in which the heavy oil 

comes out of the ground is good for making heavy fuel oil and 

asphalt, and very little else. 

 

The process of processing heavy oil, Mr. Speaker, is so difficult 

that up until this point in time, no Canadian refinery has been 

able to utilize oil to make much needed gasoline and diesel fuel, 

unless, Mr. Speaker, that oil is upgraded, and to upgrade it we 

needed to build a facility that would be able to change that 

product from its state of heavy oil. 

 

The process of building that refinery and that upgrader, Mr. 

Speaker, was a real challenge. It took a lot of commitment. In 

fact, for a number of years different governments and even oil 

companies have been talking of ways and means of upgrading 

that product. And part of the hold-back came in the fact that a 

lot of dollars were going to be needed to develop a product of 

that size. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan and the 

federal government, together with the Co-op refinery put 

together a proposal to build an upgrader – an upgrader situated 

right here in the province of Saskatchewan, right here in the city 

of Regina. In fact, an upgrader right beside the Co-op, 

Federated Co-op refinery. And I believe even for the people in 

the Federated Co-op . . . they’re happy to have that upgrader 

there because it also enhances the use of their refinery. 

 

Through this upgrader, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is going to 

benefit greatly. We have seen the members opposite choosing 

many times to ignore all of the positive aspects of Regina’s 

upgrader. The other day, Mr. Speaker, when my colleagues and 

I and some of the members opposite were able to tour the 

facility, we were informed . . . and we even saw the magnitude 

of this project. We saw the men and the women that were 

working on the project. 

 

We were informed that four million man-hours of construction 

labour will be performed on site, and of that four million 

man-hours, 75 to 80 per cent of that is being performed by 

Saskatchewan people – something that I’m sure we in 

Saskatchewan are real proud of and happy to know that 

Saskatchewan residents are benefiting from  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2050 

 

that project. Indeed, 10 to 15 per cent of that is native work. 

There again, it’s a very positive point in the development of this 

project. 

 

When we were on the site the other day we were informed that 

there were close to 1,600 individuals on site at the present time 

helping in building that project, as well as the numbers of 

individuals employed by the refinery itself. Towards the end of 

this month and the first part of September, there will be up to 

2,000 people employed on site – 2,000 jobs created, and men 

and women being employed in Saskatchewan, in Regina – 

dollars that are being made here that are going to be spent here, 

spent to help the local economy. 

 

What are the construction benefits? The construction benefits, 

Mr. Speaker, there will be processing of 50,000 barrels of 

Saskatchewan heavy crude per day which will be a big benefit 

in moving Canada closer to energy self-sufficiency. It will also, 

we were pointed out, provide a stable market for Saskatchewan 

heavy oil producers. 

 

As my member from Rosthern has already stated, there will be 

up to 1,000 permanent, stable, field-related jobs. The 

constituency I come from, Mr. Speaker, has a number of men 

and women working in the oil industry working out in the field. 

In the last year or so, with the price of oil dropping off, we’ve 

seen some of those jobs disappearing. But of late, Mr. Speaker, 

a number of people have been called back to work; a number of 

companies have come in; there has been more development. 

And I would suggest a lot of that is a benefit from this heavy oil 

upgrader going on here in Regina. We also see that once the 

upgrader is completed there are going to be 125 permanent jobs 

created at the upgrader facility. 

 

There is an additional benefit of $60 million per annum 

additional revenue in royalties to the province of Saskatchewan 

— $60 million, which this province can use to provide goods 

and services, to provide services to the men and women and 

boys and girls and children of this province to provide them 

with education and health care and other benefits that they need. 

And we, as well, are going to utilize seven billion cubic feet of 

natural gas per year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think when we look at all the statistics that have 

just been related, there isn’t any one of us that isn’t aware of the 

importance of this upgrader project. There isn’t any one of us 

who isn’t aware of the importance not only to the province but 

also to the people, the men and women of Regina. 

 

All of these positive things resulting from the Regina upgrader 

have been ignored many times. But let me tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, that the people of this province recognize the 

importance of jobs. The business people of Regina recognize 

the importance of the jobs and the dollars these jobs bring in, 

because men and women come in and shop in their business; 

they spend dollars. It has been a very popular move within this 

city. 

 

The people of this province, Mr. Speaker, are builders. This 

project shows how men and women with a vision  

can build, and are firm believers in making this province the 

best it can be through hard work and initiative. It’s through that 

same hard work and initiative that this Progressive 

Conservative government has been successful in bringing the 

construction of Canada’s first heavy oil upgrader to the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so it gives me great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to support the 

motion as read by my colleague from the constituency of 

Rosthern. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

speak on this motion during the time that’s allotted to me. And 

in speaking to it, I want to make two points and address two 

aspects of economic development in Saskatchewan around 

which this project, I think, is a part. 

 

First of all I want to illustrate, Mr. Speaker, that the NewGrade 

Energy project involving the Co-operative refinery is a good 

example of how this province and our citizens can successfully 

build this province and provide economic development and 

jobs. I also add, Mr. Speaker, that this project also shows the 

government’s economic strategy, open for business, has been a 

failure and is dangerous to our future in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the second point I want to make in my remarks is that, 

notwithstanding the construction of the Regina oil upgrader, the 

provincial government’s policies and performance have failed 

to provide sufficient jobs and economic opportunities for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

On my first point, Mr. Speaker, I say to you that the New 

Democratic Party members and the New Democratic Party 

caucus support whole-heartedly the involvement of 

Co-operative refineries in this project. We support it because 

this is a good example of a Saskatchewan company, with 

Saskatchewan people, using Saskatchewan talent, initiative, and 

energy, to build in the interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, just to make a contrast, while this 

project is successfully proceeding with public and co-operative 

involvement, the Husky Oil upgrader, which would be in 

progress at Lloydminster at this time, has somehow disappeared 

from the news headlines in our newspapers and the screens of 

our television sets. The evidence, Mr. Speaker, of how this 

government’s doctrinaire and ideological open-for-business 

policy has failed is clear. 

 

Let me compare this project to one of the government’s 

give-away examples, the Weyerhaeuser project. The NewGrade 

project, Mr. Speaker, is employing predominantly 

Saskatchewan people, employees are working in a climate of 

good labour-management relations, and the majority of the 

subcontracts have been awarded to Saskatchewan firms. And 

most of the structural steel, I found, when I toured the site 

recently, is being fabricated by Saskatchewan firms in 

Saskatchewan. Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to contrast that to 

the project that is being built by Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, 

Washington in their project in Prince Albert. 

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2051 

 

Do you think, Mr. Speaker, that the Weyerhaeuser project is 

being built by a Saskatchewan or even Canadian firm? Not a 

chance. It’s being built by a company from Alabama in the 

United States. 

 

(1500) 

 

Do you think, Mr. Speaker, or do you believe that the 

Weyerhaeuser project is using as much Saskatchewan-supplied 

product as possible? And I’ll use structural steel for example 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Not at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The motion before the 

Assembly is under rule 16 is dealing with the NewGrade 

upgrader in Regina. I can . . . 

 

Order. I would ask the member to keep his comments on the 

rule 16 motion before the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Indeed, Mr. Speaker, and I’m making a 

comparison between the NewGrade upgrader which is on the 

order paper and in this motion, and the Weyerhaeuser project in 

Prince Albert, and that is quite legitimate and in order, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And the point I was making is that whereas the NewGrade 

upgrader is using Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan 

product, the project run by the Weyerhaeuser corporation of the 

United States is not. Mr. Speaker, that project is three weeks 

behind because its structural steel is not being supplied in the 

timely way, and do you know where it being fabricated? It is 

being fabricated in Edmonton, Alberta. And that is the 

difference, Mr. Speaker, between Saskatchewan initiative and 

using Saskatchewan talent other . . . as opposed to relying 

outside corporate eastern Canadian foreign interest to do it for 

us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the important point in this is that this 

government’s reliance on eastern and foreign private sector 

economic development investment has been a dismal failure. 

The upgrader that we talk about here today is proof of that in a 

very significant way. This very resolution that is sponsored by 

the member from Rosthern shows how the ideological rhetoric 

and the stated policy of this government is wrong-headed. 

 

Did this resolution, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talk of a great 

economic activity provided because of the open for business 

policy? No, it didn’t. This government can only boast, as it did 

today, about a project which has no corporate money at all. 

Almost every cent of investment that is being put in this project, 

the taxpayers of Canada and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are 

bearing almost completely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a good project. It will provide some 125 jobs, 

and that’s welcome. But its success only underlies the dangers 

of this government’s blind determination to privatization of 

important services such as the dental care program and a 

prescription drug plan and our Crown corporations. What we 

see happening with the Weyerhaeuser project as compared to 

NewGrade is clear evidence that the direction in which this 

government is heading with its economic development 

programs,  

and its open for business policy, is leading us down a path 

where we, in Saskatchewan, will truly become hewers of wood 

and carriers of water, and will have to depend on somebody 

outside of this province to determine our destiny. We object to 

that, and we make that very clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the other point that I want to make, which I referred to 

earlier, was that this government’s policies and performance 

have failed to provide sufficient jobs and economic 

opportunities for Saskatchewan people. The 125 jobs which this 

project will provide permanently do not even come close to the 

several hundred jobs that have been lost, in Regina alone, 

because of business closures since 1982. Intercontinental 

Packers, in 1983, closed – 125 jobs gone; Dad’s Cookies 

closed, 1984 – 50 jobs gone; Dominion Bridge closed, 1985 – 

110 jobs gone; and the list goes on and on and on, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. The record of the failure of this government in 

economic development is further, further exemplified by the 

kind of bankruptcies that we have seen happening in 

Saskatchewan since they took office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are at record heights. We had he second 

highest record of bankruptcies in Canada in the last four years. 

That’s because there are so many businesses closing, and as a 

result of that, our unemployment is rising and rising, and rising 

daily. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this project is positive. We have supported it from 

the beginning. But this project alone, I think more than anything 

else, because of the nature of the project, shows how badly this 

government’s policy of open for business has failed to develop 

the economy of Saskatchewan and provide jobs for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And as a result, Mr. Speaker, I move an amendment to this 

resolution that has been proposed by the member from 

Rosthern. And I move, seconded by my colleague from 

Saskatoon South: 

 

That all words after the word “Assembly” be deleted, and 

the following substituted therefor: regrets that 

notwithstanding the construction of the Regina Heavy Oil 

Upgrader, the provincial government’s policies and 

performance are not providing sufficient jobs and 

economic opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in participating in this debate this afternoon, I want to, 

from the outset, also indicate that I support the NewGrade 

upgrader that is being built in Regina today, and certainly want 

to commend the government for having one major project, at 

least, that we can all be proud of and can all support. 

 

This certainly, this upgrader, Mr. Speaker, was long in coming, 

and we all know that. But, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I do 

have some other critical comments that I want to make about 

the government’s performance – economic performance – and 

its utter failure in providing a diversified economy for the 

province of  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2052 

 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in estimates this year I had asked the 

minister to disclose to the people of Saskatchewan the total 

agreement that was signed between Federated Co-op, or CCRL 

(Consumers Co-operative Refinery Ltd.), the provincial 

government, and the federal government, so that the people of 

this province could make a knowledgeable . . . not accusation, 

but knowledgeable determination as to whether or not this 

would be a viable project. 

 

I can understand the minister’s dilemma, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

but I do believe that in the future, when the governments make 

almost a total contribution, we must make certain that the 

people have an obligation, or have an opportunity to look at 

those agreements and determine for themselves whether or not 

those agreements are done in a proper manner, and whether or 

not the project is viable. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, my colleague from Regina North East has 

already expressed his commendation for the government, and 

we acknowledge on this side the many jobs that are being 

generated during the construction period. It’s upwards of 1,800 

jobs, and certainly that is not insignificant . . . and the 

permanent jobs that will be created by this project. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to caution the government that 

one major project does not make for a good economic 

stimulation. And I think all the economic indicators that we 

have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, clearly indicate that this government 

has failed, and it has failed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this 

province in 1987 will be the only province that will have a 

negative growth as far as economics is concerned. And I will 

refer to that very quickly. 

 

In layperson’s terms, Mr. Speaker, this means that in 

Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan, there will be less income per 

individual this year than there was last year. And we are the 

only province, the only province, where this is happening. This 

means, Mr. Speaker, that in every other province people will be 

better off than they were last year, but in Saskatchewan, our 

workers, our farmers, and our businesses will experience an 

economic downturn. That’s what it means. 

 

While, Mr. Speaker, I commend the Premier for the Regina 

upgrader, I cannot do the same for his economic diversification 

for the rest of the province. As I indicated earlier, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy will be the worst in all of 

Canada. 

 

As I indicated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a lot of economic 

indicators which indicate this. The mover, the member from 

Rosthern, spoke in very glowing terms about “the man with a 

vision.” And he said that the people in 1982 saw in the Premier 

a man who had a vision for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if he had a vision, we are still waiting to see what 

that vision is all bout, because in 1982, when he took over the 

reins of this government, this province was a “have” province. 

We left him with a surplus of $140  

million. What has he done with that? He has turned that surplus 

into a $3.4 billion deficit. 

 

Not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only that. What has this 

Premier done? He has taken the province from the long-term 

debt of about $3.9 billion, which had built up from 1905 to 

1982, and he has increased that debt by well over $5 billion – 

by well over $5 billion – so that today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

are paying out, on our deficit alone, of close to 300 million 

every year – 300 million. 

 

I want to say to the mover from Rosthern, 300 million is almost 

half of what the cost of the upgrader in Regina will be. That 

will go outside the province due to your fiscal mismanagement 

since 1982 – since 1982. So on the one hand, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, while I congratulate the Premier on the upgrader, I 

certainly cannot congratulate him on his “open for business,” 

because that has been an utter failure. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just so that people don’t think that I am the 

one that is saying that we have a slow economic growth, I read 

in a number of papers . . . here we have one in March: 

“Saskatchewan economic growth will lag, say the forecasters,” 

and that was the Royal Bank of Canada. And what does the 

Royal Bank of Canada say about Manitoba? 

 

The Royal Bank of Canada claims that Manitoba will lead 

the country in the economic growth during the next eight 

years with an average annual rate of 3.3 per cent, followed 

only by Ontario and Quebec. 

 

I’m saying to the members opposite: where we have a minus 1 

per cent economic growth, Manitoba will have a 3.3 per cent 

growth. On May 9 I read in the papers again: “Investment 

dealers say province’s economic growth slowing to a crawl,” 

and this, Mr. Speaker, is by the Investment Dealers Association 

of Canada again. 

 

And we can go on and on, Mr. Speaker. I read in the 

Star-Phoenix on July 3: “Most pick Saskatchewan economy to 

worsen in six months.” In a survey done by CanWest 

Foundation, 57 per cent of the people in Saskatchewan had a 

pessimistic view about the economic growth and the economic 

future of this province. It says: 

 

The mood of the people has shifted. It seems that the 

people of Saskatchewan will get high marks at forecasting 

again. The loss of 2,000 jobs so far this year suggests that 

the average number of people working in 1987 will be less 

than last year. 

 

And it goes on and on and on. Just this morning, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I read the Financial Post of August 17. And what does 

it say? 

 

No help for Mulroney in provincial forecasts. 

 

No help for Mulroney. And we see here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

every province having a positive economic growth in 1987, 

with the exception of one province – the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2053 

 

(1515) 

 

Now the members opposite want us to commend the Premier 

and the government for its open for business. And as the 

member from Regina North East, my colleague, has indicated, 

although we can commend you for this upgrader, we certainly 

can’t, because all the economic indicators indicate that you have 

failed, and failed miserably. 

 

We have people leaving this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at 

the rate of about 10,000 per year – 10,000 people leaving this 

province because there are no opportunities for them in this 

province. They have to leave to Ontario or Quebec or British 

Columbia in order to receive employment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members opposite: your 

open for business hasn’t worked; your give-aways to the 

multinationals, the big corporations, hasn’t worked. And what 

you should be doing is stimulating the economy by supporting 

local businesses, by supporting the Crown corporations, by 

supporting the people in this province instead of laying people 

off, firing people and not having the financial wherewith in 

order to support opportunities in this particular province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I, for one, cannot support the motion that 

is put forward by the members opposite. I will, however, 

support the amendment brought forward by the member from 

Regina North East because it clearly indicates on the wider 

basis, if you take the economics across Saskatchewan, you 

people have failed. You have driven people from this province. 

You have caused numerous bankruptcies. And not only that, 

you have . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

address the motion put forward by the member from Rosthern, 

and I do not necessarily agree with very much of the 

amendment put forward by the member from Regina North 

East. 

 

I am going to put into my remarks some information, I think, 

that deals with the upgrader, and I’m going to stick to that 

because I think some of the remarks that were made by the 

member from Saskatoon South need some remarks related to 

them, but I’m going to forego that because . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Don’t challenge me again. 

 

I want to talk, Mr. Speaker, about the upgrader in 

Saskatchewan. I believe that it is an important part of an 

integrated involvement of the people of Saskatchewan, and the 

federal government, the provincial government, and the Co-op 

upgrader. I think that one of the things that we have to deal with 

when we deal with a project of this magnitude is that support 

systems from the public sector, from the private sector, have to 

be dealt with in a very rational way. 

 

Upgrading heavy oil is a very important function in the process 

that we deal with, as it relates to the western side of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I’m going to read  

an article that appeared in today’s paper. And there was 

mention made by the member for Regina North East that said 

. . . He said that where is the Husky upgrader? Where is that 

upgrader in the north-east? He said, we haven’t heard anything 

about it for a long time. Today’s paper, he should have read it: 

 

Province’s future may be in heavy oil. Upgrading 

Saskatchewan’s huge reserves of heavy oil could be the 

key to solving the expected shortfall in light oil production 

in Canada during the mid-1990s . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a serious problem in this country that 

we’re going to be looking to the other parts of the world to have 

the kinds of oil developments that we need in order to provide 

for the energy that we have in this country. And I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have to deal in a very systematic, rational way 

in relating to the energy component for Saskatchewan. Because, 

as the member from Rosthern said, we have vast supplies of 

heavy oil in this province, and we need to have an option on 

upgrading it for them. 

 

The study which was released on Monday at the Energy 

ministers’ conference in Newfoundland was prepared by the 

Energy and Mines department from intergovernmental working 

group on energy security, made up of federal and provincial 

energy officials. And the Hon. Minister of Energy for 

Saskatchewan presented the paper to the Energy ministers’ 

conference in Newfoundland. 

 

And one of the key components of that information was the 

value of heavy oil in its relationship to energy self-sufficiency 

within the province of Saskatchewan. It’s very important. It’s 

important in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, because of the 

impact it has on well drilling, well servicing and, in general, the 

service industry. 

 

The heavy oil was first discovered in the south-west part of the 

province in Fosterton a long time ago. And if you talk to oil 

people, Fosterton, Battrum, Shaunavon, Gull Lake – all of these 

fields have significant impact and they all know where they are 

because, Mr. Speaker, that oil was one of the first oil 

exploration finds in Saskatchewan. And what it was, is heavy 

oil. It’s got high degree of sulphur content, and that’s what is 

important in the dealing with this upgrader, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Rosthern indicated that one of the 

by-products of the heavy oil upgrader is going to be sulphur, 

and it’s an extremely important by-product in the manufacture 

of fertilizers for Saskatchewan farmers. It’s going to be useful 

there. It’s going to be useful in uranium development and other 

areas. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that these by-products are 

extremely important. 

 

Heavy oil in the west side of the province is made up of heavy 

oil in the Kindersley-Lloydminster area, and the medium to 

heavy in the south-west. What it will do for the area of the 

south-west, Mr. Speaker, it will provide an opportunity for 

those producers there to market 20,000 barrels a day – 20,000 

barrels a day in a field that has a base production at maximum 

of about 30,000 barrels. And that, Mr. Speaker, that energy 

today is flowing down into United States. 

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2054 

 

Another thing that is significant about the upgrader and that is 

extremely important, for the first time, when that upgrader goes 

into place in 1988, for the first time, Saskatchewan people will 

be burning Saskatchewan gas – for the first time. Till now, 

Saskatchewan, 50,000 . . . 45,000 barrels a day have been 

coming from Alberta, light crude, into the plant at Federated 

Co-op here, and providing their service sector with an 

opportunity to distribute it. 

 

It comes from Alberta, Mr. Speaker, and I cannot for the life of 

me ever remember a good enough reason why they didn’t build 

it in the time when they were in power. They should have had 

that in place at that time. If you take a look at the volume of 

energy produced in this province and flowing out, when we 

could have had job diversification, did they ever do anything? 

They looked at a place here and a place there, and they talked 

about this place and that place, but they never did anything. 

 

And it is the example of our Premier in dealing with 

diversification in this province that has activated the private 

sector and the public sector into doing things for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I think that’s very, very important. 

 

Another thing that is important is that 20,000 barrels of crude, 

medium crude, from the South-west will be used by this 

upgrader – exceptionally important for the south-west part of 

the province. Another 20,000 are going to be used from the 

Lloydminster-Kindersley area. 

 

It’s extremely important, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 

Saskatchewan recognize that that upgrader is going to do more 

for Saskatchewan than any of the potash mines that they bought 

in any of the times that they were in government. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is why we believe that options like the Federated 

Co-op involving themselves with the Government of 

Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada are important. 

 

And they want to deal with little incidental things like we’ve 

got to put an agreement that sets the value of that oil that they 

have negotiated with the federal government, and are 

negotiating with the principal distributors out of the south-west 

and out of Kindersley. They want us to table those documents 

so that they can compete, so they can’t become competitive 

with the international market. They want us to table those 

documents. I think it’s ridiculous. What we need in this 

province is those people given an opportunity to develop the 

kinds of diversification out in the service field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can recall in 1973 when their method of 

diversification came into place when they put in Saskoil. I can 

recall that. Everything went down the tubes in the south-west; 

everybody left. And, Mr. Speaker, those same people had 

almost nothing to live on by the time it came to 1982. 

 

And what were we doing in energy development in 1982? We 

had nine gas wells. We had about 800 oil wells in 

Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, is because of their 

energy policy. If we would have put their energy into place 

today, we wouldn’t have the energy resources and reserves 

developed in the South and the south-west, 

 and in the western side of this province to provide enough 

energy for the upgrader in Regina here. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity for those people in my 

constituency to provide services to the oil patch – the volume of 

opportunity there is expanding. It is important for them because 

that is the way that they maximize their earnings. 

 

And here’s another thing: employment, because of opportunity. 

It’s extremely important. Those people have no idea about how 

money is required by the oil patch in order to develop an 

income, because it’s all risk capital. They don’t understand that, 

and they never have. That’s a part of their problem over there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is no job security when that well goes 

into the ground. And I’ll tell you, their former member from 

Shaunavon should give them a lesson or two on dry holes. And 

that would probably indicate some of the kinds of risk capital 

that are . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thanks to my 

colleague from Regina North West; he tells me I still have 10 

minutes left. 

 

I’m pleased to enter this debate today on the NewGrade Co-op 

upgrader, and I want to preface my remarks by simply saying 

how delighted I am that the consumer Co-op Refinery is as 

involved and indeed is the major player in this from a technical 

point of view. I have some comments to make on the funding of 

the arrangement a little later in the text of my speech, but I am 

really delighted for the Co-op. 

 

And it’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that over the years 

other refiners, particularly multinational oil companies that 

have had refineries in Saskatchewan, have pulled out. The 

friends of the government, the friends of the members opposite 

over the years, have pulled out. They’ve complained when the 

minimum wage was raised; I remember that when I was a small 

boy. One of the refineries said: no, we can’t afford to go from a 

dollar to a dollar-ten per hour minimum wage; therefore, we’re 

going to pull out our refinery. And they did. 

 

It’s a real treat to see that the Co-op Refinery, which started out 

as a very modest 500-barrel-a-day cracking plant in 1935, has 

grown 500 times with a number of expansions over the years. 

It’s now capable of refining 50,000 barrels of crude oil per day. 

And it’s indeed a pleasure to note that it’s now going to be 

capable of refining 50,000 barrels of heavy crude. And for that, 

I’m delighted with the Co-op Refinery and their part, and I 

indeed commend the government for their part in making that a 

reality. 

 

I’m sure that the Co-op pioneers must be pleased as Punch just 

to see this happening now – the expansions over the years. And 

the NewGrade upgrader is certainly in keeping with that very 

fine Co-op tradition. 

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2055 

 

Mr. Speaker, we welcome the construction that is going to 

provide nearly 4 million man-hours of work. And indeed, we 

also welcome the roughly 125 permanent jobs at the upgrader 

refinery thereafter. 

 

I’m also pleased to note that the upgrader is a . . . the 

construction project is a union project. Compare that, as the 

member for Regina North East did, with the Weyerhaeuser 

operation in P.A. where that construction project is non-union, 

and is behind schedule, and is buying more of their product 

from out of the province as opposed to using Saskatchewan 

firms. And I’m pleased with the NewGrade record on that. 

 

(1530) 

 

There are three concerns that I have with the upgrader as it’s 

proceeding. Briefly, the first concern I have is for that of the 

safety of workers during the construction and, quite frankly, 

I’ve had some reports that are not good. I’ve had some workers 

telling me that there’s a real good safety program as long as it 

doesn’t cost a penny – as long as there’s no money involved – 

and that’s disturbing. 

 

I’ve heard of a chemical process that is being used in the pipe 

fitting out there where the chemical that they’re using is so 

dangerous that the label says: wash clothes separately from your 

ordinary laundry. Yet there’s no protective equipment provided 

whatsoever, and that is a concern. So I’m first and foremost 

concerned with the safety of the construction workers out there 

and the long-term effects of some of the chemicals and the 

materials that they will be handling. 

 

My second concern is that as MLA for Regina North, hydrogen 

sulphide . . . There is a great concern that the amount of 

hydrogen sulphide that will be captured from the upgrading 

process is going to be a significant problem, both in terms of 

storage and in terms of the hydrogen sulphide that escapes 

during the process, and into the atmosphere that we breathe here 

in Regina, particularly in the constituencies of Regina North 

and Regina North East. 

 

The third concern I have with the upgrader project is that of the 

financial details that are being withheld from us. Mr. Speaker, 

we know that there is $300 million plus of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers’ money at risk in this project, and yet the government 

is unwilling to tell us whether the differential required to make 

that project pay is $4 a barrel, $5 a barrel, or $6 a barrel, and 

there’s a substantial difference in that. They can’t even give us 

the basic information like that on this very costly project. 

 

I’ve outlined our pleasure with the Co-op NewGrade upgrader 

proceeding, but, Mr. Speaker, it is with great regret that the 

public record shows that the provincial government policies and 

performances are simply not providing sufficient jobs and 

economic opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I point out that Saskatchewan is one of two provinces that 

in the past 12 months has suffered a loss of 2,000 jobs. There’s 

2,000 fewer jobs now than there was 12 months earlier. And at 

the same . . . Pardon me, not in the same time, but over the first 

six months of this year, there  

has been a net out-migration of over 4,500 people moving out 

of Saskatchewan – more than 4,500 people more than are 

coming in. And that’s, indeed, indicative of the failure of the 

government to provide sufficient job opportunities and 

sufficient economic opportunities for the people of 

Saskatchewan. The average earnings – the average weekly 

wages earned in the construction industry are also a cause for 

some significant concern, Mr. Speaker. In 1982 the average 

weekly wage in the construction industry was $499; in 1983 

that dropped to $445; in 1984, again under the Conservatives, it 

dropped again to only $430 per week; and in ’85 it dropped 

again to only $420 per week; and today it has dropped again, 

and it is only $416 per week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can think of no other single item that so clearly 

shows the lack of opportunity of Saskatchewan working men 

and women as this drop in wages, as more and more people are 

scrambling for fewer and fewer jobs, and they’re willing to 

accept lower and lower paying jobs because of the inadequate 

opportunities provided by the members opposite. 

 

Look at some of the promises, Mr. Speaker, that there was in 

terms of tax relief. And then I look at the record at what has 

been happening, and it is indeed disturbing to note that we now 

have a 2 per cent flat tax on all income in the province. It’s also 

disturbing to have members opposite, many of whom were 

elected on a promise to eliminate the gasoline tax for ever – no 

more gasoline tax ever, was what they were saying in 1982, and 

now we have a seven cents a litre gasoline tax imposed on 

Saskatchewan citizens, with a rebate program, Mr. Speaker, that 

requires you to hang on to each and every receipt. And I doubt 

it if every one of the members opposite have every single 

receipt for every litre of gas they have purchased. Only the 

member for Regina Wascana, who has nothing better to do with 

his time than count his bloody gas receipts; he says he has them 

all. Congratulations to you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’s probably got extras too. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Probably has extras too, the member for Regina 

North West says. I’m not sure. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve had these increases . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: — I want to raise a point of order on the basis 

that the member from Regina North raised the question about 

the conduct of an illegal matter with the member from Regina 

Wascana, and I do not believe that that’s in order, and I would 

just ask you to rule on that for me please. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Members shouldn’t make 

reflections on other members of the legislature in their 

speeches. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will not make any 

further comments on the gas tax receipts and that particular 

program. 

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2056 

 

It is with a great deal of concern that we watch our taxes 

escalating at a faster rate now than ever before in 

Saskatchewan’s history. It is for those reasons, outlined earlier 

in my speech, that I sincerely regret the lack of jobs and 

economic opportunities for Saskatchewan people – 

Saskatchewan men and women who are struggling valiantly to 

try and keep their heads above water in these tough Tory times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased with the Co-op involvement and with 

the NewGrade upgrader project. I will be supporting the 

amendment from the member for Regina North East, and 

seconded by the member from Saskatoon South, and I regret to 

say I am unable to support the initial motion of the members 

opposite. But I am in support of the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure 

that I have the opportunity to speak this afternoon on this 

positive project and the impact it will have on the citizens of 

Regina, as well as the province of Saskatchewan and western 

Canada. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to sit in this House day 

after day. In an issue like today where we have the largest 

single project ever put together in the city of Regina, the largest 

oil project in the country, in North America, going on right 

now, a project that involves 700 millions of dollars – and I will 

go into the employment figures a little bit later, but my point is 

this: and listen to the members opposite find something 

negative to say about everything positive that this government 

tries to do. 

 

Now I’d be the first one to admit that everything this 

government has done has not been perfect. But, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s nice to be with an organization . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martin: — It is indeed a pleasure, however, to be with a 

government that tries to do things on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martin: — How clearly I remember in the ‘70s when the 

potash debate was going on and I would sit in the galleries and 

listen to debate going on, and what a great thing this is going to 

be for the people of the province — $600 million of our money 

which today translates into $1.3 billion of debt to this province. 

Mr. Speaker, I say to you that the members opposite can find 

something negative to say about everything that’s ever been 

done since 1982, and they are directly responsible for much of 

the debt we have today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that if it were not for the 

determination and the negotiating skill of our Premier, the 

member from Estevan, that the deal would not have been 

completed. The heavy upgrader, the NewGrade, is a project that 

is so important in so many ways to the people of Regina, and to 

Saskatchewan, that our Premier knew he had to make the deal. 

And he did. The people of Saskatchewan should never forget 

that. 

It was interesting, Mr. Speaker, when they were talking about 

negative features. For instance, they talked about the 

Weyerhaeuser, and of course they find something very negative 

to say about that. It’s interesting that today that Weyerhaeuser 

has a productivity improvement of 17 per cent – 17 per cent 

increase in productivity today. It didn’t have this last year when 

we were losing $91,000 a day. That’s performance, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When they were talking about . . . they always bring in Peter 

Pocklington for some reason or another – a nasty word because 

the man knows how to make a dollar. Mr. Speaker, Gainers 

Meats has offered to the pork producers of this province an 

opportunity for competition. Pork producers all over this 

province know now that they can go to another outlet to sell 

their pork. And pork producers around this province will look 

for other opportunities. They now have an alternative, where 

they can go and get the best price for their pork. That’s 

something that pork producers understand. So if Mr. 

Pocklington has done nothing other than create . . . other than 

having created employment in North Battleford, he’s offered 

the pork producers of this province an opportunity for some fair 

competition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you stop and look around at the positive 

influence that this upgrader has had on so many sectors of the 

city’s economy, the prospects are staggering. Two hundred 

million in purchases of Saskatchewan goods and services alone 

— $200 million of purchases in Saskatchewan goods and 

services, four million man-hours of construction that labour will 

be performed on the site, 75 per cent by Saskatchewan people, 

representing $100 million in wages. I remind the member from 

Regina North East that many of those people working the 

upgrader are his constituents. People who are now employed 

will be part of that $100 million in wages. Mr. Speaker, in jobs 

alone countless Regina families will benefit and have benefited. 

 

And what about those workers and supervisors who are moving 

into the city of Regina from other areas of Saskatchewan? What 

will result from this? Mr. Speaker, I’ve had people in the real 

estate field tell me that they’re having a difficult time keeping 

up to the housing demand of these families. These individuals 

and their families will be injecting funds into our local economy 

that will supply Regina with that much needed shot in the arm. 

And this will not be short-term, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Regina heavy oil NewGrade upgrader will help to diversify and 

enhance our local economy for decades. And that will mean job 

opportunities and a more secure future for Saskatchewan’s 

youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because the University of Regina is in my 

constituency, I pay particular attention to that institution – an 

institution that two of my daughters attend, I’m proud to say, 

having attended it myself. They have a highly respected 

chemistry department, and I feel confident that many of the 

students in this field will have an opportunity to direct their 

knowledge into the Regina upgrader over the years. 

 

Our philosophy, Mr. Speaker, is to create opportunities  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2057 

 

that will keep our youth in this province. And as a father of four 

daughters attending university in Saskatchewan, in Regina and 

Saskatoon, I’m delighted that we now have a government that 

looks to the future, that will try to provide jobs for our young 

people. And I know that members opposite who also have 

children, boys and girls in universities in Saskatchewan, will be 

delighted to hear that there will be more job opportunities in the 

future for their children graduating from universities. 

 

The spin-off of jobs will sky-rocket in conjunction with the 

progress of the upgrader. And I would again like to emphasize 

the point that these benefits, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are not 

short-term. The government takes responsibility, a responsible 

long-term approach to difficulties facing Saskatchewan, while 

at the same time ensuring that the needs of those Saskatchewan 

residents who require assistance are taken care of today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the value of an 

upgrader to Saskatchewan and to Canada – not just to Regina. 

Others may say it was their idea. The promise of an upgrader 

was made by the previous administration, but like other 

promises it was never fulfilled. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the 

previous government couldn’t put the deal together. It took our 

Premier, with his negotiating skill, to put the deal together. And 

make no mistake about it, it was our Premier that put that deal 

together, and you know it. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan don’t want broken promises. They 

don’t want hollow words. And they know that from the member 

from Estevan, our Premier, that these were not hollow words. 

 

(1545) 

 

He said, we’ll put that deal together, and indeed he did — $700 

million worth, Mr. Deputy Speaker; hundreds of millions of 

hours of work for people of Regina and Saskatchewan; highly 

skilled people, professionals, coming into this area, trading 

interests among our chemistry students at the University of 

Regina to have a future in Saskatchewan. And they will be 

hired, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of this province see ideas and promises put into 

action. And that is where this government surpasses the NDP 

time and again. But I won’t have to go into that, Mr. Speaker; 

the people of this province know that is, indeed, the case. 

 

We will continue to follow through with projects that will 

ensure this province keeps up with the times for the benefit of 

Saskatchewan people – people, Mr. Speaker, that deserve 

nothing but the best opportunities for the future. The Regina 

heavy oil upgrader project is just one example of this 

government’s expertise in co-operating with others to ensure 

Saskatchewan can take full advantage of the many opportunities 

presented by the resources and her people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve mentioned a couple of them – the Gainers 

packer plant; Weyerhaeuser deal; the Hunter’s camper trailers 

in North Battleford, an organization that previously sold 50 per 

cent of the recreation vehicles that  

were produced in any other area of the county. Now they not 

only sell 100 per cent of them, they produce 100 per cent of 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened for the last 74 and one-half minutes 

to the negative attitude of the members opposite. And I know 

that they don’t really mean it, Mr. Speaker, because I know that 

they too, like myself and my colleagues over here, are indeed 

proud of our Premier for bringing to Saskatchewan and Regina 

the largest oil project in North America at this time, and the 

largest single project in the history of Regina – 700 millions of 

dollars, Mr. Speaker, that will bring in hundreds of millions of 

dollars of wages to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the original motion as read by 

the member from Rosthern. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure where 

the member from Regina Wascana was when the people on this 

side of the House were making speeches in response to this 

resolution. 

 

I think we set out quite clearly that all members on this side of 

the House regard the upgrader project as a good idea, and all 

members on this side of the House are feeling positive about 

that program. Most of the members on this side of the House 

were part of the tour that went out to the site the other day and 

saw the upgrader project in its glory, and we came back with a 

good feeling. We think that’s an example of the kind of a 

project that governments ought to be proud to be involved in, 

and I and my colleagues are very glad that you’re involved in it. 

 

One of the characteristics of that job that deserves special 

commendation is the fact that it is a union job. And I want to 

state clearly, very clearly, the importance of that so far as the 

construction industry in this province are concerned. The 

attitude of this government towards the organized part of the 

construction industry has not been seen as being very good. The 

construction trade unions have been facing very, very difficult 

times, and in part it’s a result of this government’s not having 

responded to some real problems that have arisen that directly 

affect the unionized sector of the construction industry. 

 

There has been a practice, which has grown up in this province 

over the last five years, in which unionized employers have 

been creating new corporate entities, and those entities are 

doing the construction work formerly done by the unionized 

employer. They’ve been doing that work on a non-union basis. 

The existing labour legislation of Saskatchewan has proven 

unable to cope with that particular development, and as a result, 

contractors, who have for years been working on a unionized 

basis, are now doing their work on a non-union basis, and that 

has had a very serious effect on our construction industry. 

 

The most serious effect that it’s had is that construction 

tradesmen, who have been born and raised in Saskatchewan, 

who have been educated in their trade in Saskatchewan and who 

have been working in this  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2058 

 

province for many years, are now sitting idle while these new 

spin-offs or new corporate creations are hiring unskilled people, 

very often from outside the province, to come in and do the 

work formerly done by our people. And that has been a most 

unfortunate development in the construction industry in this 

province. And it’s one, I suggest, that the government ought to 

have responded to some time ago. 

 

Now this is not a new proposition so far as this government is 

concerned, Mr. Speaker. This government constituted a board 

of conciliation in the construction industry . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Oops, sorry. I’m sorry I cut it off too 

soon. The member from Regina Fairview. 

 

The member for Saskatoon Fairview, I cut it off a little too 

soon. I’m sorry. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now, I was making one of the best speeches 

that my friend across the aisle has ever heard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — And I’m distressed to think that it’s not being 

recorded for posterity. In any event, the government opposite 

appointed a board of conciliation . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’m sorry the 75 minutes has 

elapsed now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 20 – Implementation of the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan 

 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to put 

forth a motion that deals with this Progressive Conservative 

government’s innovation in developing and implementing a 

province-wide pension plan for Saskatchewan, the first of its 

kind in North America. Just one more example of the 

forward-thinking attitude of this government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, an attitude of concern for the welfare of the people of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this government first discussed the idea of 

establishing a pension plan for home-makers and others not 

covered by private pension plans, we did some research in the 

area of pensions as they relate to Saskatchewan. The statistics 

show, Mr. Speaker, that 60 per cent of people in Saskatchewan 

are not covered by pension plans. Only four out of every 10 

working women are enrolled in a private pension plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the facts we faced were that the opportunities 

simply did not exist for the rest of those working at home. 

Saskatchewan’s part-time workers, 70 per cent of whom are 

women, were simply under-represented in 

government-sponsored pension plans . . . that is 

company-sponsored pension plans. The need was there, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and the government responded. 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan encourages the people of our 

province to plan for their own future. It provides a real and 

direct incentive to help people plan for their own retirement. 

Mr. Speaker, we introduced and implemented the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan because we believe in enhancing the future 

security in Saskatchewan people and for Saskatchewan people. 

 

This government believes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan has, and will be, of particular value 

to women. Of all those members who joined the plan last year, 

86 per cent were women. Half of all the contributors to the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan refer to themselves as 

home-makers. We, as members of the Progressive Conservative 

government, believe that women have the right to have a fully 

vested pension in their own name. And we believe that 

home-makers and part-time workers have a right to the same 

type of security given to people who make other career choices. 

 

Let me take a minute to explain how this innovative and 

important plan works. A home-maker who contributes $25 a 

month for 30 years – less than $1 a day – that home-maker 

could receive a pension plan of between 600 and $1,025 a 

month when the individual reaches the age of 65; individual’s 

own money, with the government matching the contribution 

over the years, dollar for dollar – the first of its kind in North 

America, primarily directed to women and home-makers of our 

province. 

 

People recognize the opportunity here. Last year almost 80 per 

cent of the contributors to the plan received the full match of 

$300 from the Government of Saskatchewan. We were there to 

get them started on the road to a secure future. This government 

recognized that it is also long overdue that the same pension 

opportunities be extended to those builders and risk-takers who 

want to plan for the future – our farmers and small-business 

owners. Last year, next to home-makers, farmers and part-time 

workers were the next largest groups of people who joined the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

The Progressive Conservative government has also 

demonstrated that it cares about those people now between the 

ages of 55 and 65 who haven’t made a great deal of money and 

thus haven’t been able to save for their retirement. We made 

special provisions for people in this pre-retirement age group, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. For each fully matched $300 contribution 

by this government, we guarantee a minimum monthly pension 

of $15. If, for example, an individual is 55 years of age and 

qualifies for the full match for a period of 10 years, the 

individual will receive a guaranteed minimum pension of $150 

a month. We recognize that $150 doesn’t go a long way these 

days, but it helps. It helps, and it is a beginning – far more, Mr. 

Speaker, than was provided by the former government who 

prefer to spend money buying potash plants. The NDP 

investment costs us $1.3 billion today. 

 

This pension plan introduced by our government gives people 

the incentive to act now to protect and enhance their future, an 

incentive so large, in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in the short 

three-month period that people last year had to get into the plan, 

more than 31,000 people from Saskatchewan responded to this  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2059 

 

encouragement and joined the plan, investing almost $9.4 

million — $9.4 million in their future. We provided the 

opportunity; they had the choice, and they responded – 31,000 

people in this province investing almost $9.4 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 70 per cent of Saskatchewan part-time workers are 

women, and 86 per cent of those who took advantage so far in 

the pension program are women, as I mentioned before. 

 

Because this issue is of such importance to women, I’d like to 

talk for a minute or so on other initiatives that are of particular 

interest to women – the initiatives brought forth by this 

government, Mr. Speaker, let me talk with the future in 

educational social assistance. These are some of the initiatives 

that have been brought forth by this government in the last year 

or so. Single parents, most of whom are women, are eligible for 

special incentive education loans. These are forgivable loans if 

the program is completed. One can appreciate the difficult and 

frustrating circumstances many of these young mothers find 

themselves in. We can’t solve their difficulties, but we can 

attempt to make their life easier through education. 

 

The Department of Education has made a concerted effort to 

move women into management positions and has been 

successful. The department has recognized that more and more 

women are seeking managerial positions. I am pleased to say 

that there are now more women in management positions in 

Education than ever before; 50 per cent of senior management 

are women in the Department of Education – 50 per cent. 

 

Let’s talk about access to educational opportunities for women. 

Many of these women, I’m sure, took advantage of the pension 

plan. Women who live on farms and in small community areas 

did not have pension plans before. Regional colleges, former 

community colleges, will have a large role to play in education 

throughout the province. The ministerial consulter process that 

carried on through the early spring indicated that those living in 

centres outside of major cities wanted more education. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Quiet. Order. Why is the member on 

her feet? 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, point of order. We’re talking 

about the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, the first pension plan of 

its kind in North America. I fail to see how education and how 

many women there are in management in Education is now 

related to the pension plan. I think the member is off topic. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard for 65 days 

now the members opposite ranging in such wide field from the 

subject matter. Now clearly the member from Regina Wascana 

is dealing with this subject. He’s dealing clearly with the 

subject, and I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

point of order is clearly out of order. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I have on many occasions 

allowed the debate to wander quite a bit on all motions that 

have been before the House. And I’ve asked members on few 

occasions to bring their comments back to the motion. And I 

would ask all members this afternoon to please keep their 

comments to the motion before the legislature. 

 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I felt that because the pension 

plan can be viewed as a social program, that it might be 

appropriate at this time to talk for a moment about some of the 

other social problems that have affected women in the province. 

 

I’d like to talk about child care, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

women. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, I object to that. 

 

Mr. Martin: — Is that a . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Simard: — You have just made a ruling, Mr. Speaker, that 

we should stick to the topic. Now talking about child care has 

nothing to do with a very specific motion that’s drafted to speak 

about pension reform. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is: 

 

That this legislature commend the Government of 

Saskatchewan for implementing the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan, the first pension plan of its kind in North America. 

 

And I would ask all members speaking on the motion to relate 

their comments to the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I still argue that the 

member opposite is not founded in her criticism. Her problem, 

Mr. Speaker, seems to me to be that she is still envious of the 

fact that it was our side that brought in the pension plan and not 

their side, and that’s the basis of the complaint. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order! Order, order! Would 

the member from Moose Jaw North please keep order while the 

Speaker’s on his feet. 

 

I would ask the member for Regina Wascana to relate his 

comments to the motion that is on the order paper. 

 

Mr. Martin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina 

Lakeview may say she doesn’t care about child care; I happen 

to, and that’s why I want to bring it in today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martin: — I feel, Mr. Speaker, that it is . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on her 

feet? 

 

Ms. Simard: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. I never said any 

such thing about not being concerned about child  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2060 

 

care. I criticized him because that wasn’t part of this motion. 

And he knows that, and he’s attempting to mislead this 

legislature by saying that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, if the member from 

Regina Lakeview wants to continually interrupt – the point that 

she raised is clearly a question of debate. It takes place in this 

House day after day after day. And if she’s not prepared to face 

up to that or only wants to see from one side . . . So clearly that 

is not in order, and I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

you caution her from simply standing up every minute. Her 

time will come to get into the debate and we can listen to her at 

that point in time. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. All members will get an 

opportunity to debate the motion. Anything that’s brought into 

the debate is debatable. And I would ask the member from 

Regina Wascana to relate his comments to the motion before 

the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, it was my contention to point out 

that many of the people who work . . . many of the women who 

are working in child care areas may not have pension plans, 

private-sponsored pension plans, and therefore would have an 

opportunity to take part in the government-sponsored pension 

plan. So I thought that might work in that area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martin: — However, Mr. Speaker, I will not then talk 

about the 85 per cent increase in child care that this government 

has brought in since 1982 to day care centres. I’ll save it for 

another day, Mr. Speaker, when I have an opportunity to talk at 

greater length about the wonderful things this government has 

done for the women of this province and will continue to do in 

the future. 

 

I won’t talk about the women in business or the increased 

opportunities for women in management positions in the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me conclude by saying that the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan shows Saskatchewan to be the innovator. It is 

under good management. People from other provinces and even 

other countries are interested in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

because, after all, it is a first in North America. And we fully 

expect that other provinces will soon be following our example. 

Mr. Speaker, all around the province the obvious benefits of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan for the Saskatchewan residents are 

evident. 

 

People want to invest in their futures, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

I’m proud to be a member of a government which can offer that 

incentive to the fine people of our province. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

now like to move the motion, seconded by my colleague from 

Moosomin: 

 

That this legislature commend the Government of 

Saskatchewan for implementing the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan, the first pension plan  

of its kind in North America. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is again a 

pleasure to stand in this House in support of a motion put 

forward by one of my colleagues, the member from Regina 

Wascana. A motion, Mr. Speaker, which commends this 

government on the value of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan that 

we are debating here today. 

 

This plan represents the strong confidence that we have in 

Saskatchewan people – a confidence that this government is 

willing to put forward and offer the people of Saskatchewan 

something that they can invest in. It represents the vision and 

the foresight of this Progressive Conservative government that 

is so much a part of the policies and programs that it represents. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the incentive we have given Saskatchewan 

residents through this pension plan is one that will help 

Saskatchewan people build for their future. And that’s what we 

in Saskatchewan are made of. We’re made up of builders – 

people who want to be the best they can be today and in the 

future years to come. Future years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 

they want to retain their sense of pride and dignity, their sense 

of confidence and security. 

 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan, under this government, offers 

security. It offers security to Saskatchewan people – men and 

women like you and I. It offers security to people who have 

never had the opportunity to benefit from a company-sponsored 

pension plan; people, Mr. Speaker, who have contributed 

greatly to our homes, our families, and our work place; people 

like home-makers, part-time workers, self-employed small 

business proprietors and their employees, farmers and their 

spouses. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when the pension plan was announced last in 

the spring of 1986, many people in my constituency were 

saying, thank you. They were saying thank you for the 

opportunity to invest in their future; their opportunity to put 

money – dollars aside right now – in a pension plan that would 

help them when they retired because they realized that even the 

pension plans that are available such as the Canada Pension 

Plan . . . The dollars are there, people are thankful for them, but 

they realize that they don’t go very far. And when we look at 

the way inflation goes and the uncertainty of tomorrow, people 

are more than happy to be able to invest and to put money aside 

for themselves for future years. 

 

This government wanted to implement a plan that was fair. We 

wanted to give the people of this province a responsible 

incentive that would allow them to feel confident about 

preparing financially for their retirement years. And I say “a 

responsible incentive,” Mr. Speaker, because that’s what the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan is. 

 

To emphasize the message of my colleague from Regina 

Wascana in his remarks earlier, this government  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2061 

 

researched the pension needs of Saskatchewan people before it 

developed the pension plan. Finding that approximately 60 per 

cent of our residents were without retirement planning by any 

way of a pension, that, Mr. Speaker, was a fact that required 

immediate action. Saskatchewan people want to plan for their 

own future. They don’t want to burden children of the province 

with their financial needs upon reaching the age of 65. They 

wanted the choice. The choice, Mr. Speaker, and now 

Saskatchewan residents do have a choice, the first such 

opportunity of its kind in North America. 

 

And this Saskatchewan Pension Plan, Mr. Speaker, is very 

unique. It gives people opportunity to pursue a very real goal 

and that being a financial, secure future. And let me emphasize 

that point, Mr. Speaker. This plan not only ensures financial 

security, but it is a voluntary plan. It isn’t a plan that is forced 

upon people. People make the choice themselves whether they 

want to get involved in the plan. Housewives, like men and 

women in our area, who haven’t had the opportunity, they now 

have the opportunity of investing in their future. Our 

government believes that people should have a choice in 

planning for their futures. We do not believe in the socialist 

maxim of forcing people to join whether they want to or not. 

 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan, Mr. Speaker, is successful 

because the people who have joined, and are now joining, do so 

because they want to. Yes, Mr. Speaker, as my colleague has 

already said, some 31,000 people made the choice to invest 

some $9.4 million in their futures through the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan. And this was in the short period of time they had 

a chance to do so last year. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that shows that the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan is fulfilling a vital need in our society. And what really 

convinced me of that, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that some 60 

per cent of last year’s applicants were over the age of 51. I dare 

say, Mr. Speaker, that these people would have appreciated the 

opportunity to invest in a plan like our Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan back in the ‘70s. 

 

In fact when the pension plan was introduced, I remember 

talking to individuals who were in their 60s already, and they 

were asking me if they could invest. They were asking, is it 

worthwhile for me to invest? I’m 63; I’ve got two years, only 

two years to invest. And yet the realization that 15 or $30 more 

a month in a pension plan was something they felt was 

worthwhile, and they were very glad to become a part of it. 

 

(1615) 

 

Over the years, many governments – including the government 

of the members opposite – promised such a plan. And when 

times were good, where were they? Where was that pension 

plan? It wasn’t developed until this government looked ahead, 

planned for the future, and with definite foresight believed in 

the people of Saskatchewan and offered them a plan they could 

become involved in. The members opposite talked a good 

game, but they didn’t deliver a pension plan. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, we just see how they invested,  

where they invested their money. Where did they invest their 

money? They invested it in potash mines. And they say to 

create jobs. Well to buy a potash mine that already had a 

number of jobs, is that creating jobs? Were those new jobs? 

They were already there. Had they developed a new mine they 

might have created a new job. 

 

That was why, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan has 

built in minimum pension and a government matching 

contribution for those who qualify. For those between the ages 

of 55 and 65, many of whom haven’t been able to save a great 

deal of money for their retirement, there was a special minimum 

pension. And we’ve already heard of how a $300 contribution 

per year, matched by the government, a person will benefit by 

$15 a month for the rest of his or her life. 

 

What this means, Mr. Speaker, is that a person who is 55 years 

old and who qualifies for a full matching pension plan for 10 

years will receive a guaranteed minimum pension of $150 a 

month for the rest of his life. This is something that many 

people can be proud of, and many people are proud of it. 

 

What’s more, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan is set up to help 

those who do not have the disposable income available to set up 

their own retirement funds. While anyone can join and 

contribute to the plan, those with lower incomes are the only 

ones who qualify for matching government grants. And since 

this works on a sliding scale, as incomes increase the 

government’s matching contribution is helping people 

according to their need. 

 

Concrete evidence of this can be found, Mr. Speaker. Almost 80 

per cent of all contributions to the plan receive the full match of 

$300 from the provincial government. That shows that the 

people who needed the plan are making use of it and are getting 

the help they need. 

 

Remember the cries of members opposite about the wives of 

rich men taking advantage of the plan? All I can say, Mr. 

Speaker, is that every person has the right to plan for his or her 

future regardless of his or her spouse’s situation. I believe we, 

as individuals, even as parents, not only have the right to plan 

for our future, but we can have an equal responsibility of 

planning for our children’s futures. 

 

But we realize that there are many individuals who, as much as 

they would like to plan for their children right now, do not have 

the finances to put aside that money, so much a year, to build 

for their children. And so we find many children over the years, 

as they’ve grown older, become housewives, or men and 

women or teenagers working in small stores in rural 

Saskatchewan where there isn’t a pension plan available. 

 

They now have the opportunity to develop and to become 

involved in a pension plan where they can feel . . . They feel 

better within themselves because they know that they are not 

only responding to something the government has given them, 

but they are also able to put something aside themselves. And I 

believe most Saskatchewan people believe and feel better if 

they can contribute to something that they are a part of, 

knowing that the government is there to help them in their time 

of  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2062 

 

need. 

 

Saskatchewan people can join the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, 

a plan, Mr. Speaker, and work with the Saskatchewan 

government to build a better financial future for themselves. 

This pension plan, along with this Progressive Conservative 

government’s recent upgrading of the Saskatchewan income 

plan, is part of our commitment to ensure that our residents can 

retire with dignity. We saw how, since ’82, the minimum 

income for seniors went from 25 up to $50 a year in pension. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government realizes how difficult in can be 

for those with little disposable income to save for their 

retirement. Mr. Speaker, the pension plan introduced by this 

government will meet the needs of this province’s rapidly 

ageing population. And we feel that we have acted responsibly 

by taking the initiative, where others ignored the needs of the 

future. 

 

The pension plan is a bold and innovative step, Mr. Speaker, 

which I am confident in predicting will be viewed as such by 

Saskatchewan residents, both now and in future years. And I 

don’t doubt that governments all across this country, and even 

in other parts of the world, will take a look, serious look, at this 

pension plan. 

 

And no doubt many people are asking the same question. Go to 

Manitoba, people living right beside us, housewives, men and 

women employed in small businesses, and they’re saying, why 

doesn’t our government offer the same pension plan? Give us 

an opportunity to invest in our futures. 

 

Many thousands of Saskatchewan people will reap the benefits 

of this program, which will go a long way towards enhancing 

the quality of life in their retirement years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to stand here today in support of the 

motion as read by my colleague, the member from Regina 

Wascana, in support of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. Thank 

you. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. Mr. 

Speaker, when the Minister of Finance originally introduced the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan, he said that the plan was an 

important milestone towards the goal of ensuring that all 

Saskatchewan residents will be able to retire above the poverty 

line. And, Mr. Speaker, New Democrats are in favour of a 

pension plan for home-makers, and part-time workers, 

small-business men and women and their employees, and for 

farmers. 

 

But this plan, Mr. Speaker, this plan does nothing for people on 

low income and for poor women and poor small-business men 

and women who may be having difficulty in their small 

businesses. This PC plan sells short the poor, Mr. Speaker – it 

sells short the poor. 

 

It appears home-makers are the largest group taking advantage 

of the plan. And New Democrats are pleased that home-makers 

have an opportunity to plan for their retirement days. There’s no 

question we’re pleased with that, Mr. Speaker. But unlike 

medicare which was premised on the notion that everyone has a 

right to  

quality health care, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan is based on 

providing opportunities for those who can afford them. There’s 

no question about that. And it does nothing for low income and 

poor men and women. It sells short the poor, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The need for pension reform has gained widespread public 

support in the last few years. In 1966 the Senate committee on 

ageing reported that the most serious problem it encountered 

was the extent of poverty among the elderly. And the concept of 

pensions for home-makers emerged in the early 1970s, and by 

December 1983 the idea, of course, had taken root. And this is 

evidenced by the parliamentary task force on pension reform, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the 1984 federal election campaign, the issue of pensions for 

home-makers became prominent. And over the course of the 

last two or three years, the federal government has been 

negotiating – the federal government, Mr. Speaker, has been 

negotiating pension reform with the provinces. 

 

In early 1986 the federal government and Ontario and Quebec 

agreed to the principle of including home-makers in the 

Canada-Quebec Pension Plan. But what does Saskatchewan do 

– what does Saskatchewan do, Mr. Speaker, instead of 

continuing negotiations with the federal government? It jumps 

the gun. It introduces its own plan as an important election 

strategy, then it puffs itself up full of self-congratulatory praise 

and it claims Saskatchewan’s taking the lead on pension reform. 

 

But in spite of all this rhetoric and back-patting, Mr. Speaker, in 

spite of this by the PCs, the fact is that this plan is geared to 

provide opportunities for those who can afford to make the 

$300-a-year contribution, and it sells short the poor. And it does 

not, Mr. Speaker, in no way does this $10 million investment, 

which is what it was last year, in no way does it solve the very 

serious problem that exists out there, that is, the problem of 

poverty amongst our seniors in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And had the PC government been less anxious 

to score some political points, and had the PC government been 

less anxious to buy votes in the last election, it could have taken 

the time to think through a real good pension reform package 

and to negotiate a true package, a fairer package of pension 

reform for the men and women of Saskatchewan. But as usual, 

Mr. Speaker, as usual, they didn’t think it through – no way. 

They didn’t think it through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the plan allows any resident of the province 

between the ages of 18 and 65 to contribute up to a maximum 

of $600 per year to the plan. The contributions of individuals 

earning less than $9,133 per annum are matched dollar for 

dollar up to 300. The difficulty for poor and low income 

families is coming up with the first $300 a year so that you can 

benefit form the government’s offer to match the contribution. 

And if you can afford that $300 on an income of less than 

$9,133 a year, then great. I think that’s great. But if you can’t, 

Mr. Speaker, tough luck for you, and that’s the PC philosophy – 

tough luck for  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2063 

 

you if you can’t afford it. 

 

And low-income people, Mr. Speaker, the people who will need 

this pension plan the most, 25 years from now, the people who 

will need those $150 a month payments, Mr. Speaker, those 

people cannot benefit from the plan today. They cannot benefit 

from it because they cannot afford to make that $300 

contribution. 

 

Access to the plan is being denied them because of the way the 

plan is designed to preclude them from participating in it. And 

so what does that do for the problem of poverty amongst 

seniors, Mr. Speaker? What does that do for that problem? It 

does nothing today, and it does nothing tomorrow, and it does 

nothing 25 years from now. But in spite of that, we hear this 

hollow bravado from the members opposite, patting themselves 

on the back with self-congratulatory platitudes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, approximately 450,000 men and women in 

Saskatchewan are eligible to benefit from a government match 

in contribution – 450,000, Mr. Speaker. But as of February 20, 

1987 there were only 20,000 people involved in the plan – only 

20,000. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, where are the other 430,000 

people? Is it possible they couldn’t afford to make the 

contribution? 

 

Surely, surely the government must realize, Mr. Speaker, that 

the long-term objective of the plan should be to eliminate 

poverty amongst seniors. It should be, Mr. Speaker, but that’s 

not the case with this plan; that’s simply not the case. It clearly 

fuels the provincial deficit without helping men and women 

who need it the most. 

 

And the plan was estimated in March 1986 to cost $5 million. 

In March 1987, Mr. Speaker, it was costing Saskatchewan 

between 10 and $11 million. So I ask: was this another 

deliberate attempt by the government to underestimate costs 

before an election? Was this another attempt on behalf of the 

government to mislead the public with respect to what their 

budget deficit would be for the year ‘86-87? 

 

The Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, has been quoted as 

saying, unless we begin to encourage people to make provisions 

for retirement now, we face a tremendous financial cost down 

the road in terms of welfare and income supplement programs. 

 

So the Minister of Finance realizes that, Mr. Speaker. But yet 

the PC government refuses to gear this plan to those individuals 

who are going to need welfare or income supplement in the 

future, down the road, 25 years from now. They refuse to gear 

the plan to deal with those people now, and that’s a very 

fundamental and basic element that’s missing from that 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan and which changes the whole 

context of the plan. 

 

If one cannot afford the $300 now, Mr. Speaker, tough luck, 

one cannot participate in this plan and gets no matching 

contribution. We need only think, Mr. Speaker . . . We need 

only think of a single parent mother who earns minimum wage, 

many of whom need all their income to feed and clothe and 

house their children – all their income – and who cannot scrape 

up the $300 a year for a contribution. And I ask you: — is that 

fair? Is that fair that  

that hard-working, conscientious, single parent mother cannot 

participate in this plan? It’s not fair, Mr. Speaker, and this plan 

is lacking for it. 

 

(1630) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And, Mr. Speaker, if a person is 18 years of 

age, for example, and earning less than $9,133 a year and living 

at home with mom and dad, who could be earning 25,000 each 

or perhaps a combined family income of 100,000, or they could 

be earning $200,000 a year, it doesn’t matter. If this person is 

earning less than $9,133 a year and living with mom and dad, 

they get the $300 matching contribution, Mr. Speaker, and that 

single mother doesn’t get it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And the members on the government side of 

the House, Mr. Speaker, are laughing, and they’re mocking this 

because they don’t think that’s important. Because they don’t 

care about those things very much . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 

Please allow the member to continue. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, they feel that that’s fair. That’s 

their philosophy on life. That single parent mother doesn’t 

matter to them, Mr. Speaker, and that’s evidenced by the jeering 

that’s taking place on the members’ side of the House. 

 

This is absolutely ridiculous, Mr. Speaker, that that unfairness 

is built into this plan – it’s absolutely ridiculous. The president 

of the National Action Committee, Status of Women was 

quoted as saying, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Experience in other countries (as the Saskatchewan 

government must surely know) has shown that such an 

approach leads to the exclusion of all but the well-to-do. 

 

And not only does this plan sell short the poor, but it 

undermines the emerging federal-provincial consensus on 

pensions – on pension reform to be more precise. A 

provincially-based plan, Mr. Speaker, is a poor second to a 

federally-based plan. A provincially-based plan is not as good 

as a federally-based plan would be. 

 

A federally-based plan would have more portability and more 

flexibility, Mr. Speaker. But what happens by the Saskatchewan 

government jumping the gun on pension reform – jumping the 

gun – is that it makes it very difficult to negotiate a federal plan 

that would satisfy all Canadians, or at least that Saskatchewan 

could mesh into and participate in. 

 

The other thing that presents a problem with respect to the 

failure to negotiate a federal plan is the fact that on the 

guaranteed income supplement payments, Mr. Speaker – the 

guaranteed income supplement payments that seniors are 

entitled to that are a federal payment to seniors – the amount 

that they receive under the Saskatchewan  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2064 

 

pension plan will be deducted from the guaranteed income 

supplement. And that’s the most recent information that I have. 

 

Now I hope the Government of Saskatchewan is negotiating so 

that that will not be the case, because that’s totally and 

absolutely ridiculous. What it means is that Saskatchewan 

taxpayers are paying out that money instead of that being 

spread across the country. And that’s an example of the 

shortsightedness that the PC government when they put this 

plan together and didn’t think all the implications through. 

That’s an example, Mr. Speaker, of what happens when you 

jump the gun. 

 

Another aspect, Mr. Speaker, of the plan that I would like to see 

the government take a serious look at is the fact that it doesn’t 

take into consideration family income. It doesn’t take family 

income into consideration. So a spouse, for example, who earns 

a $100,000 a year can pay for the spouse who may not be 

working, to invest in the plan and get the $300 matching 

contribution. But two spouses who may be working each at 

$26,000 a year get absolutely no contribution – no matching 

contribution, Mr. Speaker, even though their income may be 

half of the other family. They don’t get a matching contribution. 

And that’s unfair in this plan, and it’s another example of not 

thinking through all the implications – another example, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I just want to make another comment. One of the speakers 

on behalf of the government said that most of the people that 

invested in the plan receive the matching contribution, were 

earning less than $9,133 a year. But, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t 

have one single statistic to show us what the family income was 

of the people who invested in the plan – not one single statistic. 

And I have been asking them in this House since last December 

to be compiling statistics to show us what the family income is. 

And none of that information is forthcoming, Mr. Speaker, and 

I’m beginning to ask myself why it’s not forthcoming, because 

that criticism has been there about that plan since its inception. 

 

But you know, having made these criticisms with respect to the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that 

more pressing is the immediate need to deal with the immediate 

problem, and a very serious problem of poverty among seniors 

– poverty among seniors today. Many seniors are very poor 

today, and they didn’t plan it that way, Mr. Speaker. They 

didn’t plan it that way, but that’s the way it turned out. 

 

Many of these men and women lived through the Depression 

and they worked hard, they were frugal, and they saved what 

they could. But with escalating costs, it’s become impossible 

for many elderly men and women to make ends meet. They 

barely manage to scrape together enough money to feed and 

clothe and house themselves on a daily basis, not to mention 

paying unexpected home repair costs and increasing utility bills. 

 

And it’s important to note, Mr. Speaker, that more than half of 

the single women, 65 and over, live on incomes well below the 

poverty level. But many of these men and women, Mr. Speaker, 

say nothing. They’ve learned acceptance. They’re not 

complaining, but that’s no  

reason to neglect them. Just because they’re not complaining is 

no reason to neglect them. 

 

And the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, Mr. Speaker, does 

virtually nothing to solve the distressing problem of poverty 

among seniors. And the $15 a month payment that the member 

from Wascana referred to does nothing to help a person that’s 

living below the poverty line, or does very little. It’s 

insignificant in the total scheme of things. And for the 

government to pat themselves on the back with 

self-congratulatory praise and hold this out as social reform for 

seniors is absolutely ridiculous when the best they can offer is 

$15 a month to someone who’s living under the poverty line. 

 

You know, we must ask ourself, Mr. Speaker, we must ask 

ourself whether a plan that costs us $10 million last year, and 

could cost us $45 million a year or more, whether this money is 

being well spent when it does nothing to solve the immediate 

crisis, and it does nothing to solve the crisis that will be upon us 

in the year 2000 because low-income families simply cannot 

afford to participate. Is this money well spent, Mr. Speaker? 

 

There’s no question that we need a pension plan – absolutely no 

question. No question that home-makers, small business men 

and women and farmers need a pension plan. We need it. But 

we need a pension plan that includes everybody, Mr. Speaker, 

every person in this province, and not just the people who can 

afford it. Because I seriously question whether the money’s 

being well spent if all it does is help those who can afford to 

contribute, and leave out those who cannot afford to contribute, 

and leave out seniors now who are seriously suffering from 

poverty in this province. 

 

And the Minister of Finance’s attempt, the Minister of 

Finance’s . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Ludicrous. 

 

Ms. Simard: — And the member from Regina South says this 

is ludicrous. He thinks the problems of the seniors in his riding 

are ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. And he’s talking . . . he thinks this 

is ludicrous, and I just want his comments on record. 

 

The Minister of Finance’s attempt, Mr. Speaker, to link the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan to medical care is ridiculous. It’s 

absolutely ridiculous because the Saskatchewan Pension Plan is 

founded on a philosophy that is not geared towards making it 

universal. It is not a universal plan. It pays little attention to the 

poor, whereas medicare was universal – it was universal. It 

made no distinction on the basis of income – absolutely no 

distinction. 

 

And once again I want to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that I am 

pleased to see the members opposite were directing their 

attention towards pension for home-makers. I’m pleased to see 

that, for home-makers, and small-business men and women, 

farmers, and others. The idea was good. But no, we don’t want 

a plan, we don’t want a plan that leaves out those who need it 

the most. We want a plan that’s fair, fair to seniors today, fair to 

seniors tomorrow, fair to all people in Saskatchewan. 

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2065 

 

We want our tax dollars spent fairly. We want competent 

planning for the future and not a hit-and-miss approach, an 

approach that misses those who really need this pension reform 

the most, those who 25 years from now are going to be in 

serious problem because this pension plan overlooked them. 

And I urge the government – I urge the government to consider 

that, and to consider reforming their pension plan so that it 

brings in those people who, 25 year from now, will really need 

that pension plan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Sorry, sir. Mr. Speaker, there’s an amendment 

I wish to move: 

 

That all words after the word “legislature” be deleted, and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

regrets that the provincial government’s Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan fails to address the needs of low-income 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

It’s an amendment to the main motion, Mr. Speaker, moved by 

myself and seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

speak, both to the original motion and to the amendment, 

because of the importance of pension reform – the vital 

necessity of having reform that deals with the real problems that 

people face. People in Saskatchewan, and across Canada today, 

need real security and protection in their old age, particularly 

low income people. And that’s the thrust behind the amendment 

to the original motion, the failure of the government’s pension 

plan to provide realistic protection, reasonable protection for 

low income people. 

 

The problem is this in a nut shell: — the people who have the 

money can provide for their own pension plan, and the more 

money that an individual couple has, or an individual has, the 

more proportionately they can provide for their own pension 

welfare down the road, the more that they can put into their own 

private plan. And so the problem with this PC pension plan is 

that the poor won’t be banking on it. They can’t afford it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we have with this PC pension plan is 

fundamentally a plan for the rich. It’s a plan that is 

fundamentally unfair and it’s predicated on the ability of an 

individual to provide for their own pension protection – a plan 

where a high income earner, for example, a medical doctor, can 

make a $300 payment on behalf of his spouse into the pension 

plan, the spouse who presumably wouldn’t be working and has 

no income of her own. And lo and behold, this spouse is 

eligible for $300, dollar for dollar matching contribution, from 

the Government of Saskatchewan, from Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. 

 

(1645) 

 

Someone who doesn’t need government money,  

someone who can afford their own pension protection within 

their own family, this is the person who gets a government 

grant from the PC pension plan. And so the real beneficiaries of 

this PC plan are primarily wealthy home-makers, those who can 

afford to take advantage of it. 

 

And so because individual income and not family income is 

used as the basis for calculating contributions, we have an 

inequity – an inequity where taxpayers end up subsidizing the 

spouses of wealthy people who could well afford to put in the 

contributions themselves. 

 

And so I say, as a positive pension reform measure, I say to the 

government opposite and to back-benchers opposite, talk to 

your cabinet about making changes which will eliminate this 

particular provision in the plan. It would be a real improvement 

and it would be one cut-back that would affect a reasonable, 

desirable savings for Saskatchewan taxpayers. Amend this plan 

in the following fashion, by eliminating that provision for the 

rich to benefit, and you would have a real and meaningful 

pension reform, not the kind of hollow reform that we have 

right now. 

 

Now we need to take a look in order to understand this plan, at 

what it means for a home-maker on a low income, or on a fixed 

income, for someone who is a single parent with dependant 

children earning less than $9,133 a year. And it’s a very 

different plan indeed. In fact, it’s no plan at all. 

 

And it seems almost that this plan was calculated, deliberately 

calculated, to exclude such an individual from securing any 

pension benefits from the Government of Saskatchewan. Why? 

Because in order to benefit form this PC pension plan, one has 

to be able to afford it. One has to be able to contribute to it in 

the first place. And that’s precisely why a single parent or a 

person on minimum wage with two dependants can’t afford to 

participate. 

 

And the numbers that the government members take such pride 

in talking about – that fact that 80 per cent of the contributions, 

the contributors, were eligible for government assistance – I 

think is a testimony to failure of this plan. You can bet that very 

little of the $9.4 million of taxpayers’ money that was invested 

into this plan, was invested by people in low income situations. 

Imagine how ludicrous someone who’s forced to go to a food 

bank in order to feed their family, freeing $300 a year to put 

into this pension plan. This plan is cruel in the extreme. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the National Council of Welfare had set the 

’86 poverty line at $10,108 a year for a single individual living 

in a city the size of Saskatoon or Regina, those people at a 

poverty level of $9,133 are not in a position to invest in their 

future, to invest in this bogus pension plan. 

 

And the problem then is that this plan sounds fine but it fails to 

give benefits to those who need it. It betrays Saskatchewan’s 

poor. And far from being a forward-looking pension plan, it’s 

an incredibly backward step in pension reform. 

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2066 

 

It’s part of the PC agenda to privatize poverty, to put the burden 

of retirement on individuals who can’t even begin to pay for it 

in the first place, and at the same time to privatize big 

government grants to people who have the big dollars to 

provide for their pensions in the first place, who can well afford 

to pay for their retirement. 

 

Another fundamental flaw with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

is that it’s a poor second-best to a comprehensive plan, to a plan 

that meets the real needs of Saskatchewan people in terms of 

portability. This plan lacks portability even as it lacks 

credibility. This plan is not portable. As long as the individual 

lives within Saskatchewan, it’s portable – only as long as the 

individual lives within Saskatchewan and contributes to the 

plan and gets the government’s matching grant. But should the 

individual leave Saskatchewan and move to Ontario or Alberta, 

there would be no corresponding plan and his or her pension 

contributions and provisions would cease. This lack of 

portability then is a major weakness in this plan. Dollars put 

into the plan aren’t lost when a person moves, but they certainly 

are frozen. And there is no way an individual can have the sort 

of continuous pension protection afforded by the Canada 

Pension Plan. 

 

And so I say, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan people today 

need a pension plan that provides real protection, meaningful 

protection, a plan that is portable, and a plan that is fair. And 

this PC plan fails on all of those scores. It is not only a flawed 

plan, a plan that is second-best, but it is a plan that is 

fundamentally unfair. 

 

New Democrats place a high priority on meaningful pension 

reform, particularly pension reform that’s aimed to help those 

who need it most. This plan is not that kind of pension reform 

and I feel compelled, therefore, to second the amendment 

moved by the member for Regina Lakeview, and to condemn 

this plan fundamentally for its failure to help those who need 

pension reform and pension protection the very most – namely, 

those on low and fixed incomes. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

and speak to the motion of my friend from Wascana. For the 

benefit of the Assembly I will repeat the resolution: — 

 

That this legislature commend the Government of 

Saskatchewan for implementing the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan, the first pension plan of its kind in North 

America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us briefly look at exactly what the plan is, what 

it does, and what it is not. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, it’s not another welfare plan. Members 

opposite would like it to be another welfare plan, another 

welfare program, but that is not what the plan was designed for 

and that is not something which I could endorse. But I do 

believe that the treatment of our elderly poor is worth 

commenting on in this debate, as I  

know members opposite need to have their memories jogged 

every once in a while. 

 

The province does in fact have an income support program for 

the elderly poor. That program, of course, is the Saskatchewan 

income plan. Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP will say that they set 

up this SIP (Saskatchewan income plan) plan, and that is in fact 

true. They set it up to give the poorest seniors in our province 

25 whole dollars a month. That’s right — $25 a month, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, any thinking person knows that you’re not 

going to raise anyone out of desperate circumstances with $25 a 

month. In today’s world that is a pittance. So when this 

government, the Progressive Conservative government, took 

power it set a high priority on assistance for our poor seniors. 

First, we raised the SIP payments 100 per cent. Then we raised 

it again another 100 per cent. Payments are $100 per month 

instead of the paltry $25 per month provided by the NDP. 

 

I think it’s fair to pose the question: — if the NDP are so 

committed to helping the elderly poor, why is it that it took a 

PC government to provide meaningful income support? The 

member from Lakeview, I believe it was, suggested that this 

program didn’t go far enough. Well, Mr. Speaker, we on this 

side of the House don’t always suggest that everything is 100 

per cent. But it is a start; it’s something no one else ever done. 

 

The member also suggested that you had to have $300. You 

don’t have to have $300. You can put in $1. Whatever you can 

afford you can put into this plan. 

 

Another thing about this plan, Mr. Speaker, is you can start the 

plan and you can move to another province and you can come 

back to the province and start in and start up the plan again. It’s 

never happened in North America before. A remarkable plan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government also instituted the heritage grant program for 

seniors, that provides $500 for every single senior and 750 for 

every senior couple in the province. The members opposite 

keep talking about a pension for seniors. This is not a pension 

for seniors. This is a pension for the ordinary working class 

people. A pension when they reach retirement age, not old age; 

retirement age is what we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. The 

heritage program by itself provides greater assistance to seniors 

than the NDP ever could with their $25 plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the record speaks for itself on those who best 

assist the elderly poor in this province. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan was not designed to be a social 

assistance program. It was designed to be a mechanism to 

provide spouses, self-employed people, and small businesses 

with a workable and successful pension plan. That is the 

purpose and that is exactly the function it is serving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the facts bear out that the plan is working, with 

tens of thousands of Saskatchewan residents joining and 

contributing to the plan. If the plan was no good, Mr. Speaker, I 

submit to the members opposite: why are people joining it? Is 

everyone over in Saskatchewan don’t  

  



 

August 25, 1987 

2067 

 

know a good thing when they see it? Is it only those people over 

there that have got common sense? 

 

I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that this plan is of special 

value to low income people and to women. Low income people 

are eligible for 100 per cent matching contribution to the plan. 

If they wanted to put in $1, Mr. Speaker — $1 – the plan 

immediately puts in another dollar, and those two dollars 

together earn interest and perform along with the pool of 

investment created by all investors. You don’t have to have 

$300, Mr. Speaker — $1, if that’s all you can afford. 

 

And again, I would like to suggest to the member from 

Lakeview, if this plan is not 100 per cent, where were they for 

the years that they were in, when there was money in the till – 

money in the till that they could have used for a pension plan? 

They didn’t spend it for the pensioners. They blew it, Mr. 

Speaker, they blew it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this plan is particularly of benefit to women 

because it allows them to have a separate and secure pension 

plan in their own right, Mr. Speaker, in their own right. A 

woman whose husband may earn a significant income, but who, 

on her own, does not have a significant income – and I need not 

remind you, Mr. Speaker, that there are a large number of 

women who have no income at all, independent of their spouse 

– such women are entitled to the full benefit of the matching 

contributions. In this way they build up a security for their own 

retirement without being completely dependent upon income 

and arrangements from their spouses. You know, Mr. Speaker, 

the tragedies that occurred when women were forced into total 

dependencies upon their spouses for security of income in their 

retirement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a lot more comments on this, 

but as I see the time, I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 


