













































October 1, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 1, 1987 

 

3023 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Tourism, Small Business and Co-operatives 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 45 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The other 

evening we spent a few moments going through the estimates 

on this department. We dealt mainly with small business. 

Tonight it’s my intention to move into the tourism area and 

what your government’s departments are in terms of the 

announcements you’ve made pertinent to tourism. 

 

But I want to repeat what I had said the other night, Mr. 

Minister, there are many people in this province who are very 

sceptical of your plans, and I think what we’re going to try and 

do tonight is establish whether or not you in fact have some 

concrete plans and if those plans, that were announced about a 

year ago, have been put on the old wheel, and if in fact they’re 

moving on. 

 

We’ve — just to do a quick overview of your government’s 

performance since 1982 — we’ve seen a litany of slogans. 

We’ve seen Open For Business which was a flop. We’ve seen 

Saskatchewan Builds that didn’t work. We’ve heard Partnership 

for Progress that didn’t happen, and I haven’t heard a new 

slogan for tourism yet but I’m assuming we will, in the next few 

months and few weeks, hear some kind of a slogan. But we’re 

hoping, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman, that it be more than 

slogan than an actual fact, it will create some real economic 

development in this province — something that’s been sadly 

lacking since 1982. 

 

We have some concerns on this side of the House, I must say, in 

terms of the change to the department. It’s been lumped 

together, a number of different departments — Tourism and 

Small Business and Co-operatives have been lumped into one 

larger size department. And what we’ve been hearing, Mr. 

Ministers, and I guess what we’ve been seeing is that this 

department is in chaos. It’s my feeling and the feeling of a lot of 

others in this province that the people employed within your 

department haven’t had direction from Executive Council or 

from yourself as the minister, and they’re not really sure where 

you’re going. 

 

I said before, we want to look at your plans and your announced 

plans, and we want to see if there is a plan for economic 

development through tourism. I said before, we want to see if 

there has been anything accomplished so far or if it’s just wind 

and feathers in a blizzard. 

 

Last evening you indicated to me that you were concerned 

about positive proposals from this side of the House. And, Mr. 

Minister, that’s how we see our role. But the proposals and the 

changes, the amendments to your plans, can’t be enacted until 

we know what your plans are. Mr. Minister, the Executive 

Council, you as part of that Executive Council and the Premier, 

set the direction  

for this province in every department. 

 

And as I said, you’ve made announcements, but we want to 

know if you’ve carried through on those announcements. And I 

want to go to back to one particular area that was announced 

about a year ago during the election campaign by the Premier, 

the tourism and hospitality institute, and we’ll be questioning as 

to what’s happened since. I believe it was October 10 of last 

year. It’s been almost a year, and frankly, there’s nothing that 

we can see that’s tangible, and we’re going to be asking you 

about that. 

 

But I want to get on to what we plan to do this evening, and I 

would like to ask you some questions, if I might, regarding the 

tourism and hospitality institute. The Premier, during the 

election campaign in 1986 — I have a clipping here from the 

Star-Phoenix, and I guess this was on October 4, right during 

the campaign — the Premier announces 7,500 jobs that he’s 

going to create in tourism, and one of the vehicles that they’re 

going to be using in order to create all of these would be a 

hospitality institute. Now, Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you if 

you could update us on your government’s immediate plans for 

the establishment of the tourism and hospitality institute. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think at the beginning it would 

only be fair if I outline — you asked some of the initiatives that 

we were having in tourism and what the impact was in the 

province. I think before going right into your direct questions of 

the hospitality institute, I would outline a few of the facts that 

would be, I think, of interest to you. 

 

I think you realize, and I hope you do, the great potential of 

tourism in the whole economic development of Saskatchewan 

— not only Saskatchewan but I think every province and every 

state across this nation. I said this the other night so I won’t 

repeat it in any detail, but if you ask any of the economists, and 

especially people involved in tourism, they will tell you that 

tourism has probably one of the greatest growth potentials 

within the not too distant time frame that tourism could become 

almost our number two industry. 

 

You know, times have changed, and I think you realize this 

certainly from whence I was a boy where those who went on 

holidays were few and far between . . . 

 

An Hon. Members: A long time ago. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And the member from Quill Lakes said 

it’s a while ago, and he’s correct on that. But I think he knows 

the same thing — where we grew up and so on, that you didn’t 

get a holiday. And those who went to the East, you kind of 

wondered if they’d come back again. And anybody that ever 

went overseas, you were really wondered if you’d ever see 

them. But that’s changed. And it’s commonplace now for 

people in all walks of life to go on a holiday. That’s part and 

parcel of what life in North America and Canada and 

Saskatchewan’s all about. 

 

So I think anyone can realize that the potential for tourism 

within our own province, within our own country, within this 

continent and across the globe is growing yearly and  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3024 

 

yearly. So when I say it could become the number two industry 

in the province of Saskatchewan, I think you could find many 

people that would say that that is a distinct possibility. 

 

I see the member from Athabasca sitting across from me, and I 

think he well understands too the latent potential, still some to 

be developed, of the tourism industry in the part of the country 

that he represents. I mean, we in Saskatchewan sit here with a 

fantastic potential to develop and market many of the things 

that are here in this wonderful province and country in which 

we live. 

 

Approximately 4,650 tourism-related businesses, or 13 per cent 

of all non-agricultural businesses, exist in our province. We 

have direct and indirect employment of somewhere around 

30,000 people. Our Saskatchewan convention and meeting 

business is in excess of 56,000 people; and we have an annual 

growth trend between 9 to 10 per cent per year from ’84-87. 

And of course with the opening of the new convention centre in 

Regina, we will see that that can greatly be increased as we will 

have here in Regina a state of the art convention centre and 

hotel. 

 

Motor coaches and tours through the province is a big part of 

life. As we know, our population and the population of many 

areas in this country — the senior population is increasing. 

Seniors today, thank goodness to the times that we have lived in 

and the progress that we have made as a society, have better 

pension plans; they have an opportunity to go and visit other 

parts of the country which they didn’t in their years of being 

productive citizens of this province. So many of them take 

motor coach tours, and we presently have 537 motor coach 

tours through Saskatchewan. These tours registered 9,214 

rooms during the summer season and the direct economic 

import to the province of $2.5 million with an average stay of 

one night. 

 

And I’m sure, Mr. Critic, you would join with me in hoping that 

we could develop attractions within Saskatchewan in which we 

could entice those people to stay more than one night in our 

province. Because we know, you and I, that there’s more than 

one night of good entertainment and things to see in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

On that note, I was talking to the new executive director of 

TISASK (Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan) and 

we talked about TISASK the other night — that’s the private 

side of the tourism industry — and he was indicating to me that 

his research indicates that a lot of people coming in at the 

border of North Portal, the Americans, that are bound to Alaska. 

It seems to be to an American that the big thing to do is to go to 

Alaska. I’ve been to Alaska and I can see why they want to 

there; it’s a lovely place to see. 

 

The CEO of TISASK, the chief executive officer, was 

indicating to me that he was looking at some routes through 

Saskatchewan that would indicate to the people when they came 

to the border and came into the port of entry how they could go 

and see some of our first class golf courses, stay at some of our 

very interesting resorts, and not pass through Saskatchewan in 

one night or two days, but to spend . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . That’s  

right, to spend it in two or three areas. 

 

I see the member From Quill Lake tripping again, and he knows 

very well that at this time of the year, there is a fine potential 

that we could develop for tourism for the hunters in your part of 

the country. I mean, that is something that we can market, and 

from my investigations in the mid-western United States, 

there’s many people who would like to go there and take part in 

the fine goose hunting and upland game that you have in your 

part of the province. But I think it’s incumbent upon all of us to 

do these sorts of things. 

 

Restaurant — this is a good indicator too — restaurant receipts 

during January to May of 1987 are up 20.5 per cent over 1986. 

We have a number of new products in tourism development in 

our province. In the current year since March 31, we have eight 

product development projects, both capitals and studies, 

representing approximately $7 million in new investments. One 

that I have been at, and I think many of you have been at and I 

think the city of Regina and southern Saskatchewan are very 

proud of, is the new Queensbury Downs where we having a 

racing facility that people tell me is second to none across this 

country, and I think we should congratulate all of those on the 

exhibition board and the people involved in putting this 

together. It’s first-class, world-class. And the member from 

Rosemont is nodding in agreement that any Regina member 

should be proud of that facility. He says he supported it. I want 

to tell him that our government has supported the exhibition 

association with the expansion to the Agridome and to the 

expansion there of the barns, and now the racing facility, which 

I understand from talking to people in the mid-western United 

States, is perhaps the best in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

We have a number of four-season resorts that have opened. 

Duck Mountain has a new four-season resort. We have one 

down at the Cypress Hills and another one in Moose Mountain 

Park. 

 

So just as a little introduction to the critic to show what we have 

been doing in the way of developing this fine potential in 

tourism, I hope those opening remarks give him a little bit of 

indication of some of the things that have been done. And I can 

say that I look with great optimism to what we can do and I 

believe there is a lot of development there. And as we discussed 

the other night, there’s a lot of things at the community level, 

there’s a lot of things on the regional level that we can do as 

Saskatchewan people to make us a real show-place for tourism, 

a place where people want to come and a place where people 

want to stay. 

 

But getting to your question, you can build facilities, you can 

have natural attractions, and you can have these things in 

abundance, but I guess the thing that is brought back to me as I 

travel and as I talked to other people who travel is how you are 

treated as an individual and a human being when you go to 

another part of this country. And certainly I can tell you that 

one of the most impressing things is that if when you come into 

an area and somebody says to you, I’m glad to see you, and 

where do you come from, and how long are you here for, and if 

you are here for a while, would you like to see this and  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3025 

 

this and this. And that’s where we as Saskatchewan people can 

shine. 

 

I know from my friends in my constituency and in my many 

travels through this province — and I think all of you in 

political life would agree — that the people of Saskatchewan 

are a hospitable people, they’re a kind people, and they’re a 

sharing people. And I believe that we should be taking that 

natural instinct, that natural part of the Saskatchewan that I 

grew up in and I believe so much in, and we should be using 

that to help us market these fine resources that we have. And to 

that end, my friend, is where we’re bringing in a hospitality 

institute. 

 

(1915) 

 

You mentioned that it has been a period of time since it was 

announced, and I will grant you that. But if you know me, and 

your older members in the opposition know me well, know that 

if I’m going to do something, I will do it right. They know that 

entirely, and the member from Quill Lakes knows from five 

years of health, he knows that’s exactly correct. So I am not the 

kind of man to rush in and headstart and say, hey, we’ve got to 

get this going, we’ve got to build a hospitality institute, because 

I’m only going to have one opportunity to do it. If we only have 

one opportunity, as myself as a minister, and my government 

and as this province, it’s only incumbent that is done best for 

the interest of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So to that extent, I have gone out and discussed, as I’ve told you 

the other night in my consultation workshops this spring in 

Weyburn . . . 400 people talking about a hospitality institute, 

hearing from the grassroots of the people of Saskatchewan, how 

they feel it should be put together. A c couple of weeks ago up 

in Yorkton, my officials were with me and we had a great 

dialogue on the same thing. We’re looking to go to Swift 

Current in the very near future to hear what those people in that 

part of the province have to say. And before this is over, I’ll 

have touched all areas of the province of Saskatchewan to hear 

how they feel we should deliver this hospitality institute. 

 

And I think it’s important that we talk to all walks of life. In 

Yorkton, I remember talking to some of the students who were 

there from the collegiate, because they are the people, they are 

the people that are going to take part in this type of institute, 

they are the people that are going to build the tourism industry 

of the future, and I think it’s only right that we listen to them. 

 

So getting down to your question, because I know you have 

many more and I don’t want to belabour this, certainly we’re 

going to build a hospitality institute. You have my word that it 

will be a world-class hospitality institute. It will be something 

that you’re proud of. It will be something that your people from 

Duck Lake and Prince Albert will be able to access. They will 

be able to have that training to best put forth the face of Duck 

Lake and Prince Albert and of Maple Creek and of Hudson Bay 

and of Moosomin and of Estevan and of Bengough. Every part 

of Saskatchewan will be able to benefit from this. And we’re 

putting together at this point in time a board from a 

cross-section of people in the hospitality industry to direct the 

way that this should be developed. 

So in short answer to your question, we’re on with the building 

of it. Again, as I told you the other night, if you have 

suggestions, I welcome them. If you want to give them to me 

publicly here in the forum, fine. If you don’t feel you want to do 

it that way, come to my office, sit down with me, let’s discuss 

about what you think should be part of the hospitality institute, 

because I can tell you the Devine government is building a 

hospitality institute and it will be a good one. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I think, Mr. Minister, if I can take you 

back to my question which you haven’t answered . . . Perhaps 

you didn’t understand my question, and the question was 

shortly put. I got an awfully long answer. You were all around 

the province but you were nowhere near my question. And what 

I want to know is what your immediate plans are for the 

establishment of the tourism and hospitality institute. Let me be 

a little more specific: where might it be built? How large might 

it be? What will it house? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think if you recall, when I stood up 

to answer your question, I said I want to give you a little 

background in what we’re doing and I would lead to what we’re 

doing in the institute. And I think I did that. But if you missed 

it, that’s fine. We are in the throes of putting together a 

hospitality institute. I am, right at this time and through the 

consultation with people out there, putting together a board of 

people from a cross-section of tourism-related industries to be 

an advisory board to me on what they feel should be in the 

institute. 

 

Also as I said, I have gone to two consultative workshops of 

about 600 people, and I plan to have about another six more that 

will bring in approximately another 3,000 people. Out of that, I 

feel that we will get the mix of what Saskatchewan thinks 

should be in an institute. 

 

Now you say to me, where is it, how big it will be; and I don’t 

want to be critical of you, but I think that shows a very strong 

difference between what you believe and what I believe because 

I am not going to create, I am not going to create a 

bricks-and-mortar institute. I believe that would be regressive. I 

believe, in talking to people, that is not what they want. 

 

I believe that an institute that is going to train people in the 

hospitality trade should be itinerant. As I said, your people in 

Duck Lake and in P.A. need to have the best training possible to 

put forth the best face forward. The people in Oxbow do and the 

people in Hudson Bay do. So it may well be one component of 

it is an itinerant type of training session that goes around to 

those people. 

 

And some of those people are in what we call the lower-paying 

jobs, unfortunately. They are working in restaurants in some 

cases; they are working in hotels, and they do not have the 

money to uproot and go to Saskatoon or Regina to take a 

course. So therefore we can take the course to them. So that is 

one significant part of it. 

 

The second part of an institute is that they can work in 

conjunction with the Department of Education to write courses 

and indicate, through guidance counsellors and so on, the 

opportunities, because let’s go back to what I  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3026 

 

said earlier. If tourism can become the number two industry in 

the province of Saskatchewan, then it’s incumbent upon those 

who see this to put together courses and kits for guidance 

counsellors to indicate to young people in our schools the 

possibility and the potential that can be developed in tourism. 

 

The other thing, as I said earlier that I believe in very strongly, 

if this has this great economic potential for this province, if this 

has the opportunity to be the number two economic generator, 

then I believe that we should raise the status of the people in 

these jobs, that we shouldn’t look on these jobs as somehow 

secondary, because I don’t believe that. Some of these people 

are the front door to the province of Saskatchewan. Why 

shouldn’t we have the young girl who works in the hotel in 

Estevan as our best ambassador so that when an American 

comes up and he drops in for lunch . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: Yes, at minimum wage. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I’m saying we should raise that 

status. I believe in that. And we should have these people 

trained so that they are there and they can say, welcome to 

Saskatchewan, welcome to Estevan, here are all the benefits. 

And to my friend from Rosemont, one of the benefits may be 

the Rafferty dam in a few years, and here are all the things you 

can do there, and welcome to Saskatchewan. 

 

If you get that warm feeling, you get that kind of greeting and 

hospitality, they average thing that most people do is give a 

gratuity or a tip to that person, where they feel better about what 

they’ve been doing. I’m telling you that is the way we will sell 

Saskatchewan. That is the way we’ll develop tourism, and we 

have to do that through a hospitality institute so these people are 

trained in being able to put forward the best face of this fine 

province and the fine people we have here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, you should have taped one 

of your campaign speeches or one of the Premier’s in October 

of last year, because we’ve spent 12 months waiting. You’ve 

got up and you’ve given the same speech you would have given 

a year ago or six months ago, and that you’ll probably give next 

year in this House when we question you as to what’s the 

make-up of the hospitality institute. 

 

I want to, as well, tell you that you’ve got your share of gall — 

sitting in the Executive Council and you can talk about the 

people who you’ve frozen on minimum wage for years? You’ve 

got the courage to get up and stand and talk to those people 

about how you care about them? Be real. 

 

Let’s get what we’ve established so far. The possibility of a 

hospitality and tourism institute being housed somewhere seems 

very vague, and I don’t believe it’s going to be, just by what 

you’re saying. You want it in little areas throughout the 

province and you say you’re consulting. Right? And this from a 

government that believes in building. You’ve had 12 months, 

Mr. Minister, to build this. I want to know at what point in time 

can we  

expect this program to be working and these people to be 

trained in the industry? 

 

As I said, 12 months you’ve had, you’ve sat on your hands. We 

ask you tonight when? No answer. We ask you where? No 

answer. Just the same kind of hype that you were thrusting upon 

the people last October during the election campaign. So I’m 

going to leave that question because it’s pretty clear you’ve got 

nothing in place, and you’re not giving me any indication as to 

when you’ll have something in place. 

 

So you alluded to a board. Let’s go on to the board, and let’s 

talk about this board. Can you tell me who is on the board? Can 

you tell me when the board was established. And can you tell 

me how often and when that board has met? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I’ll go a little slower for you. First 

of all, I told you previously there will not be an institute of 

bricks and mortar. I don’t believe that’s the way we should go. 

There will be probably something of an itinerant nature that will 

move around the province so that people in those industries can 

get the training right where they are. There also will be a 

component that will move into the schools that will show the 

young people of this province the opportunities in the tourism 

industry. That may well, that may well evolve into training in 

the technical institutes and even to the universities, where we 

can come out with certificate courses in hospitality training. 

The Minister of Advanced Education and I have been working 

closely on this. 

 

So getting back to where it is and where it will be located, let 

me tell you once again, if you’re waiting to see a bricks and 

mortar school built in Saskatoon, in Regina, Prince Albert, in 

Wynyard or in Morse, you’re not going to see it because that’s 

not what we’re going to be doing. 

 

Secondly, I told you a few minutes ago, and again I will go over 

this, and I will go over it slowly — that I went out and have 

consulted with the people of Saskatchewan, and I will . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I listen, and I will continue to 

do that. At the same time, and I said a few minutes ago, I am 

putting together a board, a board that is a cross-section, a 

cross-section of people in the hospitality and the educational 

fields in the province of Saskatchewan. That board will soon be 

in place, and they will have a great deal of input into how they 

feel the institute should develop. 

 

Now you may wish that I would have rushed out in November, 

January of last year, threw something together, rented some 

building, put up some edifice, and said there’s the hospitality 

institute. I don’t operate that way. I don’t think that’s the way 

we should operate. I believe that when you build something of 

this importance for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

the first rule, and probably the first rule of all politics, is to 

listen to what they’re telling you. 

 

You know, there’s an old saying that fools rush in where wise 

men fear to tread. So I think going slow is not a fallacy. I think 

going slow and carefully, and building, and building on the 

wishes and the desires and the advice of those people that want 

to talk to us is exactly what we  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3027 

 

should do and is exactly what we will do. And there will be a 

hospitality institute and there will be a board in place very, very 

soon that I think will service the tourism needs of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — All right, I guess we’ve got that 

established. There’s after 365 days, after the Premier’s 

grandiose announcement during the campaign, there’s been no 

board established. The only thing that we’ve got established is 

that you got the same hype and the same rhetoric you had a year 

ago and that you’ve been out consulting. And that’s what we’ve 

got established to this point. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, maybe you’re satisfied with that, but I’m 

going to tell you that we on this House aren’t satisfied with that. 

We, as I said, will probably come back into estimates next year 

and we’re going to hear the same story because you’re not 

going to rush into anything. Oh no, you’re going to move 

cautiously forward, cautiously forward the same way that you 

cautiously build a $3.5 billion deficit. 

 

I want to know, Mr. Minister when you plan to have this 

itinerant hospital institute in place. Can we expect it in the year 

’88, ’89, ’90, ’91, or when? Or just prior to the next election 

again? Because this would make a nice, big headline; this 

would be a dandy — “Tourism will create 7,500 jobs.” That’ll 

look . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I would ask the member from Prince 

Albert-Duck Lake not to use exhibits in the House. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Pardon me, Mr. Chairman. I certainly 

will refrain from using exhibits. That’s enough of an exhibit to 

the people of the province. 

 

Let me quote from a headline. Let me quote from a headline 

then without reading the headline, and I’m just going from 

memory — 7,500 jobs to be created through tourism. And that 

will make good memory for the folks of this province when the 

next election comes. 

 

I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, when we can expect this 

program to be in place. I would like to know when you expect 

that this board will be in place and operating. And I would like 

to know, as well, where are the funds budgeted for this institute 

in this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I’ll give you a little more 

information as to what’s been going on in regard to this. One 

thing, in the host program — and I’m not sure you’re aware of 

the host program, but TISASK has had a host program in place 

which will be going on this fall and this winter. 

 

It’s interesting to know, and I think you are from Prince Albert 

— I believe that’s where you live — and I don’t imagine you 

read the paper, but there was an industry workshop held in 

Prince Albert a while ago, exactly on the establishment of the 

hospitality institute, right in your home town. One of the ladies 

that came out there as the  

guest lecturer, or the person who addressed the group, I had met 

in Vancouver earlier. 

 

My then deputy of tourism, Mr. Folstad and I happened to be in 

Vancouver and we met this lady, Anne Pollock was her name. 

And she happened to be, just for your information, was the lady 

that has been directing and building the hospitality institute in 

British Columbia. So we invited her out. She is a great . . . 

probably across Canada one of the leaders in how you would 

put an institute together. And it would be interesting to know 

that that meeting with the industry took place right in your 

backyard in Prince Albert some time ago. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, we’re all pleased that 

you’ve had another conference, just like your open for business 

conference perhaps — another expenditure of $300,000 that 

didn’t work. But I mean we’re glad to hear you’ve had that 

conference, and I’m glad to see that you’ve gone to Vancouver, 

and I’m glad you made reference of your former deputy. And I 

wonder where he was. Did he leave because of your 

government’s reorganization and perhaps he can’t find work in 

that environment? But that’s another question. 

 

Mr. Minister, clearly you’ve done nothing so far. We’re hoping 

for better things in the year to come, so I think we’ll move off 

of the hospitality institute. Pretty clear where you are. 

 

Can I ask you, Mr. Minister, about the Canada-Saskatchewan 

tourism agreement? And I want to know how much of the $30 

million available to Saskatchewan under that agreement has 

been spent. And I would like to know, has the province made 

available its portion of these funds, some $15 million, I believe. 

Where have you made these available from 1984 to ’89. Could 

you answer me that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well before I answer that, I’m not going 

to let you off the hook to say we haven’t done anything in the 

tourism industry, because obviously you don’t listen to what 

we’re telling you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well listen 

again — last time to explain it to you, please. 

 

We’ve had consultation workshops. Okay? Two, two . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . You fail to listen — two. The 

member from Quill Lakes again fails to listen — 650 people at 

the two of them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, at the 

two. You fail to listen also. And we have another one planned 

for . . . Usually at my workshops, I get out somewhere from 3 to 

400 people, and that’s not bad. So we’ve had those workshops. 

We are putting together a board. We had the industry come to 

Prince Albert. We brought in the best authority we could in 

western Canada that I know of to address that workshop. You 

asked me, when will it be in place? I expect the board will be in 

place within approximately a month. 

 

You asked me when the institute would be up and going; you 

asked me this. I believe that the institute should be up and going 

within the next year and probably early in the spring, summer 

of next year, it’ll be functioning. I believe it’ll be touching your 

area and all areas of the province. 

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3028 

 

So I just want to say to you before I go into the question on the 

Saskatchewan tourism agreement that for you to try and say that 

nothing has been taking place is absolutely wrong. A great deal 

has been taking place. We will be building an institute that will 

be something that you and I and everyone here can be proud of, 

and I believe it will be able to enhance and develop the tourism 

industry in this province. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, Mr. Minister, a great deal has taken 

place. You’ve consulted, you’ve spent money on a conference, 

and you’ve almost set up a board — almost. Mr. Minister, I’m 

almost afraid to ask, but I would lilac to — I think the people 

have a right to know why during your consultations you didn’t 

get a board together so that they could give you some direction. 

But I’m not talking this October, I’m talking perhaps after last 

October, why you didn’t have that board together and have this 

program on go. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think that comment certainly 

illustrates your lack of understanding of how one goes about 

building something of this nature, and I’ll leave it at that. 

 

Your question was on the Canada- Saskatchewan Subsidiary 

Agreement on Tourism. The total commitment is $12,318,000 

and the provincial share is, of committed money is $6,248,000. 

 

Excuse me. Just so we have clarification, my officials tells me 

that is of the . . . I’m quoting from about September of this year, 

and that’s from when the agreement started, which was in 

November ’84. So take that from November ’84 to September 

21, ’87. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, what was the term of the 

agreement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It was a five-year agreement. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, can you tell if a project has 

ever been refused in this province because there wasn’t 

provincial funding available under the shared-cost agreement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m informed that not because of the lack 

of fund but because some applications have not met the 

necessary criteria, there have been 32 projects that applications 

have been rejected and withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, it appears that under that 

shared formula you, in any one of those years, haven’t spent the 

full allotment. If you were to divider the 30 over five years, and 

your share, it appears to me, would be $3 a year, it appears that 

you haven’t met your target in any one of those years. I’m 

wondering, and I ask again: are there any projects that weren’t 

allowed to go ahead because the funding, the provincial funding 

wasn’t there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Sometimes where you’ll see that there’s 

an overlap from year to year because a program is announced 

and then to get the criteria and everything in place. That takes 

some time so there is a spill-over into the next year. My 

officials indicate to me that there were none  

refused because of a lack of funding. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — So you’re suggesting, Mr. Minister, then, 

you’re going to be picking up the $3 million in the next two 

years, that that $3 million of provincial funding will be 

available in this province for tourism development, but that it 

was stalled not because of lack of provincial funding, but 

because there weren’t enough applications for that money. Is 

that what you’re saying to me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m advised that, as I said earlier, that 

when a program commences, then the criteria is established and 

then people decide, well, maybe we’ll try and access this, that 

there is a spill-over from y ear to year, and that basically it isn’t, 

you know, chopped into five equal blocks, that the requirement 

increases. It’s rather a curve which would I suppose peak more 

towards the end of the agreement. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Can you tell me how much money was 

spent in each of the three years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials are working on that, so if 

you want to go on with other questions, we’ll have it. But we 

don’t just have it at our fingertips, so let’s keep questioning and 

we’ll get it to you. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Sure, Mr. Minister, if you’ll send those 

figures along that would be much appreciated. I’d also like to 

have a list of the individuals, the groups, and the projects that 

have received funding under this program since 1984. I’d like to 

know in terms, and the amounts as well, Mr. Minister. Can you 

provide that information as well, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And I presume you would want to see the 

federal and provincial commitment on those. So yes, we’re 

pulling that together and as fast as we can get it, we’ll provide it 

to you. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, can I ask you if TISASK is 

funded under the Canada-Saskatchewan tourism agreement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, they received some money under 

that. They tell me this year it’s $57,000. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me how much 

money was spent by your government for the visitor 

information centres in ’86-87? I would like to know as well 

how many centres there were in ’86-87. I would like to know 

how many employees there were in the visitor reception centres 

in ’86-87, and I would like to know how many are employed by 

TISASK in 1987-88. I would like to know, as well how many 

people who were employed by your department in those centres 

are now employed by TISASK. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’ll be forthcoming. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Can you tell me when that’s be 

forthcoming, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Just as soon as my boys get it pulled 

together here; we’re working on it. 

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3029 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m hoping, Mr. Minister, that that’ll be 

this evening. 

 

I’d like to know exactly how much money it’s costing to 

operate the information centres this year? I’d like to know how 

much the cost is, including the $116,530 paid to TISASK? And 

I would like to know . . . Under the agreement you’re 

responsible for some other expenditures, your department is. I’d 

like to know the rental payment, the heating, the telephone, the 

electrical charges, any renovations and maintenance done by 

your department, stationery, office supplies, postage, cleaning, 

janitorial supplies, and all other charges that your government 

may be responsible for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You’re right on the figure. I think 

116,530 or something to TISASK. And then you ask about the 

rent and the electricity; we will provide you with that in 

complete detail. It’s not available right now. We didn’t know 

this question would come in that amount of detail, but I can 

assure you, you will get an accounting of every cent of it. I 

don’t know if they can get that all ready tonight — they’re 

working on a couple of the other questions — but you have my 

assurance you will get it. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Could you tell me approximately what 

time frame I might be looking at in terms of getting that 

information, Mr. Minister? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If you wanted to go back over your 

question so my director of administration could get down 

everything you asked, we could have it for you in the morning. 

If you wish to allow him to get the Hansard and get the 

statements from there, it will probably be tomorrow afternoon, 

but it’ll be tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — We’re more than willing to let him get 

the information through Hansard. 

 

One of the services that TISASK is to provide under this 

agreement with the province is a training program for 

counsellors, Mr. Minister. I would like to know if the provincial 

government employees that have had previous experience in 

these facilities have been hired by the TISASK organization or 

if they’ve had an opportunity to participate, perhaps, even in the 

training of some new employees. Certainly there are a number 

of employees who have many years of experience in this field 

under your department, and I’m wondering just what their 

opportunities have been, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The people who work for us in the 

tourism offices, or the border offices where you come into the 

province, the reception centres, were trained by us. Of the 

people that had worked for the government, 11 of those people 

put their names forward to be considered by TISASK. Of the 11 

that were put forward, seven were hired by TISASK, and I’m 

under the understanding that all of those were trained by 

TISASK. So everybody that they hired went through their 

training program. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — So how many employees in total were 

there employed in your department, Mr. Minister? 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There were 21 employed by us in visitor 

reception centres. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Can you give me, Mr. Minister, any 

indication if there has been any increase in fees or charges that 

the public are paying for from services provided by TISASK 

now, and can you give me, as well, what range of increases 

those might be, if there are any? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — TISASK do not have any charge for fees 

for services, if that’s what you’re asking. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I’m not sure if I hear you, 

but what I’m asking for are the fees for any services that they 

might provide, and if there are any increases over fees that we 

charged or that the government charged when they were 

operating those facilities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, we didn’t have any fees for those 

services, nor do they. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what the 

additional $266,000 that TISASK received in July was for? 

Could you give me some indication as to what that was for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The $266,000 was for the visitor 

reception centres, and the remainder would be for the 

administration and the operation of the TISASK operation. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I want to go back to the 

employees that you have. I had some correspondence with a 

young lady who was attending university who had worked in 

tour centres for 13 years in this province. She wrote to me 

indicating that she was very disappointed that her job 

application had been refused. I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, 

why this may have happened. A young lady who had 13 years 

of experience certainly must have been found capable by your 

department and was unacceptable, for whatever other reason. 

I’m wondering if you might want to comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I wouldn’t know the reasons 

because I believe this is an individual hired by TISASK and 

they did all the interviewing and all the screening. So I 

wouldn’t know what their . . . if it was a person that they had 

rejected on what basis that would be. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I would just want to say to you, Mr. 

Minister, that when you’re making this kind of a decision and 

when you’re making these kinds of changes, that you should 

have some feeling or should feel some responsibility for the 

employees that you once had. And I’ll put this in straight 

business terms. There are many business people in this 

province, if they were selling to another entrepreneur, another 

business person would ask for some kind of a job guarantee for 

the people that they employed, and in this particular case, one 

for 13 years. 

 

And I wonder and I ask you, did you have any kind of dialogue 

with TISASK in terms of trying to give some stability to the 

jobs of the people that you had employed, this one in particular 

for some 13 years? I ask you, did you have any conversations 

with TISASK in terms of your  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3030 

 

employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I’m informed that of the employees 

that were there before, except for where some were closed, we 

asked them to put their names in. Some chose to and some 

chose not to. But then as I said previously, on the selection of 

these individuals and the interviewing, that was TISASK that 

was completely responsible for that. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I think you’re wrong. 

TISASK is completely responsible for who they chose, but 

there was no guide-lines given by your department as to 

whether or not those people were transferred when you 

transferred the operation of those facilities to TISASK. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, I said before, you’ve got a lot of 

gall standing up and talking about minimum wage earners in 

this province, and this is another indication of why I would 

make that kind of a statement. 

 

Mr. Minister, you sit around a cabinet table that has been 

irresponsible and callous to employees from one department to 

another, to working people from southern Saskatchewan to 

northern Saskatchewan, from the Manitoba border to the 

Alberta border. You’ve chased thousands of young people out 

of this province because of your employment practices and 

because of the kind of a situation you’ve set up in this province, 

and I say it’s disgusting and it’s not really acceptable at all. 

 

I’d like to ask, Mr. Minister, in terms of your commitment to 

tourism, the La Ronge tourist information booth, I’d like to 

know how cutting the funds to that particular booth fit in with 

your government’s commitment to tourism in the North? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Back to your previous question regarding 

the employees in TISASK. As I said, we had turned the visitor 

reception centres over to TISASK. We had encouraged the 

people who had been in those to put their name in, if they so 

wished, and then TISASK made the selections. And I think 

that’s only right. You may think we should still keep our finger 

in there, and say, do this, and do that, and so on. I believe if you 

turn something over to the private sector, to the TISASK, that it 

is up to them to hire the people who they want to have working 

for them. 

 

Now you speak about the La Ronge visitor reception centre. 

What we did in the last year was to finance and fund the visitor 

reception centres on the boarders where they would have 

contact with people first entering the province of Saskatchewan. 

In the case of two of these centres, La Ronge and Kindersley, 

they did not fit that criteria, so for this year we did give them a 

$5,000 grant in each case and provided a building, but they did 

not fit the criteria of what we felt a visitor reception centre of 

the province of Saskatchewan should be, and that is someone on 

the border such as at Fleming and at Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could 

give me some figures in terms of the number of tourists that 

have been in this province for ’84, ’85, ’86. And if you have 

any for the year ’87, I’d appreciate those as well. 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I have some survey results here, and I 

will dig up some more for you. I think you understand it’s 

pretty hard to tell how many came in because, you know, they 

don’t all come through visitor reception centres, they come in 

from all directions and all places. But I do have some statistics 

that may help you in what you’re wanting to know. 

 

The one thing I have here, and these are . . . Every second year 

they have done this survey and it is: total non-Saskatchewan 

Canadian trips to Saskatchewan — now this is just Canadians, 

non-Saskatchewan people — there were 1,000,048 in ’82; 

1,006,000 in ’84; and 1,063,000 in ’86. So you can see it runs 

just somewhere above 1 million to 1,063,000 — those are 

Canadians. 

 

Now I will try and dig up what I have on Americans, but I think 

you must understand that . . . and I think your question was, 

how many total tourists came in here. I don’t think we have the 

figure for the total number that came in, unless they came 

through visitor reception centres, and my officials are looking 

for more information on that for you now. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well surely, Mr. Minister, those figures 

must be indicative of the number of tourists, I would suggest. I 

see a nil increase between ’84 and ’86. And I’m wondering 

what you attribute a non-increase in the number of people who 

have visited those centres, and I would suggest to you, the 

number of people who have come from out-of-province as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The officials indicate to me those were 

people coming to Saskatchewan, and the dip could be with 

people coming through for Expo, they indicate. 

 

(2000) 

 

I have another statistic that may help you in what you’re 

wanting to find out. This one says, how many parties registered 

at the government information centres in 1986, and how does 

this compare to previous years. And I’ll give you these figures, 

these are the government information centers. In 1984 there 

were 27,409; in 1985 there were 25,225; in 1986 there were 

42,929; up till now in 1987, we have 40,000; so we have 

another three months to go in this year. As you realize the 

majority of the tourist traffic, other than the Agribition and 

things of this nature, is probably over for this year. However 

those people who are coming into Agribition, I’m not sure they 

would be registering at our government information centres 

because I imagine they’re closed down. So you could go with 

40,000 as your figure for this year. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I’m not sure if I 

understand. I didn’t hear you; it was hard to hear. Could you 

explain which visitors those were? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ll speak a little louder, I’m sorry. Those 

visitors could be Americans or Canadians that stop at our 

government information centres. So depending on which way 

they come into Saskatchewan, those are the figures of people 

that stop there for information. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Can you tell me what the number of  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3031 

 

information centres were in ’85, how many were there in ’86, 

and how many were there in ’87? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The number of centres would be seven in 

’85, seven in ’86, and five in ’87. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you, perhaps 

you can tell me how the increases in park fees are going to 

enhance tourism in this province. I’m not sure if you might 

have the figures, but I’m wondering if you could enlighten us as 

to the enhancement of tourism through those rate increases, and 

I might add, massive rate increases. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, and this is on vehicle entries. And 

comparing 1986 to 1987, in 1986 the vehicle entries into a list 

of provincial parks here. I could read them off for you if you 

wanted, but I believe you know it’s, you know, Cypress Hills 

and Duck Mountain and Greenwater and Moose Mountain and 

Echo Valley and Katepwa and Meadow Lake and so on, the 

major parks of the province. In 1986, vehicle entries, there was 

536,466. And in 1987, there was 562,897 vehicles, an increase 

of 4.9 per cent, ’87 over ’86. So I guess that is evidence that 

there are more people this year visiting our parks than there 

were a year ago. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, the parks 

that I’m familiar with, and I’ll cite one right close to the area 

that I’m very familiar with — Murray Point isn’t experiencing 

that. And if those rates in Murray Point are up, I would like to 

know. I can cite you an experience in the national park in 

Waskesiu where in 1986 they were down 20-some per cent. 

And they at that time had experienced some very massive entry 

fee increases. And I would like you to explain to me why it 

might be any different in terms of provincial parks than the 

national park. I met with some of the business people in that 

particular community, in Waskesiu, who indicated that those 

rate increases had damaged their businesses severely. And I 

would like you to tell me if you feel these rate increases are 

healthy for the tourism industry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My official indicate to me that Murray 

Point — and I’m not familiar with the locale myself — is not a 

provincial park, it’s a recreational centre or a regional park. And 

for the national parks, of course, we do not have any statistics. I 

have here before me the ones for the provincial parks, and they 

are, as I quoted to your previously, 4.9 per cent increase. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, any figures for the years in 

terms of vehicle entries — ’85, ’84, ’83? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I believe the question was whether 

the national park was down in ’86. And I think Expo had a 

profound impact upon some of the visitations to some of the 

areas in our province. We discussed this last year, or the other 

evening, when we talked about the registrations at the Fleming 

point of entry being up a considerable amount, and it seems to 

me that probably Prince Albert National Park was down 

somewhat. And I would say that a good portion of that could be 

that a lot of people took the opportunity to go to Expo. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — How much money, Mr. Minister, did  

you spend in advertising to get those people to go to Expo and 

spend their money in Vancouver? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We didn’t spend any money in 

advertising that anybody should go to Expo and spend their 

money there. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — How much money did you spend 

advertising Expo, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We spent no money encouraging people 

from Saskatchewan to go to Expo from this department. We did 

have a program, though, to people to encourage their relatives 

who would be going to Expo to stop in Saskatchewan and visit 

our province on their way through. We did spend some money 

on that type of program, and I think justifiably so, because if 

you’ll recall from my discussions the other night, I told you that 

a good portion . . . and this goes back to what I was saying 

earlier, about that Saskatchewan warmth and that Saskatchewan 

feeling and that Saskatchewan hospitality. 

 

If you will look at the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You may 

laugh about this, but this is very, very much part of this 

province that I am proud of, and I hope you would be. You may 

not be proud of it, but I am very proud of it. I am very, very 

proud of this province. I’m proud to represent it, and I’m proud 

to try to get as many people as I can to come here. You may 

laugh at that and make light of it. And for the member from 

Quill Lakes, you have every right to do that, but I’ll tell you, 

my friend, we differ a long way on that. I’m here to promote 

Saskatchewan, and you will never see me stand up in this 

legislature and laugh about the pride and the spirit of the 

province I’m proud of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Anyways, back to Expo, and I support 

you support the NDP idea in Manitoba — don’t put a pavilion 

in Expo; don’t be proud of Canada; don’t be proud of your 

province. That’s what you represent. I’m not of that bent. 

 

However, getting back to my critic friend. The member from 

Quill Lakes and I differ on some very substantial parts of the 

roots of this province. From time to time I feel it incumbent 

upon myself to illustrate that vast difference between two 

fellows who grew up in rural Saskatchewan, but because of 

political ideology and the hope of this province, are completely 

different. And I am proud of the attitude that we have on this 

side of the House. 

 

However getting back to Expo. Certainly we spent some 

money, and we asked people to . . . for them to come here and 

visit their friends in here. And as I started out to say before the 

member from Quill Lakes thought he should make light of it 

from his seat, that a big part of tourism, travel, and visit to this 

province is exactly that, of people coming back to see their 

kinfolk, to see those people who they love so much, who they 

grew up with, and a lot of them in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

We talk here, and my officials have given me some information 

on what we call our 1986 — this was Expo year — residential 

summer travel campaign entitled, “Homegrown Holidays.” And 

20,286 requests from  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3032 

 

Saskatchewan residents for a copy of The Great Saskatchewan 

Vacation Book, 11,033 referrals by residents to send a vacation 

book to their friends and relatives, along with a personal note 

inviting them to visit, and the largest numbers of inquiries ever 

received in response to a Saskatchewan campaign. 

 

I think that rests my case, that part of what Saskatchewan 

tourism is today, has been in the past, and will be in the future, 

is that home-grown Saskatchewan holiday, that feeling of 

wanting to come and see one’s loved ones and friends in places 

such as Canora, Saskatchewan, where that kind of bond means 

so much to the people. I believe that’s what we should be 

developing and fostering, and I think our program in ‘86 was a 

very resounding success and a good example of that true 

Saskatchewan spirit. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, I see you got excited 

a little bit, and you started talking about vast differences. I’d 

like to sum up now, Mr. Minister, and I’d like to tell you about 

the vast differences between you and the member from Quill 

Lake because I’ll tell you he was part of a government that 

knew how to deliver a program to small business, knew how to 

deliver a tourism policy, and knew how to run a balanced 

budget. And he was part, as I recall, of 11 of them in a row. 

 

You, Mr. Minister, unfortunately have been part of a 

government under the stewardship of a Premier that couldn’t 

manage a Crown corporation. You couldn’t balance a budget. 

The only thing you’re big on is rhetoric and hype, and that, Mr. 

Minister, is the vast difference. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — You know as well as I know and the rest 

of the people in this province know, the difference between 

your statistics of unemployment in this province. You know the 

difference in terms of the number of small business that have 

gone bankrupt since 1982 under your administration; and the 

businesses that were experiencing real growth in their 

businesses prior to your administration of 1982. 

 

You bet, Mr. Minister, there are some vast differences, and I 

say to you that the people of this province know it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — There are some vast differences in the 

way that the people who are unfortunate enough to be on social 

assistance are treated — very vast differences. They don’t want 

to be on there, and I’ve talked to a number of them who because 

of your government and your Premier’s decisions, has made it 

impossible for them to find employment in this province. Mr. 

Minister, there’s a vast difference. 

 

A year ago we hear, tourism and hospitality institute. You 

wouldn’t have seen an announcement under the New 

Democratic years that would announce a program and not 

deliver on it. People in this province . . . you talk about the 

people of this province. They were used to a government that 

they could trust. When they told them they were going to 

deliver something, they brought it to them. They were used to a 

government, when they brought a budget  

in, that they would know what to expect for that next year. But 

not your government. They were used to an election campaign 

where the government of that day would deliver what they were 

campaigning on. Not your government. 

 

(2015) 

 

Go back to your operation, your tourism and hospitality 

institute — a big announcement in October, 1986. Where is it? 

Smoke and mirrors. You were talking about the gas tax that 

would never be in the province. Where is it? It’s on the backs of 

every small-business man in this province, and you know it as 

well. Income tax cuts, 10 per cent. What did you deliver? You 

gave them a flat tax. The property improvement grant gone. 

 

I tell you, everything, every commitment that you made to the 

people of this province, you’ve broken. You promised them 

balanced budgets, and you haven’t delivered one. Not one 

balanced budget since 1982 have you been able to deliver to the 

people of this province. 

 

The total provincial debt in this province has raised a staggering 

amount. Did you promise that? No, you didn’t. I tell you, Mr. 

Minister, your promise of enhanced tourist industry in this 

province isn’t going to happen either, and the people of this 

province don’t believe it. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think you know better and I can’t understand a 

man of your experience and of your years to be able to follow 

blindly the leadership of a Premier who delivers deficit budgets, 

record unemployment, record taxes, and who is the leader of a 

cabinet who has to go out and sell broken promises. 

 

I tell you, Mr. Minister, you ought to be ashamed of yourself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — You talk about your love of 

Saskatchewan and your love of the people of this province. 

Well I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister, if you are sincere about 

your love of the people of this province, what you’ll do when 

you sit around that cabinet table is tell your Premier that he’s 

wrong and that he can’t treat the people of this province and in 

your riding and in other ridings of this province the way he’s 

treating them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m not holding you personally 

responsible, Mr. Minister. I’m holding the Premier of this 

province personally responsible for the number of bankruptcies 

in small business, and the number of homes that have broken up 

because of the economic conditions that you have thrust upon 

them. I don’t hold you personally responsible. But I’m telling 

you, Mr. Minister, you’re part of the group that doesn’t put a 

control on the Premier of this province — a Premier who has 

betrayed, a Premier who doesn’t deserve to be in office. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, what you want to do is you want to 

go in there, carry the message on behalf of the people of the 

province, that the kind of government that he is  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3033 

 

delivering is not acceptable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, my colleague has some 

questions to ask you regarding northern affairs. But before I 

take my place, I would like to thank your officials for their time 

and for the information that they will provide, and I’m hoping 

that the information that we’ve asked for will be forthcoming 

shortly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — You have my assurance, on behalf of my 

officials, that they will do their utmost to get you the 

information as quickly as they can. 

 

I just want to point out to you, we went over this the other 

night, and there’s no sense ploughing through ground time and 

time again. I mean, we waste enough of the taxpayers’ money 

in here with rhetoric questions. I mean, I don’t know how much 

this place costs a day, and I hear the same repetitive questions 

and the same line of attack. I mean, at some time the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to stand up and say, just what’s going 

on in there, and how much is this costing us? And that may well 

be coming. 

 

However, you know, you mentioned about small business and 

any programs. I would challenge you to list the programs that 

your government had, and you aren’t part and parcel of that 

because you were, I guess, an avid supporter in those days, but 

not a member. And I congratulate you for attaining office, but 

you know, I never heard of an interest reduction program under 

the NDP for small business. And I don’t think there ever was 

one. I don’t think you know of one either. 

 

I know the NDP never, ever thought of a venture capital 

corporation and the potential that that could have to enhance 

small business in Saskatchewan. And certainly, as some of your 

members last night said — and I think that is a sincere 

congratulation — the member for North Battleford indicated 

this, that he felt that the business resource centres were an 

added feature, a good feature to business development in 

Saskatchewan. And you didn’t have those. So, I mean, I’m not 

going to go ploughing over the same ground again. 

 

But I wanted you . . . you congratulated my officials, and I 

thank you whole-heartedly for that because in government one 

can only do so much, and most of that, you plant the seeds and 

you give the directions, but the spade work and the 

development of the policies of any government in this country 

is only as good as the officials and the dedication of the 

officials that work with you. 

 

And I just want to cite an example here. I wasn’t the minister at 

this time, but it was the same officials that are working with me 

today, came up . . . and this was the “Homegrown Holidays” 

that I mentioned last year, where we invited people who were 

going through to Expo, who had friends, to come and visit 

them. And just look at this brochure. Here we have the 

paddle-wheeler on Waskesiu, or the happy bunch of people on 

board inside the houseboats. Big Valley Jamboree that we’re all 

so proud of, Buffalo Days, rodeos and a nice little memo or 

note here. 

And I’m going to take a minute, Mr. Chairman, to read this 

because I’m leading up to something that I think we’ll all be 

proud of. It says in this, and this is called “Homegrown 

Holidays”: 

 

Invite your friends and relatives to visit Saskatchewan this 

summer. Know anyone travelling through to Expo? Be a 

good host and invite them to spend some extra time in 

Saskatchewan en route. With your Great Saskatchewan 

Vacation Book, you can show them a great time? 

Increased travel and tourism means good times for all of 

us. 

 

In fact, send us their names and their address and we’ll 

pass on your personal invitation — along with their very 

own copy of The Great Saskatchewan Vacation Book. 

 

Now, I just want to say, and I’m proud to say this and announce 

this to you, Mr. Chairman, to the members of the opposition, to 

my colleagues here, and to the people of Saskatchewan, because 

of that brochure — on the back it says, discover our 

Saskatchewan parks — because of that brochure, some of the 

officials that you have congratulated from my department will 

be going down to Toronto next week in a competition as 

finalists for a marketing award from the National Marketing 

Association. This is the kind of thing they did, a thank you for 

that acknowledgement. I believe they deserve credit, and I say 

to them publicly here tonight, thank you for good work that you 

have done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We’re going 

through the northern affairs secretariat, Mr. Chairman. I don’t 

think it should take a long time as long as we can . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Never did get that park. 

 

Mr. Chairman, as I was indicating, it shouldn’t take a long time 

to go through the northern affairs secretariat. I just wanted to 

make a short comment on the periodic outbursts that we hear 

from the minister. He does that quite often, and he talks about 

the home-grown holidays. And I want to say to him that he is 

also the master-mind of what has taken place in Saskatchewan 

this summer, and that is, taking holidays away from the 

members of the legislature and the staff and the civil servants 

and all the citizens out there who are waiting for their budgets 

to be passed. So, Mr. Minister, I think you can take credit for 

what has taken place here and what I consider is a summer that 

really never was. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to start off by the make-up of the northern 

affairs secretariat. Could you indicate if there’s been any change 

in the make-up of the secretariat. Was there anyone dropped or 

anybody added to that secretariat? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, there’s a one person deletion. One 

individual in the secretariat took early retirement. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Could you indicate who is not on the  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3034 

 

secretariat now then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The gentleman was Alex Ostiforof. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — I’m sorry, Mr. Minister. I don’t seem to see 

him as a member of the northern affairs secretariat. He’s not in 

this here. Could you tell me when he was appointed to the 

northern affairs secretariat. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials tell me he was associated 

with northern affairs and I assume the previous department of 

DNS (department of northern affairs) for many years — longest 

serving member of the secretariat. And he took his retirement in 

May, May 31 of this year. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, the northern secretariat was 

only formed in November of 1985. You say then there is no 

turnover. Could you indicate then if Wanda Catarat or Turnor 

Lake is still a member of the northern secretariat? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Member, I think we are a little 

confused in this. They’re not members of the northern 

secretariat. I think what you’re talking about are members of the 

northern advisory council. 

 

So what I told you was correct on the secretariat. The lady that 

you are referring to would have been on the northern advisory 

council. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I will rephrase my question 

then. Could you indicate if there has been any additions to the 

advisory council of the secretariat and if anybody has been 

dropped? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There have been no additions to the 

advisory council. Mrs. Catarat resigned because of health 

reasons. There have been two members that have been dropped 

from the advisory council. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Could you indicate who the two members 

are, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, the two members were Rev. Bishop 

Short and Ron Scrimshaw. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When I go 

through here, I see what the mandate is and I consider it to be a 

pretty important mandate, and I’m sure that you would consider 

it a very important mandate too. The mandate of the secretariat 

and the advisory board seems to be a mandate that covers just 

about every department in northern Saskatchewan. In fact it . . . 

and I just want to quote here, and it’s from your document: 

 

Faced with these challenges and charged with a broad 

mandate for co-ordination, communications, and policy 

development, secretariat activities sought to achieve 

multiple objectives. 

 

And I would assume that by that you mean, Mr. Minister, the 

going out into the communities and finding out what really is 

the problems and bringing that back to different government 

agencies. Am I right in that? 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, you’re correct on that. And I think 

you will know, and I hope you concur with, I believe, that the 

council have been doing a good job of going, as you say, to the 

communities, talking to those elected officials in the 

communities, and getting from them their grass roots 

viewpoints and opinions of what type of initiative could perhaps 

be developed to advance the economic viability and the way of 

life in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Would it be fair to say then, Mr. Minister, 

that you accept what the secretariat and the advisory board is 

doing by going around to the communities and providing you 

and other government agencies with the type of information, as 

you say, meeting with the grass roots people to bring forth ideas 

for economic development in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I some time ago made a tour through 

there with the chairman of the northern advisory council and 

some of the staff members from my department in the North 

there, and I guess the reading that I got as I travelled through 

there was general support, support for the council, a feeling that 

the necessary dialogue was taking place. Of course it’s only 

reasonable, I think you and I both know that that certain 

discussions will result in recommendations and that the 

recommendations would eventually become policy. 

 

And I think that is one of the things northern people are looking 

to see, and I’m hopeful that some of the recommendations will 

soon be enacted as part and parcel of our delivery to people in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But I don’t think, at least in my travels, that I’ve found any 

great dissatisfaction with the process that was going through. I 

think that people felt the members on the council were 

approachable people; they were people there to listen, rather 

than and try to dictate or to ramrod through any one specific 

idea or train of thought. That was the impressions I got, that I 

went through, that the process, the council and the secretariat 

were accepted by the northern people I talked to as being there 

in the hope of fulfilling some of their aspirations and their 

needs. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And it would be 

fair to say, Mr. Minister, that you and your government would 

accept their recommendations as they brought them forth from 

the grass roots, as you indicate, of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly I would say that of the 

recommendations, some of them we will be accepting and 

considering, and I am hopeful that, to some degree, we may be 

able to be implementing some of these. I think they’re basically 

reasonable. I think you realize that things don’t happen always 

overnight. It takes some time, and I believe from my 

discussions, most people are willing to see what can develop 

out of these. But certainly I’m sure that some of them should be 

able to come to fulfilment. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could 

indicate the number of meetings that were held last year, and 

could you indicate how they’re paid, the pay per meeting. And 

are there any individuals within the  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3035 

 

northern secretariat or on the advisory board that are paid a 

full-time wage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Okay, I’m going back from member. You 

asked the number of meetings; I believe there were either eight 

or nine meetings last year. You asked if the members of the 

advisory council were full time or part time; they are all . . . 

well not part time, they’re paid on a per diem plus their travel. 

And I think you asked about the members of the secretariat, and 

they, of course, are all civil servants, and they’re full-time 

employees. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Well I asked three questions and I got the 

answer to one, Mr. Minister. You said there were eight or nine 

meetings. I asked you how much the per diem was, and were 

there any members of the advisory board that were paid on a 

full-time basis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Okay, I’m sorry. I gave you the number 

of meetings; I gave you the . . . that there was a per diem. I’ll 

give you the amount of the per diem now; that’s what you’re 

wanting. For a member, it’s $90 a day; for the chairman, it’s 

$115 per day, plus they get their travel, and there are no 

full-time, paid members of the advisory council. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now I want to 

turn to a couple of other issues. And I see that the northern 

affairs secretariat and the advisory council were involved in 

fishing and trapping and forestry and mining, and they’ve just 

covered the whole spectrum in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The first comment I want to make is on the advisory council. 

And if one takes a look at the advisory council and you take a 

look at just how one-sided that council is, Mr. Minister . . . You 

just have to take a look at the make-up of that advisory council 

to see just how one-sided it is. There is one person sitting on 

that council that covers the west side of Saskatchewan, the 

constituency of Athabasca — one person — and that individual 

is Tony Durocher out of Ile-a-la-Crosse and, I might add, a very 

good individual, and Wanda Catarat the same, but for health 

reasons, as you indicated, she stepped down. The only other 

individual that was on there that was from the west side was 

Ron Scrimshaw and he was from Calgary. 

 

One has to take a look at the nominations that you have here for 

the advisory council, and you see that Bill Klassen is from 

Prince Albert, and you see that Walter Kupsch is from 

Saskatoon, and then you had Ron Scrimshaw from Calgary; you 

have Benny Siemens, you’ve put Stony Rapids, but he’s from 

Saskatoon, he’s living in Saskatoon; and you have Bishop Short 

who is from Prince Albert; and the rest of them are from the 

east side of the province. You have Louis Bear from Sandy 

Bay, John Carrier from Cumberland House, Anne Hyrniuk from 

La Ronge, Joe Roberts from Stanley Mission. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, where do you see the fairness in a 

body like this when the biggest population is on the west side. 

We have major problems on the west side, and I can go into 

them, if you want, a little later. But I ask you, how could you 

appoint a body like this and only have one  

individual that represents the west side out of a body of 10 

individuals — 10, 11 individuals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, there are eight on the board now, 

and you must be fair that Mrs. Catarat was from the west side 

and resigned because of illness. Dr. Ron Scrimshaw, as you 

know, grew up in Big River and lived in Dore Lake so was very 

familiar with the west side. 

 

Ben Siemens, as you know, runs his business out of Stony 

Rapids, and he’s in Stony Rapids a good portion of the time, 

and I’ve visited with him in Stony Rapids. And so I think you 

realize that there is representation from the west side, and I 

indicate to you, as I did to the member from Prince Albert-Duck 

Lake, if you feel that there’s an imbalance, and, as I say, there 

have been some that have resigned because of illness and so on, 

I have no aversion to putting another person onto the board 

from the west side at all. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would ask that 

you take a look at this body and that you do start putting some 

people on the west side of the province and get some equal 

representation. When you talk about Ron Scrimshaw from 

Calgary, just because he was born and raised in Big River — 

and he most certainly wasn’t born and raised in Dore Lake, and 

has been in Calgary for years — I don’t know, other than 

maybe for political reasons, why you would want to put an 

individual from Calgary onto an advisory board to recommend 

the types of policies that have been carried out, and I intend to 

get to those policies that have been carried out by yourself and 

your advisory board. 

 

I just think that it’s highly unfair, and I would ask you, Mr. 

Minister, to take a serious look at the make-up of this board. 

And if you’re going to continue to have an advisory board and 

you’re going to take recommendations, as you say you have 

taken recommendations from them, and will continue that, I 

would ask that you seriously take a look at putting some other 

Northerners from the west side. 

 

I now want to turn to other areas. You indicated that the 

northern advisory board and the secretariat have gone out and 

have held meetings and have brought back to you and to other 

government ministers recommendations that you are carrying 

out. I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, if it was the 

recommendation of the Northern Development Advisory 

Council and the northern secretariat, through you to the cabinet, 

to cut off the food transportation subsidy in the far North — the 

$250,000 food transportation subsidy that I know that your 

advisory board and all your members of your secretariat have 

been told and have been requested by the citizens of Camsell 

Portage and Uranium City and Fond-du-Lac and Stony Rapids 

and Blake Lake and Wollaston to re-implement that food 

transportation subsidy. I ask you, Mr. Minister, was it the 

recommendation of the council to withdraw the $250,000 a year 

food transportation subsidy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I want to go back on Mr. Scrimshaw 

for a moment, and I don’t know if you’re aware of this or not, 

but Mr. Scrimshaw, Dr. Ron Scrimshaw, was with the Nova 

corporation which has been a leader in northern development, 

and my officials  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3036 

 

indicate to me that Mr. Scrimshaw was a leader in affirmative 

action programs and so on, so I think is a valuable member to 

the board. But as I said to you previously, that I will take that 

under advisement what you have suggested, and as boards 

change, the make-up change of boards, I will take your 

recommendation into consideration, and I’m sure as we had the 

case of the lady from the west side, Mrs. Catarat, who had to 

resign, that I will be able to put another replacement on there 

from the west side. So I don’t think you have any worry about 

that. 

 

You talk about the northern food subsidy, and again I have to 

say to you, Mr. Chairman, here we are ploughing over ground 

that we ploughed with the same member. You and I have talked 

about this for the last four years because I remember when I 

was minister of Health, when the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

maybe next year too because that’s just typical of your type. 

And I tell you, the member from Saskatoon, you will learn in 

here that the people of Saskatchewan are going to start saying, 

what on earth is going on. Why is this place dragging on for 

some over 100 days with repetitive questions with exactly . . . I 

would imagine there is anywhere between 60 to $90,000 a day 

to keep this place running. Those are the dollars that are being 

spent because of repetitive questions. 

 

And here it comes again, the food subsidy. Well we’ll talk 

about the food subsidy. Yes, the food subsidy was removed, and 

you recall that. And you stood in here and you supported 

increased medical coverage to the west side of the province that 

you represent, and that’s exactly where the transfer of money 

went, to provide doctors up the west side that were so valuably 

needed. And that was done and you can’t deny it. 

 

But let me tell you furthermore, because we said, and I was 

right on that and so was our government, that a lot of this food 

subsidy was going to hunting camps, and you know that also. 

You may not admit it, but you know it. And you can duck if 

you want, from Saskatoon, because we haven’t even honed in 

on you yet, but let me tell you that that was what was taking 

place. 

 

And I want to tell you that we have substituted that because 

some of that money wasn’t going to need people. That has been 

substituted by a payment of $25 a month through the social 

assistance, and that has resulted in, my officials tell me, 

approximately $400,000 going into the part of the province to 

the needy people, the people that needed it, and not to your 

friends that run hunting lodges. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, 

we’re going to be here for a long time tonight. We’re in our 

88th day here today, and you want to blame us. It was your 

government that decided in your wisdom that you weren’t going 

to call the session until June 15. You could have called a 

session in February when you should have called it, but in your 

wisdom, because you didn’t have a budget ready, because you 

didn’t know what you were going to do, and when you did 

finally bring the budget out, the minister was $800 million out. 

No wonder you didn’t bring the budget in when you were 

supposed to because you were so confused. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Thompson: — But when you talk about taking $250,000 

away from the citizens of northern Saskatchewan to provide 

fresh food and vegetables on their tables, and you use the crutch 

that it’s going to the tourist operator, let me tell you that is 

totally wrong. And you know full well yourself that the tourist 

industry in northern Saskatchewan only operates for two, three 

months out of the year and there are very few of them. And you 

talk about $400,000 a year going into northern Saskatchewan 

on social assistance on that $25 per family. I say that is a wrong 

figure. 

 

And you’re trying to tell the citizens of Saskatchewan that 

everybody in northern Saskatchewan is on social assistance. 

That’s what you’re saying. You said $25 a family. And you’re 

paying out now, instead of $250,000 for food and vegetables, 

you’re paying out $400,000. I tell you when you take a look at 

the amount of families you’re covering, your figures are wrong, 

the same as the Minister of Finance’s figures were wrong when 

they were out $800 million in that budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — And you want to talk about wasting time 

and spending the summer in this legislature. Well I think you’re 

the individual that should answer for that, and it’s about time 

that the private members on that side stood up and took this 

cabinet to task. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — There was absolutely no reason for us 

sitting in here all summer and wasting our time. We never sat 

once in the mornings in Crown Corporations or Public 

Accounts until just last week. You refused to call them. And 

that’s right. You refused to call the Crown Corporation and 

Public Accounts. There’s the little minister for Regina South 

who says, three weeks ago. All right, three weeks ago, but 

we’ve been here for over three months. And every day we have 

wasted every morning. And you accuse us of wasting time. I 

say that you are a confused government and when the polls 

indicate that the Tories in Saskatchewan are down at 17 per 

cent, you’re right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — And I think, Mr. Minister, it’s time that 

some of your private members who occupy the back benches 

started to stand up and take a look at your policies. You don’t 

mind, you don’t mind cutting off . . . You don’t mind cutting off 

fresh food and vegetables to Northerners who are living in 

northern Saskatchewan, but yet you’ll turn around and give a 

single family over $400,000 to start a drug store chain up on the 

west side of . . . one that has already closed down. Your 

government has put in over $400,000 to that one family. That 

would have paid for the transportation subsidy for two years. 

 

You don’t mind paying Manalta Coal all the moneys that you 

paid them to take our drag-lines and our coal mines, and you 

don’t mind giving Peter Pocklington a $10  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3037 

 

million grant to move into Battleford, but yet you can’t provide 

a food subsidy for northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And he says, Mr. Chairman, that we have been debating, 

debating the food transportation subsidy for the past four years 

and you indicated that it was providing food on the table for my 

friends, the tourist operator. And I say, Mr. Minister, that you 

should get up and apologize for that. 

 

I have been fighting in this legislature ever since I’ve been in 

here for the citizens that live in northern Saskatchewan — not 

just the tourist operators and not just the trappers and the 

fishermen and not just the teachers, I fight for everybody. And 

most certainly . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: — And most certainly the food transportation 

subsidy that you cut off, Mr. Minister, was providing fresh food 

and vegetables for the families and their children in northern 

Saskatchewan. And I ask you, through your northern secretariat 

and your advisory council, to go out into the communities and 

see if I’m not right. And I would ask you to reconsider that and 

once again implement that food transportation subsidy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would say we’ve 

heard the words of a hypocrite. I remember you, Mr. Member, 

when you supported . . . when I was the Health minister of this 

province and I remember asking you, do you support a drug 

store for Buffalo Narrows and the west side, and you said, that’s 

the thing to do. Tonight you stand here and you bellyache 

because we’ve got one going. 

 

I remember asking you: do you believe we need additional 

medical services at the west side of the province where you 

live; where your family is; where they were short of doctors; 

where you questioned me in this House for added medical 

service, and we put it there. Do you give any credit for that? 

No, you don’t. You stand here and make wild whirlybirds about 

a food subsidy program. 

 

I’ll tell you what we’re doing for food subsidy in northern 

Saskatchewan. Here it is — Grow North. And I don’t know if 

you attended the conference or not, but a conference was put on 

between SIAP (Saskatchewan Indian Agriculture Program Inc.) 

and the northern secretariat to try and get the whole area of food 

production in the North going, and up and flourishing. And 

that’s what should be done. 

 

I don’t know if you saw the centre-fold in the Leader-Post 

yesterday or not, where there was a full spread on northern 

foods, featuring wild rice, featuring smoked trout, featuring 

bannock, featuring wild cranberries, talking about the Kellers 

from La Ronge. That’s the kind of development we want to see 

in the North, not a continual subsidy. Put the money into 

helping people develop their own food sources. 

 

So I take exception when you stand up here . . . And if you’re 

going to be a representative, it’s only right to give  

credit where credit is due. And I would like you to stand up and 

criticize that medical service that’s been put in on the west side. 

And I’ve heard you pick holes in the drug store, but I tell you, 

those were services put in under the Conservative government 

that never existed when you were government in this province. 

So I take exception when you are the elected member up there, 

that you won’t stand here. You say, I stand and I fight for all 

people, but you won’t give credit to the things that are done 

good just because of your partisan political viewpoint, just 

because the Devine government addressed those needs. But you 

won’t stand here and you won’t give that kind of credit. 

 

And the other thing I find most amazing about you is, it seems 

to make a difference to you how many days the House sat 

because of when it started. I don’t think it makes any difference 

whether it starts in April, May, November or October — 120 

days or 80 days; 80 days is 80 days no matter from where you 

count it. 

 

And I’ll tell you, and you well know that it’s well-known . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well maybe you will learn this if 

you’ll be quite for a minute, the madam from Rosemont . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I will tell you that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: From where? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Oh, no, Lakeview, just across the lake 

here. Well I’ll tell you why I got mixed up. Usually the fellow 

from Rosemont is always talking, but this time it was the 

member from Lakeview. 

 

But let me tell you this, and the member from Athabasca well 

knows, you well know this, that in politics you open the House 

and in the legislature, in government, the government comes in 

with the throne speech, and it opens the session, and there’s a 

budget speech. And then following that, when the session shuts 

down is entirely up to the opposition. If the opposition insists, if 

they insist on asking rhetorical questions, if they believe that 

three and a half weeks or so in Environment is in the best 

interests of the province of Saskatchewan, then so well be it. So 

well be it. So well be it, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. We’re in 

estimates and I think the comments and the wandering 

comments of the minister now is nowhere in line with the 

question that was asked, nor the details of the estimates that 

we’re dealing with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Speaking to the point of order — and you 

can check with Hansard — I remember just five minutes ago 

where the member from Athabasca stood and went moaning 

and groaning on about having started the House in the summer 

and sitting here all summer. So I think I have every right to 

reply to any comment that he makes. I take exception to the 

member from Quill Lakes’ point of order. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I believe . . . Order. I believe as 

we’ve been sitting here and listening, all members have actually 

wandered and used different claims and  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3038 

 

wandered off the topic, and we’ve excused it. But if you’d like 

me to call everyone right to the point, then I think that would 

have to apply to both sides of the House. So I would like to ask 

members to take note, and address the question of Tourism and 

Small Business. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I ask you for directions. I 

am now under the estimates of the northern affairs secretariat 

and the northern advisory council which covers every item that 

I have been discussing. It’s not a department that handles 

specifically one department. 

 

If I’m not going to be able to ask the questions regarding 

fishing and trapping, which clearly are outlined in the report, 

Mr. Chairman, then I wouldn’t be able to really do proper 

justice to the estimates. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Well I think if I understand the 

proceedings, item 1 does allow for some variance and to cover 

the areas. So I will just ask all members to basically keep their 

questions and answers towards the points that are brought 

forward and we will proceed. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, I will. 

 

I just wanted to . . . and as the minister indicated, and he 

indicated that I brought up, regarding the sitting of the House in 

the summer. Mr. Minister, I never even said anything about 

sitting in the summer. You’re the one who brought that up. And 

you talk about us ending the session. I want to just remind you, 

Mr. Minister, that you are the one who started the session in 

June 15. It was your government, not us. 

 

I want to now go back to the question that I asked that you 

didn’t answer, Mr. Minister, when I did sit down. Will you, 

through your northern secretariat and the northern advisory 

council, go back and meet with the communities and ask them 

what they really think about the food transportation subsidies, 

and will you take another serious look at reimplementing that? 

That was the question that I asked you before we both got sat 

down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I believe from the contact 

that we’ve had and the people that I’ve talked to and the 

discussions with the secretariat and advisory council, I believe, 

as I said earlier, that I think the whole aspect of what SIAP are 

endorsing . . . and I should say for those who don’t understand 

what SIAP is, it’s the Saskatchewan Indian Agriculture 

Program. 

 

And along with the Department of Agriculture of this province, 

as well as the northern secretariat, hosted a very successful food 

conference in La Ronge some time ago. And I do believe rather 

than trying to institute a food subsidy program, because I don’t 

think we want to see just subsidies be the way of life in any part 

of this province, that it’s much more logical to be going with 

such things as aquaculture — and by that I mean fish farming 

— and also the growing of berries. 

 

There’s such things as fur farming. They have these new 

animals — the little animals up there — fitch. It seems very 

profitable. Wild rice, of course, is something that the North is 

becoming very famous for. We also have an  

article here, I see. It’s called “The revival of La Loche — 

chickens may make the future brighter for La Loche.” 

 

So rather than trying to institute some subsidy, especially when 

social assistance has been taking care of the needy and those 

outlying fly-in communities, I believe it is much more 

progressive and much more the wave of the future and a true 

development of the North is to be trying to market, as I see 

here, native people with corn patches, members of the Timber 

Bay dairy co-op that we should be doing whatever we can to 

develop agriculture in the North and that’s the thrust we will be 

taking. 

 

So in answer to your question, no, we wouldn’t be looking at 

reinstituting the food subsidy program but we would be trying 

to develop these kinds of initiatives for northern people, in 

conjunction with northern people which I believe and our 

government believes, it’s the direction we should be following. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

most certainly you indicate quite clearly where your priorities 

are. You state quite clearly that the food transportation subsidy 

is not a priority and that you will not implement that. Yet you 

will still continue to subsidize the hauling of liquor into 

northern Saskatchewan, but no subsidies for food. You make 

that quite clear, and that’s another indication as to your policy 

and why you are down in the polls. 

 

I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, before I close, did you get 

advice from your northern secretariat and the advisory body? 

Was it their advice to you and your cabinet to cut the fish 

transportation subsidy down to 60 per cent and to completely 

eliminate it off the pickerel? Was that the recommendation from 

your secretariat and the advisory council? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m advised that the transportation 

subsidy comes out of the Parks budget, and my advice is that 

there was a readjustment and that the pickerel, which is a fish 

that demands a good price and was sufficient to carry itself 

because of that and the prices being up on pickerel, that a 

decision was made by the Parks to address a subsidy to the 

other varieties that don’t garner such a good price. So that 

would be the rationale, as I’m informed, that was behind that 

decision. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Then I take it from your answer, Mr. 

Minister, that it was the recommendation of the northern 

secretariat and the advisory board to reduce the other species by 

60 per cent . . . or down to 60 per cent of the transportation 

subsidy and to eliminate the pickerel — and I forget the other; 

there was another species. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That wasn’t a recommendation of the 

advisory council. It was the decision of the Department of 

Parks. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Just another one before I sit down, Mr. 

Chairman. And I see in your annual report you talk about the 

secretariat and the advisory board giving instructions to the fur 

industry in northern Saskatchewan and indicating that there was 

some clouds on the horizon. We  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3039 

 

see now that a policy has come out where they have taken the 

lynx out of production. Trappers cannot sell lynx in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to know, Mr. Minister, if that is the policy that was 

recommended by the Northern Development Advisory Council 

and the northern secretariat. Because once again, here we have, 

if that is the case . . . if that’s not the case, then you didn’t get 

that recommendation from that northern advisory council or the 

northern secretariat, then I say it’s a game, a southern mentality 

being imposed upon northern citizens, because trappers are 

continually telling me and they’re telling your government. 

 

And I have a letter here from the mayor of Stead Lake, who just 

had a trappers’ meeting in Big River and that was on September 

29, where they indicated to your government — and your 

secretariat is involved in the Stead Lake area — that they 

cannot trap lynx, and any lynx that are caught they will have to 

be turned in for government disposal. 

 

I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, if you will, through your 

northern affairs secretariat and the advisory council, go back 

and recommend to the Minister of Parks, Recreation and 

Culture to withdraw that regulation that he has put in, because 

one has to take a look at just how serious, serious that is. 

 

When you say, your government says, Mr. Minister, that you 

cannot sell lynx . . . If you catch a lynx, then you have to turn it 

in to the government for disposal. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why? 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Well I don’t know why, but I want to say 

this to you, Mr. Deputy Premier, that you should talk to that 

Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture and to the Minister of 

Tourism and Small Business, who is in charge of the northern 

secretariat, to stop that policy because that is the most 

expensive fur that is in the bush today, is the lynx. They’re 

down. They run in cycles when the rabbits run. 

 

But all of sudden, in your wisdom, Mr. Minister — and I don’t 

know if that came from your secretariat and from the advisory 

council or not — but in your wisdom you said that they can’t 

trap them, and if they catch them, they have to turn them in to 

the government for disposal, and they are going to dispose of 

them. 

 

One has to know that. When you take a look at some of the 

advisory council on there, they’re trappers. And lots of them 

live in the North and they know what happens. Everybody 

knows, and anybody that has anything to do with trapping 

would know that a lynx can be caught in a mink trap; it can be 

caught in a fox trap; it can be caught in a weasel trap. And that 

happens. Lynx are caught in rabbit snares, and that has 

happened. And lynx are caught in martens traps. So the trappers 

are going to catch the same amount of lynx. 

 

Some trappers leave just before freeze-up and they don’t come 

back till Christmas, and they catch lynx. And I can take it, for 

example, that Lawrence and André John who leave Patuanak at 

freeze-up and will not come back until  

Christmas, and they always have three, four lynx. And the lynx 

are bringing up to $1,800. 

 

And what are you saying now with a southern policy? And I’m 

not sure if it came from your northern secretariat or not, but 

you’re saying to those trappers, when you come back with those 

lynx — and that’s money that they use to put food on the table 

for their children and to pay their expenses — you’re going to 

say that the government is going to take them for disposal. And 

I say that is wrong. And that is something that has to be 

stopped. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would, through your good office 

and through your northern affairs secretariat and advisory 

council, recommend to the minister that he withdraw that new 

regulation because it’s going to cause no end to problems. 

 

With that, Mr. Minister, I’m fairly well finished. If I will get 

your assurance that you will take that up with the Minister of 

Parks and Renewable Resources. 

 

I do want to say, in closing, that you indicated that I wasn’t 

concerned about medical services in northern Saskatchewan. I 

have always been concerned with medical services. I have 

indicated to you on many, many occasions in this House that 

there would be nightmares happening in northern 

Saskatchewan. And you know, as the years went by, there was. 

We don’t have doctors in La Loche; that’s served out of 

Meadow Lake. Doctors up north are served out of Saskatoon. In 

Ile-a-la-Crosse in the last three years we’ve had 37 doctors 

turnover. So there’s a lot of work to do in the health field in 

northern Saskatchewan, and I urge you to continue on that way. 

 

As far as a drug store, yes, I agreed that we needed a drug store 

in northern Saskatchewan, but we didn’t have to pay a half 

million dollars to one family to start up those drug stores, and 

then all of a sudden two years later, have them start to 

withdraw. 

 

So I just say, yes, I’m concerned about the health services in 

northern Saskatchewan. And if you would take it upon yourself 

with your northern secretariat to try and see if you can reverse 

the regulation on the lynx trapping and continue to work 

towards better health facilities in northern Saskatchewan and 

anything else that will create a better life for northern people. 

 

With that, I thank you, Mr. Minister, and I want to thank your 

officials for helping you out tonight. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, thank you, member from 

Athabasca. Certainly on the lynx, I was not aware of that 

policy,. I think you said the 29th, the trappers’ meeting was. 

And it has not been, from my information, brought to my 

advisory council’s attention, and I’m sure it probably will be. 

Being that, I will certainly look into this and talk it over with 

my colleague on this policy. 

 

Getting into health care, as we’ve discussed before, I think you 

know I have a commitment to health care in the North. I think 

you must admit that there has been  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3040 

 

considerable improvements over the last five years. 

 

On the method of the drug store, I just want to clarify a point 

there. As you know it was really for three outlets, not just one 

drug store, and it was the one set of pharmacists, as we know. 

But I believe you have seen improvement in health services in 

northern Saskatchewan. I know that there always have been 

some areas of problem and there still are; it isn’t a perfect 

situation yet. But I think in all seriousness we have to say, if 

we’re being really fair and honest about it, that there has been a 

considerable improvement over the last four or five years in the 

delivery of service. And I sincerely hope that in subsequent 

years that can continue. 

 

So I thank you for your questions pertaining to the North, an 

area which you represent, and regarding the lynx, you have my 

commitment that I will look further into this. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have 

a number of questions that I’d like to direct to the minister 

tonight with respect to his estimates. 

 

Mr. Minister, a number of years ago while I was still serving in 

the House of Commons in Ottawa, I had the opportunity, as a 

member of parliament, to be involved in the establishment of 

the first federal ministry of state responsible for small business 

matters, which I take some considerable pride and satisfaction 

in because it was an initiative that was important to small 

business generally but certainly to Saskatchewan. And of course 

now as the MLA for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg where small 

business and agriculture quite literally go hand in hand as the 

backbone of our local economy, these issues are of particular 

interest to me. 

 

I want to being, Mr. Minister, by referring to what I regard to be 

three very worthwhile programs that I want to mention in 

particular, and I have a couple of questions about them. 

 

All three of these programs were ideas that I personally have 

advocated and supported for years, going back to the time when 

I was a member of parliament in the 1970s, so naturally I was 

pleased when these three specific ideas were proposed for 

implementation in Saskatchewan, and I refer to the tax break 

provided for starting up new business, new small businesses in 

the province of Saskatchewan. I think of the venture capital 

program, secondly. And I would also refer to the Saskatchewan 

Stock Savings Plan. 

 

Mr. Minister, with respect to the latter of those programs, the 

Saskatchewan Stock Savings Plan, which of course provides the 

tax advantages for investments in business in Saskatchewan, 

one of the fundamental differences between the plan in 

operation in Saskatchewan and the parallel plans in operation in 

other provinces is that in those other provinces, in most cases, 

the stock savings plans are specifically geared to provide a 

better benefit and a larger benefit for those people who choose 

to invest in smaller enterprises. And as you make your choice to 

invest in larger enterprises, the benefit gradually goes down in 

those other provinces. 

 

It’s my understanding that in Saskatchewan the benefit is  

effectively a flat benefit across the board. There are, of course, 

certain eligibility requirements for the benefit to apply at all, but 

presuming those criteria are satisfied, as I understand it, the 

program does not draw a distinction between investments in 

small or new or emerging enterprises and the very large going 

concerns. And I wonder if the minister could explain why that 

plan functions in that way in Saskatchewan, as compared to 

other provinces where they have deliberately and consciously 

skewed their stock savings plans to be of the largest benefit to 

the smallest enterprises. I think that sounds, on the surface, like 

a very worthy principle. So you give the biggest advantage to 

those who are in smaller enterprises and may need that 

investment incentive the most. It’s been done in other places 

like Alberta and Quebec and other provinces, and I wonder why 

that feature is lacking in the Saskatchewan Stock Savings Plan; 

and would the government give consideration to a modification 

in the Saskatchewan Stock Savings Plan to provide greater 

emphasis upon investments in small enterprises, as opposed to 

large enterprises. 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I am informed that you have to, before 

you can qualify, you have to register under the Alberta Stock 

Exchange. That in itself almost indicates that it is the larger 

companies, and the smaller ones wouldn’t qualify to register 

there, and that’s why in our system, they’re not in it. That 

answers your question. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to pursue that for a 

moment, both on the point that you just mentioned about 

registering with the Alberta Stock Exchange and the original 

question that I asked about the fundamental rules. 

 

I’d just like to quote briefly from the Financial Post Moneywise 

magazine for August of 1987, which contains a rather lengthy 

analysis of stock savings plans right across the country. And 

specifically referring to Saskatchewan, the magazine says this: 

 

Saskatchewan approved its SSP (Saskatchewan stock 

savings plan) in June 1986 and by August the first share 

issues appeared. The stock savings tax credit program is 

simpler than the plans of other provinces because it 

doesn’t distinguish between emerging and blue chip 

enterprises. 

 

And again in documentation that I’ve read, that has been 

provided publicly by the Saskatchewan Department of Finance, 

that same point is made, that while other provinces, no matter 

what stock exchange they may participate in, while other 

provinces have sort of a sliding scale of benefits so that you get 

the biggest tax advantage if you invest in a small enterprise and 

the smallest tax advantage if you invest in a large enterprise. 

Other provinces do that, Saskatchewan doesn’t, and I’m not 

sure that that’s entirely dependent upon just being registered on 

the Alberta Stock Exchange. 

 

Another interesting feature, Mr. Minister, in this particular 

article in this same magazine, is in reference to the Nova Scotia 

plan. And again I quote from the magazine  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3041 

 

referring to what’s been done in Nova Scotia: 

 

Nova Scotia’s stock savings plan is the first in Canada to 

allow private companies, specifically small emerging 

ones, to undertake offerings without first obtaining a stock 

exchange listing. 

 

And in view of that particular practice in the province of Nova 

Scotia and in view of the other rules that apply in other 

provinces that seem to deliberately try to focus the benefit of 

the program on small enterprises, I wonder, Mr. Minister, and I 

guess this is more in the shape of a representation than a 

question, but I wonder if you would be prepared to take up that 

issue with your cabinet colleagues to determine, first of all, why 

Saskatchewan has done things differently with a flat kind of 

benefit across the board rather than focusing upon small 

business. 

 

And if there does not appear to be a compelling reason that 

really forces us into doing that, would the minister give 

consideration to a proposal that might see the Saskatchewan 

Stock Savings Plan modified in certain ways to provide 

particular benefits to small enterprises, which of course have a 

particular problem in attracting investment revenue. I think that 

might be a healthy development in Saskatchewan for our small 

business community. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I guess part of the situation here, 

and I think you’re aware of this, is that a lot of our emerging 

companies and so on are smaller and we have the VCC (venture 

capital corporation) vehicle for that, and that’s the one they take 

advantage of. The larger ones that have to be on the stock 

exchange, of course, get the stock savings plan, and you’re 

aware of that. I’ve taken your suggestion under consideration. I 

don’t know if you’re aware of it or not, we’re really responsible 

for the administration of VCC, the Department of Finance, for 

the stock savings plan. But I’ve taken your consideration to . . . 

paying attention to it, and we’ll pass it on and discuss it and 

dialogue it with my colleagues. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, thank you. 

And I would like to raise with you two other matters that 

potentially affect small business in Saskatchewan, and I would 

be grateful for your responses to them. I have before me tonight 

a paper entitled, “Tax Reform and Small Business,” a 

consultation paper prepared in August of 1987 by a member of 

the House of Commons, one Alfonso Gagliano, who is a 

member for a constituency in the province of Quebec. And Mr. 

Gagliano makes a couple of interesting points that I would like 

to have your response to, particularly from a Saskatchewan 

point of view. And I’m now quoting from Mr. Gagliano’s 

paper. He says under a heading entitled, “The rate of taxation 

for small manufacturing business.” 

 

The Minister of Finance proposes to significantly broaden 

the corporate tax base and reduce taxation rates. The 

proposed federal corporate tax rates are . . . 

 

And there’s a chart that sets out the rates for general business, 

manufacturing business, small general business, and small 

manufacturing business. And Mr.  

Gagliano goes on to make this point: 

 

As you can see from the chart, only small manufacturers 

— only small manufacturers have an increased taxation 

rate . . . 

 

And I say parenthetically there, under tax reform. Going back to 

the quotation: 

 

Large manufacturers continue to have lower rates than 

large general businesses. You may well ask why the 

privilege was not extended to small manufacturers. After 

all, 85 per cent of the manufacturing industry is small 

business and 74 per cent of the jobs created in 

manufacturing were created by small businesses that have 

fewer than 20 employees. 

 

The proposed tax reform obviously penalizes this very 

important sector of the economy. It should be remembered 

that in February of 1986, the Minister of Finance 

proposed, in what he qualified then as the first phase of 

corporate tax reform, a reduction of the taxation rate for 

small manufacturers from 10 per cent to 8 per cent. Why 

has the minister backtracked? Why has he raised the 

taxation rate for these businesses? 

 

And again . . . that’s the end of the quotation, Mr. Minister. And 

what the chart tends to show is that for small manufacturing 

businesses in Canada, this tax rate is going from 10 per cent to 

12 per cent, continuing into the future, while for other business 

categories, the rate is actually going down. 

 

And it may well just be an anomaly in the calculations of the 

formulas, Mr. Minister, but I wonder if you could indicate if 

this matter has come to your attention as the minister 

responsible for small business in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And if it has, do you plan to make specific representations to 

the federal government to correct what seems to be an obvious 

anomaly in the structuring of this formula that, quite 

surprisingly, raises the tax rate for small manufacturing 

business while the tax rate for other businesses is generally 

scheduled to go down? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That has not been brought to my 

attention, as the minister, by anyone in the small business field, 

and I’ve checked with my officials and they haven’t had it 

brought to their attention. 

 

However, as you know, the dialogue on financial matters, it 

takes place between the Ministers of Finance, both federally 

and provincially, and certainly a big portion of that kind of 

discussion is taxation policy and the application of taxation 

policy to the various sectors of our economic community. And 

certainly in discussions that will be upcoming and taking place 

between the provincial government and the federal government, 

we  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3042 

 

would be more than willing to discuss that with Mr. Wilson to 

see if there can be any change in it. 

 

But getting back to your question: has it been brought to my 

attention by the business community? The answer is no. And 

has it been brought to the attention of my department in 

discussions with the business community? The answer again is 

no. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I’m grateful that you’ll be 

keeping an eye out for it and may raise it for further discussion 

because, looking at the charts, it does appear to be almost a 

mistake. And it’s something that I think could be relatively 

easily corrected if someone pursues it. 

 

One other matter, Mr. Minister, flowing from tax reform as it 

affects small business that I would like to raise with you tonight 

has to do with the proposals about a new form of sales tax 

across the country and the concerns which some in the business 

community have raised very vigorously about the form and the 

impact of that particular tax. 

 

One of the suggestions that is made in this paper drafted by Mr. 

Gagliano, the member of parliament that I referred to a bit 

earlier, is that as the whole process of tax reform proceeds, 

there should be some specific attention paid to the idea of 

exempting small businesses from the implications of any new 

sales tax features. That sounds like a pretty broad proposition 

that we would obviously want to examine with some 

considerable care, but there’s a very interesting three sentence 

paragraph in this paper, Mr. Minister, that I would like to quote 

to you on this idea of providing some form of sales tax 

exemption or sales tax reduction as far as the small business 

community is concerned. And the paragraph reads as follows: 

 

This type of exemption is nothing new. In Canada, 

businesses that have annual sales of under $50,000 are 

currently exempt from federal sales tax. Moreover, 

countries that levy value-added tax stipulate the minimum 

sales figure for tax purposes, and small businesses with 

total sales below this threshold are exempt. 

 

That’s the end of the quotation. If we already have some 

exceptions within our system, Mr. Minister, for small business, 

and if those other countries that apply VATs (value-added tax) 

or BTTs (business transfer tax) or all of those other new 

variations on sales taxes, if those other countries provide 

exemptions for small businesses, it would seem reasonable, at 

least, that Canada should consider the same thing. 

 

And as your representations go forward to Mr. Wilson on the 

other point about the manufacturing tax, I wonder if I could ask 

you to ensure that this other matter gets into the mill, as well, so 

that we can assure that whatever happens in tax reform, it 

doesn’t come down heavily on the small business community 

which is obviously especially critical in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, certainly I think there’ll be a lot of 

dialogue that’ll take place in this, and is taking place now on tax 

reform. Certainly, with the VAT or the value-added tax, or the 

BTT, business transfer tax,  

whatever form, if either of those are adopted in Canada, it 

would be my intention and certainly that of my colleagues to 

see that we could get in that reform system, perhaps the best 

system possible for small business. 

 

And I’m sure that you have suggested and what Mr. Gagliano 

has discussed in his paper will be part of those discussions. As 

you know, I can’t give any assurance as to how those will come 

out, other than our input will be from Saskatchewan, certainly 

to the extent that we hope we can gain some benefit for the 

small business sector. I wouldn’t want to see them adversely hit 

with a tax reform that would make things very difficult for 

them. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for agreeing to 

pursue that matter. 

 

I just have one other question I would like to direct to you, and 

it has to do specifically with Saskatchewan taxation. As I have 

talked with a number of small-business people in my own 

constituency and across the province, and as I’ve read the 

results of the various surveys conducted by the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business and other organizations, 

there seems to be one consistent message that comes through all 

of that, and that is the burden upon small business enterprises of 

local business taxes. 

 

It’s a difficult question involving at least two, if not three, levels 

of government and the whole issue of revenue sharing, the 

whole issue of providing sufficient tax bases for the operations 

of local government, and at the same time not implanting a 

burden upon local business communities that is just too 

crushing to bear. We’ve seen in a number of communities in 

Saskatchewan various programs being implemented at the local 

level to try to alleviate that local tax burden. In other 

communities we’ve seen the beginnings of what appeared to be 

mini tax revolts in relation to that particular tax burden. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, what consideration is being given 

within your department to this whole matter of the local tax 

burden upon small business enterprises, and what is presently 

under way in terms of your government’s planning to address 

that question, and to make it possible for local governments to 

bring down that burden which is presently very high in many 

communities and threatening to get even higher to the point 

where it could become a very clear disincentive and 

discouragement to business enterprises? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly this has been raised with me 

and with my colleagues here on this side of the House; I think 

particularly the Minister of Urban Affairs has addressed this on 

many occasions. And I understand, and I guess it varies from 

community to community because there are different levels of it 

as to severity of it, but I guess looking across the province one 

could correctly say that it is a concern of many communities. 

 

You understand, and I can tell from your remarks, that it is of 

course applied by the municipal jurisdiction. And certainly it 

may well be, and I imagine you would concur with this, that I 

think in the times we are in, that it may be incumbent upon 

municipal government as well as  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3043 

 

provincial government to look at maybe more imaginative and 

efficient ways of delivering service. 

 

We have been through a period of time where things came 

pretty easily for a while, and I don’t think that’s there right now 

when you look at the resources of our province and you look at 

the price of our grain, and so on. Your seat and my seat are 

indicative of that, that the resources are just not bringing in the 

money that they did previously. So therefore it’s going to be 

incumbent upon government to maybe rethink kin some 

situations the way they have been addressing and providing 

services. Being that as it may, though, we have instituted within 

government an interdepartmental committee with Urban 

Affairs, with people from my department, as well as people 

from the municipal sector at large, to address this whole 

situation. 

 

I think it goes without saying that there are many who would 

say I wish it could be removed, but looking at it realistically, 

those services and infrastructure has to be maintained in these 

villages and towns and communities, and just for one area of 

government to relinquish it and put it on the other area of 

government who is also strapped for resources is not really the 

solution. 

 

So I hope that out of this committee that we can come up with 

some kind of solution. I am sure that you’re well aware that 

there is no easy solution. It’s going to take sane heads and a lot 

of thought and discussion to try and come up with some type of 

solution, and that may take some time. I don’t see an 

instantaneous answer to this one. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate your comments on 

the point. I would ask you for just one further bit of information 

which I would be quite satisfied with if you could provide it 

within the next few days, and that is the amount of money that 

is generated in total within the province of Saskatchewan as a 

result of local business taxes? I think that should be a relatively 

easy statistic to obtain, and particularly what portion of it would 

be generated by small business? That may be a little bit more 

difficult to obtain. But I would be grateful if you could attempt 

to gather those statistics so we could have that information. 

 

With that, Mr. Minister, I just want to thank you and your 

officials for your attention this evening, and I’m grateful to 

have the reassurances that you’ve given, that at least some of 

the items that I’ve raised this evening you intend to pursue as 

policy matters on behalf of the government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly you have my assurance 

that we will ascertain for you the amount of money from the 

business tax across the province. 

 

On the second aspect of it, that’s a little bit difficult, and maybe 

you and I have to meet outside the House or somewhere to kind 

of come to an agreement on what we call small; you know, is it 

under 50 employees or 20 or whatever it is. And then, I think, in 

all fairness, so we’re not misleading you, the best we could do 

would be an educated estimate, but to try and be as close as we 

can. 

 

So if that is satisfactory to you, I give you the commitment we 

will do that. And thank you for your questions. 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The ex-MLA for 

Regina North keeps chirping item no 1, agreed, and it shows the 

complete disregard that the Conservative government holds 

co-operatives and that, what used to be a once proud 

department, that of co-operation and co-operative development, 

holds it in absolute disdain. 

 

In the Tourism and Small Business estimates, and in the 

northern affairs secretariat, I never once heard the minister talk 

about the co-operative movement or the co-operative sector of 

our Saskatchewan economy. Mr. Chairman, it is time for us to 

focus on that co-operative sector. 

 

The attack on co-operatives in Saskatchewan by you and your 

Conservative government is unprecedented, unequalled, 

unfortunate, and totally uncalled for. 

 

It’s unprecedented in that not even the free enterprise Liberal 

government from 1964 to 1971 dared to amalgamate and 

disseminate the department, or pardon me decimate, the 

department of co-operation and co-operative development as 

your Conservative government has done, and continues to do 

today. 

 

It’s unequalled because Saskatchewan, more than any other 

province, has a solid, and a strong, and a no-nonsense approach 

of helping ourselves by helping each other make things happen 

through co-operative efforts. 

 

Pooling wheat was important early in this century to 

Saskatchewan farmers because the private grain companies — 

the private grain trade — were fixing prices for wheat, causing 

severe economic hardship for Saskatchewan farmers. And so 

farmers banded together and they lobbied governments for a 

pooling of wheat. Together those farmers, those pioneers, 

moved governments into action, and the Canadian Wheat Board 

of today continues to this day as an active monument to the 

co-operative spirit of Saskatchewan pioneers. 

 

In the process of fighting those free enterprise grain traders of 

Winnipeg, the co-operative movement became the solution for 

many of the problems that were holding back Saskatchewan 

people. Political action became focused on co-op ideals. People 

were seeking a fairer deal for Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, or CCF, grew 

from that political movement, and it is alive and well today 

within the New Democratic Party. The attack that your 

government has led on co-operatives in Saskatchewan is 

unfortunate because we now need co-operation more today, 

more in these tough Tory times than we do in relatively good 

economic times. 

 

In Conservative Saskatchewan today we have unemployment 

that is persistent, it’s personally devastating to the many, many 

thousands of people that are looking for work. And much of the 

unemployment is unnecessary. Worker co-ops have been tried, 

and they’re been successful in a number of places right around 

the world and in other provinces, in Saskatchewan, and we have 

a few cases, a few examples right here in  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3044 

 

Saskatchewan where they’ve been successful. 

 

And I can’t understand why you, Mr. Minister, have so 

radically and drastically reduced the department of co-operation 

and co-operative development. When worker co-ops offer some 

hope to the unemployed Saskatchewan people this department 

should be actively promoting the worker co-ops, day care 

co-ops to help Saskatchewan families across Saskatchewan and 

to . . . pardon me, helping these Saskatchewan farmers . . . I’ll 

start that all over. It should be: promoting day care co-ops to 

help families across Saskatchewan to properly care for our 

province’s children. 

 

Day care co-ops can also stimulate some growth by providing 

much needed jobs. The department of co-operation staff are 

needed, as I say, more than ever, but particularly, Mr. Minister, 

in the field of agriculture. They’re needed to help Saskatchewan 

farmers by explaining and promoting some of the ideals and the 

objectives of co-operatives, so that that alternative could be 

better understood and that farmers could utilize co-op ideas to 

help them with the cost-price squeeze. 

 

We need some alternatives such as active promotion of co-op 

farms; of machinery co-ops; seeding co-ops; harvesting co-ops; 

livestock co-ops; soil conservation co-ops — much needed in 

the province; even snow-plough co-ops; and the list just could 

go on and on indefinitely. But the opportunities for 

Saskatchewan farmers to join together in a co-operative manner 

to help themselves and help their neighbours, those 

opportunities have never been greater than they are today with 

the cost-price squeeze that those farmers are facing. 

 

Mr. Minister, there can be no dispute over the enormous impact 

of the co-operative movement in Canada, and indeed right here 

in Saskatchewan. In Saskatchewan, co-operatives and credit 

unions combined together report an active membership in 

excess of 1,026,000 people. The reason that the active 

membership is greater than the population of the province is 

that many of us are active members in more than one 

co-operative. 

 

As well, the economic power and potential of the co-operative 

movement for job creation and regional development has to be 

emphasized. And I’ll cite a few examples of some of the things 

that co-operatives are doing. Saskatchewan co-operatives and 

credit unions, Mr. Minister, paid combined salaries of $322 

million in 1985 and ’86. In total, co-operatives and credit 

unions employed 14,692 Saskatchewan people; more than 

11,000 of those are full time, and more than 3,000 are part time. 

Total revenue of Saskatchewan co-operatives and credit unions 

has exceeded $4.8 billion in 1985-86. Total assets of 

Saskatchewan co-operatives and credit unions exceed $6.8 

billion. 

 

Three of Saskatchewan’s top ten businesses as reported in 

Saskatchewan Business in July of 1986, Mr. Minister, were 

co-operatives. IN total, there are 25 co-ops and credit unions, 

that are included in the list of Saskatchewan’s top 100 

businesses. 

 

(2145) 

I doubt very much if I’m telling you things that you don’t know 

— at least I hope not, but sometimes I have to wonder. This 

year, Saskatchewan Wheat Pool led Saskatchewan’s list of 

people that entered the Financial-Post top 500 corporations in 

Canada, they were 50th. 

 

I hope that in some small way I contributed in the past to the 

wheat pool growth. It was a very, very small way, but as you 

are well aware, Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was my former 

employer before the good people of Regina North became my 

employer. 

 

There was 198 retail co-operatives that had sales of $729 

million in 1985 and ’86, and that represents 16 per cent of the 

total retail sales in Saskatchewan. I could go on outlining the 

co-operative accomplishments, Mr. Minister, but, given the 

significant contribution of the co-operative sector to 

Saskatchewan’s economic and social life, it seems appropriate 

that initiatives to help people form co-operatives for the 

delivery of goods and services would be a major initiative of 

this government. That would seem logical. It is not apparently 

happening, since instead we have the spectacle where, since 

1982-83 under this Tory government, there’s been a steady 

demise of the department of co-operative — co-operative and 

co-operative development. 

 

Along with the demise of the department, the co-operative spirit 

is being dismembered, if you like. Let me cite the department 

budget: in 1982-83, the province budgeted $3,340,000 and a 

total of 79 person-years that was directed to the co-operative 

effort. In 1986-87, that budget had been reduced from nearly 

$3.5 million to $2,959,000, and the reduction in the 

person-years from 79 person-years all the way down to 59-3 

person-years — a very, very severe reduction. And these 

actions, Minister, display to us and to the co-operative 

movement in Saskatchewan a total lack of commitment to that 

co-operative movement. 

 

I see that in the 1987-88 budget forecasts, that the Department 

of . . . the Co-operatives branch of your department has a total 

budget of $443,900. That is one dismal record of withdrawal of 

support for the co-operative sector. Does your government not 

agree that there is a basic inconsistency in your actions, 

Minister; that your present course towards co-operative 

development is at a cross purposes to the general trend of 

co-operative institutions in Saskatchewan? And does this 

government believe that you can continue and do more work 

and more development with less money and less staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. 

member is mistaken or just doesn’t understand what is taking 

place in the co-ops, and I will get to that in a moment as to the 

number of staff and the budgetary figures. But I listened to him 

with interest and outlining some statistics pertaining to 

co-operative development and co-operative activity in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and I can assure him that the 

co-operative spirit is well and alive in Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact, some of our top businesses are co-ops. He listed a few 

of them there. But certainly I remember looking in  

  



 

October 1, 1987 

3045 

 

Business Week magazine or one of those magazines and looking 

at the top 100 companies in the province of Saskatchewan, and 

a large majority of those were co-operatives. So to say that the 

co-op spirit is not alive and well in the province of 

Saskatchewan is just simply not correct. 

 

At this year, just to indicate some of the things that have 

happened in the present year — this is April to August of ’87 

this year — there’s been 16 feeder co-ops have started up in this 

province in that period of time; three rural development 

co-operations; one outfitter’s co-op; two farmers’ markets; one 

hog marketing co-op. So there’s been a number. I can go on and 

list them, but I won’t take the time of the House to list them all, 

but actually 31 from April till August, ’87, the formation of 31 

new co-operatives. And ’86 and ’87 we had the growth of 77 

new co-operatives in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The member, when he started his introductory remarks . . . and I 

don’t think he was paying attention, or I will draw to his 

attention what I had said. He indicated that in the discussions of 

Tourism, Small business, northern development and 

Co-operatives, that I had not talked about co-ops. And I’m sure 

his seat-mate, the critic for a small business, will correct him 

and will recall that when we started our discussions on the 

estimates last evening and we got into the discussion on the 

business resource centres, which some of the members opposite 

support, is a very innovative and modern approach to the 

assistance of the establishment of small business in this 

province . . . 

 

When I was discussing the formation of these, I indicated to the 

members opposite and to all present that one of the initiatives 

undertaken by the amalgamation of the departments was to 

allow these business resource centres to incorporate the 

formation of co-operatives. 

 

So I would . . . and I explained that in some detail — if the 

member would like to look back in Hansard he would see this 

— that simply put, that in 12 centres throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan we have, at street level, business resource centres 

where one can come in and get access to just a large number of 

business-related materials, also to computers to help analyse 

your own business problems that you may be having. And we 

have some very, very capable people, some very, very capable 

people in these business resource centres who are there to assist 

people and advise them. One of the things that they will be 

describing in the formation of a co-operative and how you 

would go about forming a co-operative if you so wish. 

 

So for today I could say that if there was someone, let us take in 

the area around Yorkton, who may wish to form a farmers’ 

market co-op and don’t know how to just go about that, they 

can just walk right into the business resource centre in Yorkton. 

The consultant there will certainly sit down and go through all 

the things that are necessary to form a co-op, or he will access 

from people in Regina in my department. They will come out 

and help whoever it is form a co-operative if that is the type of 

business venture that they would wish to form. So for the 

member to say that there have been no discussion of this, I think 

it is simply not correct. 

Further to that we are having a lot of meetings with co-ops at 

this time. My acting deputy is telling me about meetings that 

are taking place with co-ops, to have co-ops access the VCC 

type of activity — a way of giving financing to retail co-ops 

who may need that. 

 

I want to tell you that in May I had a meeting with all the major 

co-ops down at the Saskatchewan Hotel. It was a fine meeting. 

They had some, some concerns . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s another meeting he had. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, another meeting. Something . . . And 

to the member of Quill Lakes, I would again caution him and 

remind him, had he had a few meetings he probably wouldn’t 

have got kicked out so severely in 1982. 

 

But getting back to the critic here for co-ops, I want to indicate 

that that was a very good meeting in which I explained some of 

the thrust and initiatives we would be having to help develop 

the co-operative spirit and the formation of co-ops through our 

business resource centres. 

 

I think the statistics that I’ve read to you tonight are proof 

positive. And just before I end, Mr. House Leader, I see you’re 

getting anxious to get to your feet. But before you rise to your 

feet, I’d just like to remind the member opposite, who takes 

great pride in the wheat pool — and well he should as he was 

an employee of the wheat pool at one time. I don’t know if the 

management feel the same way about him as he does, but we’ll 

leave that to pass. 

 

However, I just want to remind you and the members, give you 

something to think about tonight. And that is the biggest co-op 

project that has even been undertaken in the province of 

Saskatchewan — right out there, north Regina, where I spent 

five years of my life working at the Co-op Refineries. 

 

And I’m proud to say that a Conservative government was able 

to sit down with the biggest co-op, one of the biggest co-ops in 

this province, and work out a deal for the biggest project of its 

type ever undertaken in the province of Saskatchewan. I think 

that tells you where the real spirit of co-operative endeavour is 

in this House. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 p.m. 

 


