













































September 10, 1987 Hansard Evening


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 10, 1987 

2433 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 19 – An Act to 

amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When 5 o’clock 

arrived and the House adjourned for supper, I was in the 

process of establishing the position of our party with respect to 

the E&H (education and health) tax and the massive tax 

increase, the massive tax grab, from 5 per cent to 7 per cent – a 

40 per cent increase which we of the New Democratic Party 

believe is a very unfair increase in the sales tax. 

 

What we believe has happened, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

government – in summary to my speech, and my remarks prior 

to 5 o’clock – in summary: what this government has done is 

that they have clearly broken the words that they made, the 

promises that they made, the commitments that they made to 

the people of Saskatchewan. They made promises and they 

have broken the promises. 

 

The promises that were made, Mr. Speaker, have been broken 

with the introduction of an increase of 40 per cent in the sales 

tax, from 5 per cent to 7 per cent, and as a result, Mr. Speaker, 

we have basically four or five reasons why we are going to 

oppose this Bill. One, that it is unfair to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It’s a consumption tax, Mr. Speaker – an 

increase in the consumption tax by 40 per cent from 5 per cent 

to 7 per cent on the sales of goods and services. And of course 

what this does is it hurts middle income and low income and 

poor people the most. It hits these people the hardest. 

 

This government has clearly indicated, by the increase in the 

sales tax that they are the authors of, that they do not support 

the families in Saskatchewan nor the taxpayers in Saskatchewan 

because all they want from these people is an opportunity to 

raise some more tax dollars to make up for the massive deficit 

that they have created. And the people of Saskatchewan . . . 

And obviously, Mr. Speaker, what they have done is they have 

cut taxes for oil companies, but have not give the same 

reciprocity to the taxpayers of the province. 

 

The second reason that we are opposing it, Mr. Speaker, is 

because it is part of the largest tax grab in the history of this 

province. It is one of five or six tax increases plus a number of 

hidden tax increases that we have not been able to count up as 

yet on the people of Saskatchewan. What this means, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the E&H tax is part of a tax increase that means, 

for a family of four in this province, $1,000 a year increase in 

provincial taxes alone — $1,000, Mr. Speaker. Just imagine a 

family of four earning about 25 to $30,000 a year, gross 

income, what $1,000 net means to them in terms of less dollars 

to spend on goods that are necessary for their family. 

 

What we have as an example of this government . . . They do 

not just raise the taxes and say, well we’re going to cut back 

and we’re going to provide some leadership in terms of good 

management. What they have done, Mr. Speaker, is, rather than 

address their mismanagement and address their fiscal 

responsibility and address the problems that got us here, they 

are saying: no, we’re going to forget about all that; we’re going 

to help our rich friends; but we’re going to tax people in this 

province at a rate that is unprecedented in the history of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The other reason we’re going to oppose this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

clearly is that it is not the way to attack the deficit. The way to 

attack the deficit, Mr. Speaker, is to have good management. 

The way to attack the deficit is to be . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — The way to attack the deficit, Mr. Speaker, is 

not only to have good management, but also to be fiscally 

responsible, to have some accountability to the people of this 

province. And they do not have accountability. And, Mr. 

Speaker, what they also have done is that they have, rather than 

cleaned up their own shop with respect to management and to 

clean up their own shop with respect to patronage and nepotism 

and corruption and other items, Mr. Speaker, what they have 

done is they have passed their mismanagements, their 

incapacity to manage, on the backs of the people of this 

province. 

 

And the fourth reason, Mr. Speaker, that we are opposing this 

Bill, along with the other tax Bills, is very clearly that it is a 

double-cross to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — They promised in the election campaign that 

they were going to reduce personal income tax by 10 per cent. 

What do we see, Mr. Speaker, is a 24 per cent increase in the 

flat tax. 

 

They promised in the election campaign that they were going to 

eliminate the 5 per cent E&H tax. And what we have seen, Mr. 

Speaker, is not an elimination or a reduction, what we have seen 

is an unprecedented increase, a 40 per cent increase in the E&H 

tax, the sales tax, from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. That is a clear 

double-cross, that is a clear deception to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and that is a deception and a double-cross, Mr. 

Speaker, that will be rewarded in a reciprocal manner come the 

next election by the taxpayers of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — And finally, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t resolve 

the credibility problem that this government has. That is why 

we are not supporting this E&H Bill. They have on occasion 

after occasion made statements, and they have obviously not 

committed themselves to following up on what they have said. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, finally what I’d like to say is that this  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2434 

 

government, whatever they say, they do the opposite; whatever 

they promise, they break or double-cross; and whatever they 

suggest, they deny. That is the government that we have in this 

province right now, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, as a result 

of that we cannot support this tax Bill that they’ve put forward 

on that very basis, because it’s a massive tax grab and for all the 

reasons that have been stated prior to my sitting down right 

now. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to join in 

this debate on the tax grab, the E&H 40 per cent increase in the 

tax grab. I’m pleased to add my comments to those of my 

colleague from Regina North West and I’m pleased and proud 

to be able to be standing here and speaking up for the people of 

Regina North, and indeed for all of the good people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — This tax grab, Mr. Speaker, is clearly a desperate 

act of a desperate government that is desperate for ordinary 

people to bail it out of its mismanagement, its incompetence. 

It’s asking the people of Saskatchewan to bail out the 

Saskatchewan treasury because of your incompetence and your 

mismanagement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it is unbelievable that any 

government could so quickly turn around a $145 million surplus 

that the government members opposite took over just over five 

years ago – took over $145 million surplus, squandered it, and 

in its place we now have a $3.4 billion deficit, and growing 

daily. 

 

It is absolutely appalling that this is happening in a land where 

we have so much. There is so much we could have here. What 

we see are government cut-backs when it comes to services for 

people, and yet we see patronage rampant, growing daily, more 

and more patronage appointments, more and more Mr. Hills, 

and so on. Meanwhile the deficit continues to grow and because 

of that we see a 40 per cent increase in E&H tax. 

 

I’d like to state the deficit another way. When the members 

opposite took over the $145 million surplus . . . I just want to 

state how often $145 million fits into a $3.4 billion deficit, 

because it’s such a huge number it’s almost unfathomable. But 

145 million will fit into $3.4 billion 23 times – 23 times, and 

still there’d be $65 million left over additional to the 23 times. 

 

Another way of stating this debt . . . My colleague for Regina 

North has stated it in terms of for a family of four, but this 

government has introduced brand-new debt of over $3,400 for 

every single man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan – $3,400 

per person. Another way of saying what that will result in: it 

results in $340 per year interest alone, just interest payments 

alone, to the lending institutions from which the government 

has borrowed from – $340 per person per year, and $1,360 for a 

family of four. Small wonder, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government, the government opposite, has lost all its credibility. 

Its  

credibility is totally gone. 

 

And how did we get into this deficit situation that causes the 40 

per cent increase in the E&H tax? The incompetence resulting 

from the give-aways. We’ve already outlined in previous 

speeches how the government has given away in excess of $1.7 

billion in oil royalties primarily to the major oil companies, 

many of them American – $1.7 billion in foregone royalties, 

that to collect that, all the government had to do was leave the 

royalty structure that was in place, when they became the 

government, in place. Just leave it alone, and our treasury 

would be $1.7 billion better off right today. 

 

Then there was the quarter billion dollar give-away to 

Weyerhaeuser, a firm from Tacoma, Washington. Small 

wonder, when you see two examples like that that accumulate 

to well over $2 billion, it’s small wonder that they have 

accumulated that deficit and it’s small wonder that they have to 

now nervously look around and say: where can we get this 

money from; where can we recoup some of that money? And 

what are they doing? They’re going after the ordinary 

taxpayers, the ordinary people of Saskatchewan. And we say 

that’s unjust; it’s unfair; and we won’t stand for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: —Two other examples, somewhat smaller but 

certainly examples that everyone can understand in terms of the 

financial mismanagement. We have the government opposite 

selling off $40 million worth of highway equipment. Better 

stated, it would be a virtual give-away because they realized 

about $6 million for $40 million worth of highway equipment. 

Then they have to go about laying off highway workers. Then 

we watched the highway system – that in Saskatchewan we are 

very, very proud of our highway system – we’ve watched that 

system deteriorate to the state where today there’s many 

highways, Mr. Speaker, you and I would be ashamed to call 

highways, and indeed we’d be ashamed to drive down them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — The final example I choose to use is the coal 

mine that the government gave away near Coronach. It cost 

$137 million to develop this mine, and they sold it for $102 

million – a ridiculous give-away price. And on top of that they 

long-term financed $85 million of it. The net immediate return 

to the treasury was a mere $17 million, and the people that were 

working in that coal mine – even more importantly – the people 

that were working that coal mine are now working for less 

money than they were before. Their benefits are eroded 

shamefully, all as a result of the incompetence of the members 

opposite. 

 

We are against this increase in the E&H tax, Mr. Speaker, 

simply because it hits ordinary people very hard and hits them 

in the pocket-book again. On top of the 2 per cent increase in 

the flat tax, we’re now getting hit with the E&H tax going from 

5 per cent to 7 per cent and that despite – as my colleague, the 

member for Regina North West, so ably pointed out in his 

speeches just before mine – despite the fact that all of the 

advertising done by the  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2435 

 

government members and indeed advertising done by some that 

were not elected, because the voters in those constituencies 

knew better than to trust them a second time, but all of the 

advertising was saying: we’re going to reduce the income tax 

by 10 per cent; we’re going to eliminate the E&H tax in our 

first term of office. 

 

(1915) 

 

That was the promises made in 1982. Totally eliminated. And 

it’s really small wonder that we have to oppose this tax grab. 

Couple this – the promises for jobs, the promises for cuts in 

personal income tax, and the elimination of the E&H sales tax 

that you had promised – couple this with what is going on with 

the minimum wage freeze, where there’s been one measly 

25-cent increase in over five years, mere two-bit increase in 

over five years. 

 

And I see the member for Weyburn taking great glee in that. 

He’s happy, He’s almost beside himself for joy at all of the 

people, the poor people of Saskatchewan, that are struggling 

valiantly, struggling, trying to keep their heads above water. 

And what have we got to present them? A 40 per cent increase 

in the E&H tax; that’s what we present them. We present them 

with increases in other taxes. Now we’ve got a 7 per cent gas 

tax. We’ve got a flat tax that the people of Saskatchewan had 

never seen before the Conservative government took office, and 

indeed it will be a pleasure for us to eliminate that in our first 

term of office. 

 

The E&H tax, Mr. Speaker, is a consumption tax and it is 

regressive because low and middle income people pay a 

disproportionately high amount of their income on taxable 

items – a disproportionately high amount of income on taxable 

items. 

 

I don’t believe that there is a tax on shares. If somebody wants 

to buy 100 shares of Esso Resources, for instance, I don’t 

believe we charge the 5 per cent E&H tax on that. The wealthy 

investors – people with money – have so many places they can 

invest their money without having to pay the 5 per cent E&H 

tax. It’s a real shame that the government, instead of going after 

the big corporations, instead of going after the oil companies, 

the pulp and paper mills, instead of going after the people with 

the ability to pay, they’re hitting minimum wage earners – and 

indeed people on welfare, Mr. Speaker, also pay this new 7 per 

cent E&H tax that is being introduced here. And for those 

reasons, obviously we’re going to be voting against that. 

 

I pointed out earlier, in an earlier speech dealing with another 

matter, how some workers in this province have actually had, 

not just taking into account inflation . . . But their actual dollars 

that they’re taking home from their employment has been 

decreasing, and the example that I used then is construction 

workers that have had a reduction in their wages, in their pay – 

never mind taxes. The amount of money the employer pays 

them has been reduced every year since 1982. Prior to ’82, it 

had been steadily growing; since ’82 it has been steadily 

decreasing, Mr. Speaker, and those construction workers that 

are fortunate enough to still have employment – to still be able 

to find employment in a province where unemployment has 

risen so dramatically – those people  

are finding now we’re adding 40 per cent to their E&H tax in 

addition to all of the other taxes that have been imposed by a 

government that stated clearly in their last election campaign, 

very clearly, that they were the government to reduce taxes. 

Well if that’s a reduction, we don’t want any more part of it and 

nor do the people of Saskatchewan want any part of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Civil servants, Mr. Speaker, have had their 

salaries frozen now for quite some time. Does the government 

opposite freeze their taxes? Not a chance. Taxes, inescapably, 

are rising for those people and rising at an incredible rate 

because of the incompetence of the government. 

 

It’s interesting – just before I leave the wage freezes – the SGI 

in-scope employees, that is, in-the-union employees, have now 

got a two-year freeze on their salaries while recently the 

out-of-scope, or management positions, got a 7.6 per cent 

increase. So there seems to be a double standard by the 

government that if you happen to be better off, happen to be 

fairly wealthy, well, we understand, you need a little more 

money; we’ll help you out. But if you happen to be just 

struggling to keep ahead, just trying to stay one step ahead of 

the bill collector – only in this case now we’re trying to stay one 

step ahead of the tax collector – those people are being hit. 

That’s the patent unfairness of this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I pointed out, it’s the financial irresponsibility, the fiscal 

mismanagement, the patronage and the just plain incompetence 

of the members opposite; that’s the reasons why we have a 40 

per cent increase in the E&H tax. We say: instead of giving a 40 

per cent increase, let’s get some reasonable, some responsible, 

some good government. Let’s provide some services for people 

that show people that we can get something for our tax dollars. 

 

A point that I want to make just in closing, Mr. Speaker: the 

E&H tax is supposedly for education and health. Those are two 

areas that we have seen drastic changes to. We have seen some 

pretty significant cuts. The children’s dental plan as we knew it 

has been abolished; two years of service for children 15 and 16 

has been abolished – completely cut. Yet we see the 

government saying: we need more money to provide less 

service. It doesn’t make sense. 

 

We see education cuts, and we hear about them daily. The 

papers are full of stories about how enrolment is up and yet 

some classes are full. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was down at the university just yesterday and I 

spoke to a constituent of mine who has been trying to take 

French class. In April this woman enrolled, in April, and the 

first class she could get into just started this week – the very 

first available class. Obviously enrolment is at a high level. 

There’s a great deal of demand for some of the classes, and yet 

we see cut-backs in funding for the universities. 

 

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2436 

 

The increase in the E&H tax, at very least, the additional 

increase should be going to education and to health. But it will 

not, instead it’s going to try and put some sort of a dent in this 

$3.4 billion deficit that seems to grow almost hourly. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Growing every day. 

 

Mr. Trew: — My colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake 

says it’s growing daily. I will argue that it’s growing hourly. 

And indeed it’s fortunate that the Minister of Finance doesn’t 

come and give us the figures more often, because that number 

would grow. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I will be joining my colleagues on 

this side of the House and voting against this regressive Bill 19, 

which is a tax grab that grabs 40 per cent more E&H tax from 

the citizens of Saskatchewan. And I will be voting against that 

Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me 

pleasure to be able to join this debate tonight. You have to 

excuse my voice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s two words that I’d like to key on tonight; 

one of them is trust and the other is need. We have a situation 

after October of last year where we saw a government that was 

elected on trust. People gave them the trust, and trusted them 

that they were going to reduce the sales tax; and trusted that 

they were going to not increase gas tax; trusted them that they 

were going to manage the affairs of this province in a way that 

going to be beneficial to the people of the province. They put in 

this government that trust. And what have we received? We 

have received a total opposite of what they said they were going 

to give us. And the people since October, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

have told me and the members on this side that they no longer 

have trust in this government, and it’s proven by the polling, it’s 

proven by the phone calls. It’s proven by just the general 

feeling out in the province of Saskatchewan amongst the people 

that this government, along with the Mulroney government in 

Ottawa, cannot be trusted. 

 

We have a Premier who’s losing trust. And isn’t that a sad 

statement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for this province? Planting in 

the minds of the people a mistrust in the people that they 

elected – that is degrading the whole system. And the part that 

bothers me most is the members on this side happen to be 

dragged down with it, and I say that is wrong. 

 

We have a government over there who is losing trust so they 

say they have to build the province. Go with us; times are 

tough. Even though you think that we’re not doing what we said 

we’ll do, we have a plan. Our plan is going to be unfolded over 

the next four years. Right now things are tough; bear with us. 

It’ll get better. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on the books, I’m sure it will get better 

because anybody that can be out as far as the Minister of 

Finance to the negative can be out as far as that to the positive, 

because he doesn’t know what he’s doing. 

 

That brings me to the next point, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the 

one of need. Why do we need this increase in the sales tax? Do 

we need the increase in the sales tax to help feed the mouths of 

hungry children? It’s not shown from members opposite, the 

Minister of Social Services. But we need it for George Hill. 

 

Do we need the increase in the E&H tax to employ dental 

workers and give children good teeth around the province in a 

very simple, effective, efficient manner? Not according to this 

government. We need it to employ people like Paul Schoenhals 

at $100,000 a year. That’s what they say. Paul Schoenhals, the 

ex-minister of the government opposite. 

 

Do we need this increase in the E&H tax to ensure that people 

who want to go to university can be there? Not according to that 

government. The need, according to that government, is to 

employ party hacks. Do we need that 2 per cent rise – 40 per 

cent in the E&H tax – to ensure that farm families in this 

country have centres to go to, to alleviate their stress; to make 

sure that their family farms are going to be saved; that they 

have the mental competence and desired facilities to help them 

through this crisis? Not according to that government. But they 

need it to fly the member from Kindersley from Regina to 

Alberta. That’s the priority. That’s the need they are telling us. 

 

And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that need is wrong. We need a 

government that is going to be responsible; that is going to be 

competent; that is going to be able to run the affairs of this 

province in a manner in which the people respect, in which the 

people anticipated and which the people need. Their 

anticipations have been shattered, their respect is lost, and their 

needs have not been fulfilled. 

 

(1930) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, today as I stand in this House, I am very, very 

disappointed with the government opposite. I see members on 

the other side of the House, who before the last election made 

promises with straight faces to their constituents. They had 

made promises to their constituents and now they have to turn 

around, because they don’t even have any say in what this 

cabinet is doing but they have to defend it. And I say to them: 

show us on this side, show us and show your constituents that 

you should deserve their respect by voting against this Bill that 

puts the needs of the people second to the needs of the priorized 

few friends of the Tory party. I ask you that. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, all I have to say is I will be voting 

against this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I rise from 

my chair tonight I wish to indicate that I have a few reasons 

why I will not be supporting this Bill, and I wish to share those 

reasons with the people of not only Prince Albert-Duck Lake 

but the rest of the province. 

 

But before I do that, I’d like to share a little message with  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2437 

 

our friends opposite, and I think what it will do is indicate a 

good omen for the people of this province that there are, in fact, 

good times to come. And I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, I have 

a little telex here from Ontario, and it says – I’m going to quote 

from it if that will be all right – and it says: 

 

Not only are the Tories being knocked down to third place 

for the first time since 1919, but Grossman, the leader of 

the PC Party, has gone down to defeat in his Toronto 

riding, St. Andrew-St. Patrick. 

 

He held the riding for 12 years and his father held it before him 

for 20. And I say to you and the members of this House, a good 

omen for the people of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, as I enter the debate 

on the legislation to increase the E&H tax from 5 to 7 per cent, I 

would want to say that what this Bill does is clearly indicate the 

reason that the people of this country are losing faith in the 

Tories. An election campaign promise is one thing; a 

commitment to govern fairly and honestly is another. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that the members on that side 

of the House are unable to distinguish between honesty and 

fairness. 

 

I recall in the 1982 election campaign, the Tories, 64 

candidates, the New Democrats, 64 candidates throughout the 

province, and I recall, Mr. Speaker, very clearly some of the 

commitments that were made to the people of this province. I 

recall that the senior citizens were promised free telephones. I 

recall that very well. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there 

isn’t a senior citizen in this province who has a telephone in his 

home that doesn’t get a bill from Sask Tel monthly, and I want 

to suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, a higher bill than what they got 

in 1982. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I recall a promise to remove 

the gas tax, and that was kept, but only for a short while. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who made that promise? 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — My colleague says, who made that 

promise. Well, a number of them did. As a matter of fact I 

would suggest to you that 64 of them did, and I could quote 

from a little pamphlet from the member from Shellbrook-Torch 

River, who is my neighbouring riding. I’ll just quote a little 

piece out of his campaign pamphlet. It was a letter to his 

constituents and it says, eliminating the provincial sales tax, one 

of our promises. And if your gas tank holds 15 gallons you’ll 

save $6 every time you fill her up. 

 

Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that member is going to have an 

awful hard time going home and explaining to the people of 

Shellbrook and Canwood, if that is in his riding – I’m not sure; 

I may not be clear on that – but I want to say that he is going to 

have an awful hard time explaining how these people are going 

to save $6 every time they fill 

 her up now with the new gas tax put on. It’s a broken 

commitment and it’s an indication that this government is in 

trouble, and it’s an indication that this government can’t be 

trusted. 

 

Nobody was told that this government was going to bring a flat 

tax to the people. That was never told. It came in the most 

intelligent budget that this province had ever seen. 

 

The former Minister of Finance stood before the people of this 

province, told them he was delivering the most intelligent 

budget, and what did they get? What did they get, Mr. Speaker? 

I’ll tell you what they got. They got the prelude to the biggest 

tax grab that any government has ever perpetrated upon the 

people of Saskatchewan since this province was formed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — But, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking today 

about an increase in the sales tax, and I will try to make my 

comments pertinent to that particular increase. It’s very difficult 

because the number of increases in cost to the people and the 

taxpayers of this province varies widely. A lot of increases you 

can’t see on the surface, like the cuts to the dental plan that are 

going to cost the children and the people of this province 

money; the drug prescription plan that is costing already, and I 

say, Mr. Speaker grossly unfair. The members on that side of 

the House should be embarrassed. 

 

I would like to say tonight that as this debate started and when it 

started, I have not seen one member from the PC caucus on the 

government side of the House stand up to either try to explain 

or to try to defend the reasons that this Bill and that this 

increase is before this legislature, and that the people of this 

province are now paying for. 

 

Not one member has had the courage to stand up here and 

explain to the people who live in his riding, or her riding, why 

this government has had to increase the E&H tax. 

 

And I say to you that all of us in this legislature, all of us who 

sit in here, want to get home to our families. And we all want to 

move the . . . the way the House works. We want to speed it up 

and get it working, and get our work done, so that we can be 

home and visit with our constituents; so we can be with our 

families. 

 

But on a Bill as important as what this one is to the people of 

the province, I think we stood here for two weeks, and if every 

member on this side of the House stood up to defend the rights 

of the people of this province against untruths and 

misrepresentation from members on that side of the House, I 

think we would have our time well spent. And I want to say to 

you that I’m willing to stand here and do it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, there’s a wide 

range of tax increases that the people of this province have seen, 

and a wide range of cuts to services. The number of people on 

social assistance has increased dramatically. The number of 

people unemployed has  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2438 

 

increased dramatically, and we could talk about all of those 

things. 

 

We could talk about the fact that young people can’t get into 

university. We could talk about the fact that young people are 

leaving this province. We could talk about the fact that this 

government has simply mismanaged the affairs of the province. 

We could go all through all of those things. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to focus on the fact that this government has 

misrepresented what their plans were, and that they’ve been 

unfair to the people. 

 

I have seen since 1982 people who have worked in the 

construction industry who made good livings for their families, 

and who were able to buy new cars and pay 5 per cent E&H tax 

on building materials. I’ve seen those people go to their local 

merchants and buy major appliances – fridge, stoves, washers, 

dryers – and pay 5 per cent E&H tax. And I’ve seen the time 

when there was an income level in those families that they 

could do that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen since 1982 some of those same 

families on an income level that they simply can’t afford to buy 

those appliances and those cars, and buy the homes to house 

their families, and the chesterfields. And I know all members of 

this side have experienced the same because the same situation 

prevails throughout this province. I’ve seen those people move 

to a decent wage scale to 5 and $6 an hour; seen some of them 

go through their unemployment insurance, and finally be moved 

to the rolls of social assistance where they never expected or 

never wanted to be. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I say that’s one of the reasons that this 

government has had to increase the E&H tax because the 

number of sales of those kinds of items that used to produce 

revenue for the government through that tax of 5 per cent isn’t 

sufficient any more, so this government has decided to increase 

that rate. And as well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen the business 

people who used to sell goods to these workers in a situation 

where their businesses are breaking even, and they don’t have 

the disposable income that they used to have, which means they 

don’t shop at their neighbouring stores, which means a chain 

reaction, and it means, inevitably, that the economy of this 

province is slowing down. 

 

And I think if you followed the economic growth pattern and 

the economic indicators of the province of Saskatchewan, it 

becomes very, very clear that if you’re going to relegate 

middle-income people to the low-income level, you’re going to 

stifle your economy, and that’s what this government’s been 

doing. Wealth is polarized to a certain few in higher-income 

levels. It’s not happening rapidly; it’s a slow progression, but it 

is happening. The number of people that middle-income people 

are asked to support on social assistance is growing. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, what is happening is that we’re having 

two income levels in this province. We’re having those that 

have, and those that don’t have. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not 

the kind of a society that the people of Saskatchewan want, nor 

did they expect, from this  

government in 1982. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of difficulty going back to my 

riding and explaining why this government has thrust these 

increases upon the people of this province without being 

terribly political. And I try in my constituency office not to be 

political, but at times it becomes a situation where, aside from 

partisan politics, I can’t explain it. And what I end up having to 

do in a lot of cases is explain it in very partisan fashion, saying 

that the Tories govern for the rich and the rest of us don’t 

matter. 

 

And I don’t like to have to do that because – I’ll be honest and 

very sincere about this – in 1982 I expected better from this 

government. I really did. And members on this side of the 

House have nothing against any member on that side of the 

House, nothing personally, but it’s what this government stands 

for, and it’s what the PC Party collectively, as an organization, 

does to people when they govern. 

 

And I go back to the letter, to the message we got from Ontario, 

where Mr. Grossman was soundly defeated in his own riding – 

the leader of the PC Party in Ontario. It’s a trend that we’re 

going to see in this province, Mr. Speaker, because the people 

have lost trust, they’ve lost faith, they feel betrayed. And this 

government is only here for as long as it takes for the Premier to 

get the courage to call an election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — My colleagues today have gone through a 

list of commitments, a list of commitments made by members 

from that side, and one of those commitments was that they 

were going to eliminate the education and health tax in this 

province. 

 

(1945) 

 

Did they do it? Mr. Speaker, no, they never eliminated that tax 

in the first four years of government as they promised. What 

they did was wait until they were lucked in to the second 

victory and then increased it to seven. 

 

As I said we can go through the whole works. I look through a 

list here from one of your candidates, a former MLA who was 

summarily defeated in the last election, one Gordon Currie, 

provide free telephones for seniors, freeze utility rates, phase 

out the 5 per cent E&H tax. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I just . . . I’m about to close my remarks, but 

before I do, I have a graph here that clearly indicates why we 

have these kind of Bills before us, and why this legislature and 

the members of this legislature are faced with going back to 

their constituencies and explaining to people why this kind of 

legislation is before the House. And if you look at this graph, 

and I’m hoping that the people through their televisions can see, 

and these numbers were all quoted by the member from Quill 

Lakes earlier today, but this graph outlines the deficit as it 

grows since 1982. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m afraid the member is using 

an exhibit, and rules of the House do not allow it. You may 

explain what the graph depicts, but he may not  



 

September 10, 1987 

2439 

 

use as a exhibit in the House. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Excuse me, Mr. Speaker, I apologize for 

that; I wasn’t familiar with it. 

 

Then let me quote the numbers for the Deputy Premier because 

I’m sure he’ll be interested in this. Estimated deficit in 1982, 

and this was from an inherited $150 million surplus, Mr. 

Speaker, $150 million that was left by the former administration 

in this province, and this is what they’ve turned it into. In 

1982-83, $220 million forecasted deficit, actual deficit, 227; 

1983-84, $317 million deficit, actual deficit 331; 1984-85, $267 

million forecasted deficit, actual deficit, 379; 1985-86, $291 

million deficit, actual deficit, 584. 

 

And the Finance minister of the day, in this pre-election 

projection of what the deficit was going to be before this 

government was going to the people, forecasted a $389 million 

deficit. What was the actual? A little slip – whoops, whoops — 

$1.235 billion. How can anybody be so wrong? Even the most 

incompetent of Finance ministers, I would suggest to you, 

would be a little closer than that. 

 

I say it’s one of the reasons that the people of this province feel 

betrayed, and again, it’s one of the reasons we’re back to this 

kind of legislation in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that we could go on and on and on and 

we’ll have a chance, I’m sure, on third reading. And there are, 

I’m sure many of my colleagues wanting to say a few more 

words about this particular piece of legislation. 

 

I want to indicate that I will be voting against this Bill, and I 

also want to indicate that I’m hoping the people, the members 

who represent a lot of people in this province – not as many as 

they might like, less than 50 per cent – but the members from 

that side of the House will be able to go back to their ridings 

and explain with some conviction why they’re again into the 

pockets of these people, why they’ve betrayed them, why they 

campaigned in 1982 saying one thing and in 1987 are doing 

another. I’m hoping that they’ve got their lines down pat 

because I think they’ve got a tall tale to tell. They’re going to 

have to be some very good story-tellers in order to get that one 

believed in their ridings. 

 

There’s much more to be said, as I have already indicated, Mr. 

Speaker, and I now beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 36 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. As we 

adjourned the review of the estimates of the spending of the 

Department of Social Services and the plans for the department 

for the next year at the end of the day yesterday, we were in the 

process of discussing some of the  

funding issues that directly affect hundreds of non-government 

organizations who provide very valuable social services to their 

clients around many, many communities in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I don’t think it’s stretching the point at all to say 

that the large majority – as a matter of fact, if not all – of those 

non-government organizations are feeling the pinch these days 

because they’re put into a position where they have demands to 

do more with less. Security is not their strong characteristic 

these days, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I would like to continue this discussion on 

behalf of the many non-government organizations that put to 

work thousands of volunteers across communities in the 

province of Saskatchewan to do good works for the men, the 

women, and the children in their communities, people who 

work as a labour of love because they believe that through their 

efforts they can in some way help to make it a better world for 

their fellow men and women and children. And I want to ask 

you, Mr. Minister, if you will consider changing your policy by 

which funding is granted to non-government organizations. 

 

We’ve seen this year the insecurity of the funding policies that 

have been used for a number of years, funding policies that 

mean that on a year-by-year basis every non-government 

organization in Saskatchewan cringes as it waits for the budget 

announcement, not knowing if it will have the same budget this 

year as it had last year, hoping that it may be expanded so that 

they can expand their services and better serve the people that 

they exist to serve within their mandate, and fearing, fearing 

that at the whim of government or pressures real or imagined by 

the politicians in this Assembly that they may not have the 

resources to continue to offer their capable services. 

 

I would ask, Mr. Minister, if you have given some thought or if 

you would consider providing funding commitments to 

non-government organizations two years in advance. The 

advantages of that are obvious. What it means is that if there are 

cu-backs, and we know that there have been some cut-backs 

this year. The large majority of non-government organizations 

were held to zero per cent increases which in terms of the 

impact of inflation meant that they’re working now with 4 per 

cent less than they had last year. The insecurities that they have 

to commit to their clients, their ability to continue to provide 

services, to commit to their employees – thousands of dedicated 

employees – the security of employment. 

 

And I would ask, Mr. Minister, if you would tell me if you have 

given consideration to a policy whereby funding commitments 

to non-government organizations would be made not year by 

year but would be made one year in advance, at the very least, 

to provide security to those dedicated volunteers and people in 

communities around Saskatchewan to serve the people in their 

communities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the situation is 

thus, that the legislature votes an annual budget. It would be 

beyond our jurisdiction to make commitments that are not 

authorized by this Assembly, and this Assembly does not 

operate on a two-calendar year but on a single-budget year. And 

that seems the only practical way to do it. 

 

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2440 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t know that that’s 

entirely accurate because within each government department, 

well in advance of the release of the budget, department 

officials are asked to submit their budget plans, in many cases 

more than a year in advance, and decisions are made just the 

day before the budget. And I think with political will, if it is the 

will of the Minister of Social Services to make it happen, it is 

possible to give that kind of commitment to non-government 

organizations. 

 

I know, Mr. Minister, you’ve not made that decision. I don’t 

criticize you for that, but let me ask you again whether you 

would be willing to consider making . . . if you would give 

consideration to a policy whereby commitments would be 

made, funding commitments would be made to non-government 

organizations a year in advance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I give no commitment to 

spending next year’s budget, but I will look at the possibility of 

two-year contracts rather than one-year contracts where contract 

work is being supplied to the government by outside agencies. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I would say to you 

that I would be most happy to work together with you towards 

that objective. I think it would be a worthwhile objective that 

would lend some security to a very, very important kind of 

function done within communities around Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, if I can ask you another . . . and the questions I 

have today not surprisingly having to do with non-government 

organizations or funding related questions basically. You will 

be aware, as I am, that by and large employees of 

non-government organizations do not enjoy the same level of 

employment benefits as do employees say, for example, who 

are in the employ of your department or many other 

departments. And in addition to the insecurity that exists 

whereby on a year-by-year basis, they’re not certain whether the 

operation will continue and their jobs will continue beyond the 

beginning of the budget year, they often are sacrificing the 

ability, if they were to work in public employ, in pensions, sick 

leave benefits, dental plans, and sick pay in many cases, and so 

on. 

 

And I would ask, Mr. Minister, if you recognize that this is a 

reality for employees in many non-government organizations. I 

would hazard to say the large majority of non-government 

organizations . . . and if you have given some consideration in 

recognizing that, first of all, to increasing funding to permit for 

improved employment benefits for non-government 

organization employees. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, it’s a concept that I 

constantly keep in mind. There are many factors that have to be 

considered. The factor is that these people do not directly work 

for the government, so we would not have direct control over 

the benefits or the qualifications of people. If we started paying 

benefits and wages in line with what the government workers 

are receiving, we would have to expect the same kind of 

qualifications to be followed. So it’s something that we give 

some thought to but it’s not an easy thing to resolve. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t totally agree. 

Partially I agree, and that has to do with my next question. I 

don’t totally agree with what you’ve said because for 

non-government organizations budgets are approved on, as you 

know, on a line-by-line basis, and one of those lines is 

employee benefits. And it is possible, if the will is there, to 

assign increased funding to non-government organizations 

which can be translated, which have to be translated into 

employee benefits so that employees in non-government 

organizations can enjoy some of the securities that are common 

to people in the public sector. 

 

But let me address the second half of your statement, Mr. 

Minister. You are correct. I believe that in many cases 

employees of non-government organizations have been hired 

with less paper qualifications, if we want to call them that, than 

might often be the case in the public sector, and as people who 

have often been hired, I would suggest, because of their 

personal skills, because of their commitment, and not 

necessarily, in many cases, because they have the paper 

qualifications. 

 

(2000) 

 

What that means is that in changing times, as needs change in 

order for NGOs to meet their mandates, to serve their clients 

and their constituents, that oftentimes the skills required of 

those employees also do change. And I think it’s been . . . It’s 

fair to say that it’s been a sore point for some time that NGOs 

generally do not have training budgets sufficient to permit for 

any kind of concentrated upgrading of staff skills. 

 

And I would ask, Mr. Minister, if that is a fact that you have 

recognized and if you have any plans to increase funding again 

– I apologize for these being funding questions, but that’s the 

reality – to increase funding that can be earmarked in 

non-government organizations to provide for training so as to 

improve the qualifications but, more importantly, the skills, of 

those employees in NGOs to serve their clients more 

effectively. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we have recognized this. 

For example this past spring I announced that there would be 

increased training for foster parents, as an example. And we are 

putting that money in the budget, and we recognize these 

factors and are doing what is possible. 

 

The members of the opposition have an easy time finding new 

places to spend money. And I find that my children have no 

problems spending all the money that I give them or all the 

money that I could earn, but what I have to tell my children is 

that the money has to come from somewhere. And I say to the 

members of the opposition, if they could think of somewhere 

this money should come from . . . I can assure them that we are 

receiving all we can from oil companies and all their other 

favourite enemies. And so if they can think of some easy ways 

for us to get money, I would be pleased to spend it, and I’m 

sure we can agree on many worthwhile places that it could be 

spent. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, I’m sure we can, Mr. Minister. It’s, as you 

recognize, a matter of priorities. If you’re looking for  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2441 

 

suggestions, I would suggest an extra $300 million a year or so 

that you’ve been giving up on oil royalty losses. I would 

suggest a quarter of a billion dollars for Weyerhaeuser. I would 

suggest looking at the $10 million paid to political staffs of 

cabinet ministers. I’d suggest looking at the $20 million paid 

each year for government advertising. And those can be sources 

that can be looked at for increased funding. 

 

Now you’re heard those suggestions before, and it will be up to 

you and your colleagues to decide whether you see any merit in 

them or you want to continue on the path that you’ve arrived at. 

But I simply, as we come here this evening, Mr. Minister, and 

talk about social service needs, I would assume that part of the 

process that you involve yourself in as you sit around the table 

with your cabinet colleagues is to talk about priorities, 

revenues, and expenditures, and putting them in the places that 

are most important. I’m simply asking this evening, then, as you 

look at the non-government organization sector of the 

Department of Social Services, whether there is the political 

will to increase funding to allow for training of staff; to allow 

for security of employment with better benefits; to allow for 

security of employment and delivery of services by funding a 

year in advance. 

 

And again, I repeat, Mr. Minister, I think these are worthwhile 

objectives. I’m realistic enough to know they can’t happen 

overnight, but we can make progress if the will is there. And I 

commit myself to working together with you to reach that 

objective because I believe it is one that is worthwhile, and in 

the long run is in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Minister, another funding related question, and it has to do 

with the fact that largely due to the delay of the budget and this 

year’s spring budget being delivered not until June 17, that 

whereas many non-government organizations were used to 

getting quarterly funds, as you mentioned yesterday when we 

spoke about this topic, and as a result were getting funding 

month by month in one-twelfth increments of their total 

funding: I would simply ask, Mr. Minister, if that practice has 

now ceased and if non-government organizations can look 

forward to receiving their moneys from your department to 

carry out their services by payment of quarterly amounts of 

each year so that they can have that money in the bank and use 

that to plan their operations for the next year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, when I pointed out to the 

members opposite that they should make suggestions, I also 

pointed out that they would come up with their usual, standard 

NDP answers, and they did – $300 million dollars more could 

be obtained from oil. 

 

When the price of oil went down there were 5,000 jobs lost. 

How many more jobs would you lose by raising royalties? How 

many jobs would the members opposite want to lose in 

Saskatchewan to try to raise money to create other jobs? Would 

it offset? I doubt very much, because money does not grow on 

trees. It comes out of oil wells; it grows on farms in the form of 

grain and cattle; and it goes on and on that way, but the 

members opposite don’t realize that potash mines produce 

money when they are producing potash. So the royalties on oil, 

on shut-in wells, are zero. So you have to balance these  

things. 

 

Weyerhaeuser again. Somehow Weyerhaeuser and the jobs at 

Weyerhaeuser, somehow that is detrimental to our economy. 

The $10 million for political staff – we don’t have political staff 

in this government. We have people that do the job of running 

the government. Just because they don’t happen to be people 

that are suitable to the members opposite does not mean that 

they are political staff. 

 

What we are looking at here is governing under the 

circumstances that exist today. It should be pointed out that 

NGOs received $59,000 towards training last year – $48,000 

was for benefits and $11,000 to the Saskatchewan human 

services organization for executive development training. So we 

are doing what is possible. 

 

I suppose that if the NDP solution of pouring taxpayers’ money 

on every problem was a real solution, then when we were 

elected in 1982 there should have been no problems in this 

province, and yet they were there and have continued to be 

there. And as I pointed out earlier today, many of the problems 

in this province are not financial problems but social problems 

that go to the moral issues and the life-styles of people. And 

therefore we have to work on not only pouring money on the 

problem but work on the spirits of people. People may not 

necessarily be poor in body but if you are poor in spirit you will 

soon become poor in body, and that has to be taken into 

account. I don’t know what the magic answer is, but I would 

think that more morality, better values, better education, all of 

those factors would alleviate the problem. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, if I could just reflect for a moment 

on the topic at hand . . . And I will happily debate with you your 

oil revenues policy; I will happily debate with you 

Weyerhaeuser and on and on. But it’s been the practice of 

yourself, Mr. Minister, whenever we go through the estimates, 

and the plans and practices of your department, that you get into 

an area which you feel a little bit uncomfortable – rather than 

giving a straight answer, we go off on some rambling oratorical 

excursion. 

 

Let me just reflect for a moment, Mr. Minister. When you say 

$60,000 for NGOs for training, that translates into something in 

the neighbourhood of 200, maybe $250 per NGO, for training. 

And that’s not a whole lot of money. I think both you and I will 

recognize that you can’t do a lot of staff training for 200 or 

$250. And I’m simply asking you tonight: you are the 

individual responsible for the Department of Social Services. I 

understand and I accept that it’s largely at the direction of your 

Premier, who is inputting as to how Social Services shall 

function and that it’s not solely your decision but you are the 

spokesperson for the department. I’m simply asking, as you 

look at the real problems that face the requirement for funds 

within your department to deliver good quality social services 

to the people of Saskatchewan, if you’ll address those real 

issues. 

 

You may have forgotten, Mr. Minister, that I asked you a 

question, a very specific question, and I’d appreciate it if you’d 

answer it for me. 

 

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2442 

 

Rather than continuing the funding by month by month to 

non-government organizations, my question is this – let me 

repeat it: is that practice now ended and are we now into the 

point at which NGOs, non-government organizations, can count 

on their funding coming in quarterly payments? Which is a very 

significant factor – non-government organizations, as you well 

know, are non-profit organizations. They don’t have slush funds 

sitting around and they can’t afford to go out and borrow, and 

they rely very heavily on the consistency on which the 

government funding comes in order to carry out their services 

for the people that they serve in their own communities. So, Mr. 

Minister, please, a simple answer to a simple question. Has that 

practice discontinued now and can they expect quarterly 

funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, when the budget is 

passed, NGOs can expect quarterly funding. But as long as the 

NDP continue to hold up the budget, then they will have to do 

with monthly funding because we are on interim supply. So as 

soon as the members opposite see fit to pass the budget and stop 

holding up the budget, then we will go to the usual procedure. 

 

Before I sat down earlier, I heard the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland, I believe . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — No, Saskatoon Sutherland, I believe, 

ask what sort of values. And I don’t think it’s necessary for me 

to explain to the member for Saskatoon Sutherland, a member 

of my church, a pastor in the Lutheran Church that I go to – I 

don’t think that I should have to explain to him what sort of 

values are required. He should know and he shouldn’t be asking 

the question. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well Mr. Minister, I’m pleased to hear you say 

that when the . . . Mr. Chairman, could you call the government 

members to order, please. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. All members on both 

sides of the House have an . . . Order. All members on both 

sides of the House have an opportunity to ask questions in 

Committee of Finance, so I would ask all members to allow the 

member from Moose Jaw North to ask his questions without 

interruption. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 

appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m pleased to hear you say that when the 

estimates are passed, because the day will come in which 

they’re passed. They will be passed when the review of your 

department has been completed and that will occur, Mr. 

Minister, when you’ve finished answering the questions. 

 

So let me suggest, Mr. Minister, it is my responsibility, as critic 

for Social Services, to ask the questions to hold you accountable 

to the people of Saskatchewan. It is your responsibility, Mr. 

Minister, to provide answers as to the plans and the conduct of 

your department. 

 

Let me remind you as well, Mr. Minister, that there was a day 

in this province in which it was a common  

occurrence that budgets were presented in the month of 

February or the month of March, often passed before the April 

1 beginning of the fiscal year, and so that government 

departments knew what they had to operate with because there 

was some competent management of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You will recognize, Mr. Minister, that those were days that 

occurred prior to 1982, and the picture has gotten worse every 

day since. Let me remind you that it was the decision of you, 

your Premier and your cabinet colleagues, made without the 

concurrence of your back-benchers – the few key cabinet 

colleagues, and you may not have been in on that decision, I 

don’t know – but it was your decision to delay the calling of the 

Legislative Assembly until June 17. So as we sit in this 

Assembly debating the estimates for your department there is 

only one side of this House that is responsible for the delay, and 

Mr. Minister, that responsibility rests squarely on the shoulders 

of your Premier. That is where that responsibility exists. 

 

Mr. Minister, I will be happy to move to another topic within 

the Department of Social Services. As I’ve said to you, I’ve 

asked some very serious questions this evening, and I give to 

you my commitment to work together with you to improve the 

working operations of non-government organizations to deliver 

important social services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Before moving to another topic I’d like to wrap up, Mr. 

Minister, by putting, I think, the delivery of social services – 

non-government organization social services – into context by 

reading a portion of a letter that was written to you, Mr. 

Minister, on April 20. It was written to you by the NGO 

chairperson for the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 

Union, which represents 27 organizations that are funded in 

whole or in part by your department. 

 

I’d like to simply conclude, Mr. Minister, by putting it in 

context because I think, I believe that non-government 

organizations, the boards and the staffs of non-government 

organizations, are very responsible, are very caring, and are 

very capable people who are quite capable of delivering good 

quality social services. But they have limits too, Mr. Minister, 

and I’d like to share with the Assembly this letter written to you 

on April 20. It reads, and I quote: 

 

NGO workers represented by the Saskatchewan Government 

Employees’ Union . . . 

 

And I would add, Mr. Minister, a paraphrase that I think what is 

said here is just as true for those who are not unionized, who are 

not represented by any union. 

 

NGO workers . . . are not responsible for creating the 

provincial deficit and should not be expected to assist in 

its reduction. On behalf of our thousands of clients across 

the province we are informing you that our services 

cannot be cut back any further. There is no fat to trim. 

Any attempt to gouge our funding would jeopardize our 

ability to work effectively with our clients. 

 

(2015) 



 

September 10, 1987 

2443 

 

The people we serve are the most powerless in society; 

abused and assaulted women and children; the 

unemployed, the hungry, and the disabled. For many 

reasons it is difficult for our clients to speak out. (How 

true that is.) Often they have already been silenced by a 

system that isolates and excludes them. Many fear they 

will lose what little they have if they publicly question 

injustice. That is why we, the workers in the agencies 

they rely on, are telling you that their services cannot be 

cut back any further without incurring a great deal more 

human suffering. 

 

May we remind you that NGO’s exist because 

Saskatchewan communities identified a need for our 

services. As non-governmental organizations we are run 

by community boards made up of individuals who 

volunteer their time and energy to support the work (that) 

we do. Now you are telling (the) communities across this 

province that their priorities are not your priorities; that 

your government is prepared to sacrifice the needs of the 

most powerless in society in order to chisel away at the 

deficit. 

 

NGO workers cannot help reduce the deficit because we 

cannot afford to cut our services anymore. We have been 

consistent practitioners of fiscal restraint. We’ve always 

run on shoe-string budgets; we have been forced to hold 

bake sales and bingos to earn the additional funds we 

desperately need. 

 

We believe we have done more than our share to work 

within the confines of the meagre budgets we receive. 

We have accepted minimal budget increases in the past 

few years, we have have worked at wages substantially 

lower than our counterparts in other jurisdictions, and 

have handled large and unwieldly client caseloads. 

 

You attempt to appeal to our sense of obligation to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. We, in turn, appeal to your 

responsibility to the public. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, that summarizes the situation for 

non-government organizations in Saskatchewan, that is facing 

them in Saskatchewan today. 

 

I simply wanted to conclude with that, Mr. Minister, because I 

think it reflects the clarity of thought, the positive commitment, 

and the sense of responsibility that pervades non-government 

organizations in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I will repeat what was 

said earlier publicly when I announced well before the budget 

what the situation would be on non-government organizations 

so that they would know where they are in this budget year. We 

did that prior to the budget. 

 

The budget for non-governmental organizations this year is 

$27,781,180, which is approximately the same as last year. It’s 

an increase of $103,920. There are 272  

programs: 80 saw no change; 133 saw an increase; 57 saw a 

decrease; and 2 were dropped. As a result, 213 programs were 

unchanged or had their money increased. 

 

I think those statistics speak for themselves and nothing more 

needs to be said. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Chairperson, I would like to direct my 

questions to the minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, my first series of questions relate to northern 

Saskatchewan. In regards to the North, I must say that the PC 

government’s economic development strategy for northern 

Saskatchewan is based much on welfare itself. In the history of 

northern Saskatchewan, in the past five years, especially, since 

your government has come into office, there has been a huge 

increase in regards to welfare in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

A lot of people have been concerned, of course, with the fact 

that you didn’t follow the law in regards to the Key Lake 

agreement where 60 per cent of the people should have been 

employed there, but in fact only 20 per cent were; the fact that 

when your government came in a lot of the people were 

working in the forestry area, a lot of them lost their jobs and 

they were unable to get as many contracts as they used to 

during the period of the ‘70s. 

 

So when I look at your history of the past five years, your 

economic policy is one of welfare – welfare on two counts; 

welfare to the people and giant amounts of welfare, of course, 

to the large corporations such as Weyerhaeuser. The 

government funding that is required even to build the roads, like 

I mentioned this past week, on $8 million, to me is still a form 

of welfare in a sense that, you know, money from the public 

purse is transferred to a large corporation. 

 

But getting to the issue of welfare, your strategy even this year 

on economic development in northern Saskatchewan, about a 

month ago, reflected your strong attachment, I guess, to the 

welfare model of economic development. 

 

You gave a certain amount of money for the development of a 

golf course in northern Saskatchewan, and that was right in La 

Ronge. I’m trying to find out a little bit more details about that 

specific development in itself, so I’m going to ask you some 

questions in that regard. 

 

There was of course a golf club, the Eagle’s Nest Golf Club, 

from La Ronge was formed, and in a matter of the long-term 

interest to have a golf course in La Ronge to sort of be 

co-ordinated with a tourist industry. But also there is an 

independent developer by the name of Jean Poirier who is part 

of this development scheme. 

 

What I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, is this: a lot of people well 

recognize that a golf course is very important for the tourist 

industry in La Ronge, but the thing that a lot of people want to 

know is how the money was spent. Exactly how much money 

was given and who was it given to? Was it given to the . . . 

transferred to the club itself, or was it transferred to the 

developer? Exactly how much money was transferred and 

exactly who was it transferred to? 



 

September 10, 1987 

2444 

 

And what has been done so far in regards to your commitment? 

Has any work already been done in regards to the government’s 

commitment? 

 

So I’ll leave you with those questions for the time being and 

find out what you have to say. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well first with respect to . . . I don’t 

know the name of the golf course in La Ronge, but it’s eagle 

something. Eagle’s Nest, is it? 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s Eagle’s nest golf course. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you. Eagle’s Nest golf course. 

The Department of Social Services has not given any money to 

the Eagle’s nest golf course. 

 

What has happened there is that under our welfare reform plan, 

we have funded the golf course to hire people in lieu of paying 

them welfare, so they are doing community work at the La 

Ronge Eagle’s Nest golf course. Rather than us paying them 

welfare, they are working at the golf course. It costs the 

province approximately the same amount of money, and a 

community service is being done. 

 

The developer and the golf course are separate, and that was 

one of the problems they had to iron out. The information I 

have is that the developer has kept his land around the golf 

course separate, and that the golf course is a community project. 

We have nothing to do with the developer. The developer may 

do as he sees fit with his land. 

 

The golf course is a community project, and as you’ve 

indicated, we feel that it is a useful community project for 

future tourism in La Range and that part of Saskatchewan. It 

gives people a greater variety. When they go up to fish, they 

can also play golf. It greatly increases the tourist potential, and 

we look forward to that project. 

 

With respect to the welfare case-load in the North, in 1982 

statistics and the 1986-87 statistics, as a per cent of the 

provincial of the Saskatchewan case-load, it is now lower. It 

was 5.5 per cent of the Saskatchewan case-load; it is now 4.7 

per cent of the Saskatchewan case-load. So the North has done 

better in the last five years as compared to the rest of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition, last year under welfare reform in Saskatchewan 

employment development program, there were the following 

number of jobs created in lieu of having people on welfare: 

Athabasca constituency, 467; Cumberland, 99; Meadow Lake, 

59; for a total of 625 jobs, 13,087 work weeks. A total dollar 

expenditure of $3.4 million to have people working rather than 

having them on welfare. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Could you give me the specific facts on 

numbers, percentages in relationship to figures. When you have 

a smaller number of people in the North versus a larger number 

of people in the South . . . is not an equitable type of way of 

computing and figuring out exactly. I want to know, in 1982 

how many welfare cases were there. In 1986-87, how many 

were there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The average welfare case-load in 1982 

was 1,449. Our most recent statistics show 1,426. 

 

Further information on your golf course project. Jean Poirier 

turned over all of the land that he owned for the golf course to 

Air Ronge, who gave it to the non-profit society, the Eagle’s 

Nest golf course. So the developer gave the golf course land to 

the community and kept his own land for future development 

surrounding the golf course. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — In regards to the golf course. My understanding 

– I was reading the paper this past week – Eagle’s Nest golf 

course, the community club has now changed its idea and 

instead of building on the spot where the original developer 

wanted it, they are talking about a new area. To me it raises a 

problem in terms of your planning. It reminds me of the 

wilderness adventurers camp where you put in tourist dollars 

and the thing fell apart, and he didn’t have, you know, a proper 

look at it. You see, this community group is now saying that 

they are going to move to another location. What do you know 

about it, and what will happen to that initial investment that you 

put in it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we have not put any 

initial investment into the particular piece of ground the 

member opposite refers to. If the community wishes to move 

the site of their golf course, that’s fine with us. To my 

knowledge they are moving it before they start. So if they want 

to move it from one place to another, that may be a problem for 

the developer – and I don’t know maybe they’ll give him his 

land back. 

 

I don’t really care where they put their golf course. I certainly 

have no desire to assist them with employees to build two golf 

courses or waste any money clearing land that they’re not going 

to use, but to my understanding they are going to use it 

wherever they’re putting their golf course, and it seems to me 

like a very good community project. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Okay. One more general statement, and that is 

in relation to Indian and Metis people. The issue is one of 

concern, and I will read you a statement by the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, and this is how they put it: 

 

The province does not accept the idea of Indian government. 

It fails to understand that what is in the best interests of 

Indian people is also in the best interest of the province, 

namely that good, sound, band-controlled programs would 

reduce the alarming numbers of Indian people in provincial 

correctional centres, child care institutions, and in all 

facilities. Indigenous people can only effectively deal with 

their problems when they have a meaningful control over 

their own affairs. 

 

(2030) 

 

On August 26, when I was asking you questions in regards to 

Indian and Metis self-government, you kept on repeating the 

fact of responsibility. You seemed to imply that Indian-Metis 

people were not responsible, that in fact  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2445 

 

the only responsible government was the PC Government of 

Saskatchewan, and that seems to be what your implication was. 

And when I looked at the facts, and when you look at 

Indian-Metis organizations, you always come out with this 

financial argument or anything, and when you look at your 

government, you’re $3.4 billion in the hole. You’ve cut back 

health; you’ve cut back, you know, a lot of the basic services 

that we’ve come to recognize in this province. And yet when 

you look at the record of a lot of the Indian-Metis organizations, 

such as in the field of education, there has been tremendous 

progress made. And when people gain control and are 

responsible for their own lives, the situation in the long run 

becomes a lot more better. 

 

And when I was hearing some of your statements, you seemed 

to imply that aboriginal people in this province could not be 

responsible, but that wasn’t very clear. So I want to hear from 

you directly what do you think of the idea of especially a lot of 

the Indian-Metis people wanting to gain control of aspects of 

even training more of their people in regards to the social 

service sector and also for gaining, you know, delivery of part 

of the services, especially as happens in their particular areas. 

And I wanted to know whether or not you agree with the idea of 

increasing the responsibility and role and the decision making 

of aboriginal people in this province. Where is your position on 

that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I do agree that 

Indian and Metis people should have more responsibility for 

their own lives, and in the not too distant future I will be able to 

announce in this Assembly some progress in that regard, but 

I’m not prepared to announce it today. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, I would . . . In regards to the 

whole issue of northern Saskatchewan and also in regards to 

Indian-Metis people, may I remind the minister that it is 

extremely important that, especially at a time when economic 

development is at the low end, and that the policies and 

practices of your government systematically forced out a lot 

more Indian and Metis people from the employment ranks, that 

you need to combine it with a quality social services system, 

and that you need involvement in that area and also in regards 

to involvement of people in the North. 

 

Could you make a final statement in regards to making sure that 

you will definitely work towards greater involvement of both 

the North and both the Indian and Metis people; and make sure 

that the tremendous pressures that the workers have had to face, 

the high case-loads in the North, the tremendous pressure that 

the families had to put up with, you know, are turned back. That 

in fact you will work your utmost to try and resolve some of 

these situations. So I will leave you with that comment, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I believe you and I both have to go to the North and see what 

we can do there. You have a greater chance of success because 

you know the people better and have a better chance of leading 

the people into what you suggest, responsibility for their own 

lives. 

 

I went to La Loche and I met with the mayor and council there, 

and they were very straightforward. They said there is no 

economic base for La Loche. They said that the people are here 

and they don’t want to move, and so we have to try to find 

things for them to do and ways for them to control their own 

lives, to be responsible for their own lives. 

 

And I’ve offered up, as Minister of Social Services, that rather 

than pay welfare in La Loche, we are prepared to have people 

work for themselves, learning new skills. 

 

I understand it’s possible to grow some food in La Loche. We 

have offered on many occasions that we have a Saskatchewan 

employment development program where people would be 

hired to grow food for themselves, rather than be on welfare. 

We have asked them to submit projects which would grow food 

in La Loche. They can be co-operative gardens; they can be 

collective gardens. I don’t really care what they do, but we are 

prepared to spend money on the people growing food for 

themselves rather than having it trucked in, and have had no 

response. 

 

So what has to be done is that there has to be leadership and 

there has to be internal desire. And I fully agree with you that 

Indian and Metis people should be given more responsibility for 

their own lives, to use your wording. I fully agree with that, and 

I encourage them to take that responsibility. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Minister, you will know – you should know that the crisis 

situation in rural Saskatchewan is affecting farm families, 

affecting rural communities, small towns. We have a drastic 

situation where we need counselling, we need stress 

management, we need other facilities to alleviate the problems 

that are developing in a very, very quick manner, fast manner – 

problems that to date, haven’t been confronted by your 

government. In fact, the opposite is true, and I could use the 

example of the Yorkton Crisis Centre, a centre that you closed 

because you wouldn’t give them $60,000 – $60,000 out of your 

budget – leaving people in that area and the surrounding area, 

and you know where they come from. They come from Melville 

and Kamsack and Sturgis and Canora and Saltcoats and 

Preeceville and Bredenbury and Langenburg, and all the other 

places around there, as well as in Yorkton. For $60,000, you 

deny them access. You deny them access to the counselling and 

referral that they need to help their families maintain a way of 

life that they deserve. 

 

The Yorkton Crisis Centre, prior to June of this year, saw an 

increase in the 11 months preceding of 300 per cent in their 

case-load. The centre was supported by hospitals, RCMP, and 

the transition house. And the numbers are interesting, Mr. 

Minister. And this is just an example of the other areas of the 

province. The numbers are interesting because when you look 

at the issues, for which they came in, they have the top few are 

suicides, alcohol, depression, or general information – general 

information being that there’s a problem and they’re just trying 

to feel their way through this thing – and it goes on to talk about 

a number of other issues. But the interesting  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2446 

 

thing, as was in December of 1986, the referrals from the 

Yorkton Crisis Centre, out of a total of 103, 24 referrals went to 

the Mental Health Centre. So although the issue that they came 

in from varied, the real issue in the eyes of the person who 

referred was that their mental health was at stake. And for 

$60,000, you deny these people. You say there’s other places 

they can go. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, that’s very, very 

deceitful when you say that. 

 

The highest number in December . . . The second highest 

number was 17 for information, information because those 

people are scared out of their life to even be there, and you’re 

going to tell go to some government institution, go to Social 

Services. Do you know, Mr. Minister, how much it takes for a 

farm family in crisis to go to anybody? Do know what it takes 

for them to get up in the morning and decide today’s the day we 

have to go because things are so bad that we cannot stand it any 

more? And you’re denying them the easiest access in Yorkton 

that they had. 

 

It goes on: Mental Health Centre, 20 per cent in January, 

roughly, and February. And that is a direct result of your 

government’s effect on the people in the rural areas of this 

province. The rhetoric about helping them falls flat on its face 

when you look at the numbers in the Yorkton Crisis Centre. So, 

Mr. Minister, I ask you: what is the Department of Social 

Services doing in rural Saskatchewan in the future – things that 

it’s not doing now – to improve programs in stress 

management, family counselling, crisis intervention, and 

transition houses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the member 

from Humboldt stands here and professes to be an expert in 

eastern Saskatchewan, in my constituency, and in agriculture. I 

do not believe he knows very much about my constituency, 

about Yorkton, or about agriculture. I don’t know if his 

questions were on agriculture or if they were on social services. 

 

But I can tell you this, that farmers don’t want welfare. Farmers 

want a fair deal. The farmers want a fair price for their product, 

and they do not want welfare. So don’t bring agriculture into 

the estimates of the Department of Social Services. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Gee, you’re a dunce. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — In . . . The member from Saskatoon 

South calls me a dunce. He will have his chance to speak here 

. . . He’s still shouting from his seat. If he wishes to call me a 

dunce on his feet, then we can take that matter up. But for the 

time being, I would ask him to listen. 

 

In Yorkton the following services are available for people who 

have problems: the Yorkton hospital, the RCMP, Shelwin 

House, which helps women and families in need, the 

Department of Social Services, the Yorkton psychiatric centre, 

the churches in the area, Alcoholics Anonymous, SIGN 

(Society for Involvement of Good Neighbours), the friendship 

centre, and soon coming on-stream, the youth drug and alcohol 

centre – 10 agencies right now. 

 

And I cannot . . . I don’t understand at all how the crisis  

centre in Yorkton would save agriculture in my constituency, or 

in the member for Yorkton’s constituency or Canora or Pelly or 

any of the constituencies in that area, how the Yorkton Crisis 

Centre would have anything to do with saving agriculture and 

assisting agriculture in that area. Agriculture . . . That’s how 

much the member from Humboldt knows about agriculture. 

 

I said earlier today in question period that the Yorkton Crisis 

Centre was providing useful services, but we felt that they were, 

at least in 60 per cent of the cases, duplication of services that 

were already available, some of them have already been listed 

for this Assembly. So therefore, because this was federally 

funded and not funded by the province, nor had the province 

ever asked for the service, it is totally unfair to suggest that now 

it is a provincial responsibility. 

 

This centre started, the crisis services, approximately the same 

time as Shelwin House shelter for women and families, and at 

that time it may have been more necessary. But Shelwin House 

has now been established, is more mature, and can provide 

those kind of services where necessary. So you have 10 services 

in the city of Yorkton providing services to that region, and the 

member asks what are we doing for rural Saskatchewan. Are we 

to send a social services counsellor to every farmer? Is that 

going to solve the financial problems of farmers? 

 

No, we have to come up with solutions for agriculture. It took 

the member from Humboldt 44 days to realize the House was in 

session before he even talked about agriculture, and now he 

thinks it has something to do with social services. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, it’s all I can do to sit here and 

listen to that garble. I just ask you: do you have an answer to 

my question that I asked previously? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well if he could ask a specific question, 

I would try to give him a specific answer. I’ve answered in the 

Assembly today, and the member was present in question 

period when I explained the situation on the Yorkton Crisis 

Centre. I could go into a long explanation of agriculture and 

what this government is doing for agriculture, but beyond that, I 

believe his question has been answered. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Unfortunately that is wrong. My question, and 

I’ll repeat it again: what is the Department of Social Services 

doing in rural Saskatchewan to improve family counselling, 

stress management, crisis intervention, and transition houses? 

What are they doing to improve those programs in the future 

that they are not doing at the present time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the Department of Social 

Services has 41 social workers employed in the Yorkton region. 

Most of them are working out of the Yorkton office, one of 

them in the Melville office. We’ve followed the same 

procedures that have been followed for a long time in that area, 

and it is commonly known to  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2447 

 

the people in that area where to find the Department of Social 

Services, where the offices are, where the office is in Melville, 

where the office is in Yorkton, and we intend to continue 

providing the services with a staff of 41 people we have in that 

area. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — So in other words, Mr. Minister, you’re not 

improving the service, you’re actually cutting your service by 

things like the Yorkton Crisis Centre. 

 

I will ask you now . . . You said previously in the estimates that 

there was no need for developing a rural day-care program, 

ensuring the safety for children. I would ask you: on what facts 

do you base that assumption? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Minister, I did not say that. I said 

the demand was not as great, that we would analyse the demand 

and try to service rural Saskatchewan in accordance with the 

demand that’s out there. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, will you be attempting to run on 

any type of a pilot project in rural Saskatchewan with regards to 

a rural day-care program in the next six months? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve been 

considering that. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — You said you were considering it. Does that 

mean yes, no, maybe so? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — It means yes. If we can find a suitable 

pilot project, we would run one. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — So in other words, at this point in time you are 

attempting to find a suitable area where you can run a pilot 

project for the next six months. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I know a suitable area. 

I’m just trying to find the suitable project. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, at this time you are attempting 

to set up a pilot project in rural day care within the next six 

months – actively attempting to set up a project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairperson – as is now common – 

I will be meeting with the federal minister in the not too distant 

future, and when the federal government has come out with 

their national day-care program, I will try to work that in with 

our Saskatchewan program. 

 

The percentage of day-care spaces in rural Saskatchewan is 

considerably lower than it is in urban Saskatchewan, and I 

would like nothing better than to work on some pilot projects in 

rural Saskatchewan with respect to day care. And as I indicated 

earlier, I would just have to have a suitable pilot project to work 

with, and we’re looking at some new concepts in that regard. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I find it upsetting 

that there are . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I do get upset, 

because there are people – and you should know that, being in 

Social Services – who have a need, in rural areas, for 

counselling, they have a need for  

crisis centres, they have a need for family centres that they can 

go to to alleviate the crisis that they’re in. 

 

We have people in rural Saskatchewan who are suffering in 

silence, and you’re muzzling them by taking away crisis 

centres. We have people in rural Saskatchewan, because of the 

economics, who are showing increased stress, and the numbers 

are showing day after day that they’re increasing. 

 

So why, may I ask, are you not increasing the number of staff 

that you have? Why are you not localizing it more? Why do you 

not meet the needs of the people? You sit there watching family 

breakdowns, child abuse, drug and alcohol abuse and suicides 

happening in the country because of stress – and all the 

numbers are going up – and yet I believe, sadly, that you and 

your government think along the lines of the Mulroney 

government, that rural Saskatchewan is a commodity and not a 

socio-economic infrastructure that it is. And that’s very sad. 

 

I sit here day after day and hear you attack people, talking about 

women, talking about foreigners. My grandfather was a 

foreigner at one time; so were many other people. I hear you, 

the Minister of Social Services, standing up day and day again, 

robotified, spieling out unemotional comments about people 

and people’s lives. 

 

I think that’s the most disgusting thing I’ve ever seen, turning 

people out of North Park Centre, telling them to go somewhere 

else, telling the people, the young children of this province, that 

. . . telling us today in this legislature’s question period that the 

families should be able to feed their children. Those families 

could feed their children if your government could manage this 

province. I’ve never seen anybody stand up in this House like 

that before. 

 

And I see here the Premier of this province sitting mute, letting 

you go on attacking the children and families of this province in 

rural Saskatchewan. How can that government and that Premier 

let this happen? 

 

And I will just close by saying one thing. The children of this 

province that you’re neglecting today, 20 years from now, I can 

hear what they’re going to be saying, the Tory government took 

the “good” out of the good old days. The Tory government took 

the “good” out of the good old days. 

 

So I ask you, come out of your shell, cast off the ironclad 

armour, show some emotion, and let these people, this province, 

carry on their lives in a fashion that they deserve. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, what does one reply to a 

question like that? 

 

The question is . . . It is an interesting note that the agricultural 

critic for the NDP, and the only person who calls himself a 

farmer among the NDP, did not win the  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2448 

 

farm vote in his own constituency. So that person has no 

credibility speaking for farmers because the only farmer among 

the NDP did not win the farm vote in his own constituency. 

 

I tell you what adds to stress for farmers. The NDP’s policies 

added a lot to stress for farmers. I recall farmers in my law 

office when the interest rates were 22 per cent and the NDP did 

nothing. The NDP had our money tied up in potash mines, in 

Crown corporations. The money could have been lent to 

farmers at 5 per cent – 22 per cent interest was stress. 

 

I had farmers in my office in my constituency whose interest 

exceeded their entire crop, and they are still suffering from that 

kind of stress. I spoke to farmers this weekend, farmers who 

haven’t recovered from 22 per cent interest rates. Now the 

prices of grain are low, and they haven’t recovered yet from the 

22 per cent. That’s what caused a lot of stress, I can assure you 

that – that causes stress; those are the kind of policies. And then 

the NDP solution was, well sell your land to the government 

and rent it back from us. 

 

And the member from Humboldt refers to his grandfather. Well 

I believe our ancestors probably came from the same type of 

background. I believe they probably were farmers in Europe 

who came here because they could own their own land. And we 

have to find ways for farmers to be able to keep their land, and 

not sell it to the government, and not pay 22 per cent interest. 

And furthermore, farmers are so independent that even though 

they suffer and probably have less cash on which to feed their 

children than people in cities, than the people that the members 

opposite think they represent, there are only 124 farmers on 

welfare in Saskatchewan out of 70,000. There is a group of 

self-sufficient people who have the pride to feed their children 

no matter what, and they will continue to do so. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, we’ve touched on some topics this evening. I’d like to 

move to a new area – the delivery of services within your 

department. And I refer to the income security services offered 

by your department – a very, very critical part of the security 

that Saskatchewan people need and have come to rely on in 

much larger numbers than any of us are proud to say. 

 

And as I think about income security, Mr. Minister, Mr. 

Chairman, I think back so many years to a former premier of 

this province. Tommy Douglas, a premier who understood the 

culture; he understood the psyche; he understood the heart of 

Saskatchewan people; he understood that Saskatchewan people 

are by their very nature a caring and sharing people. And 

Tommy said many times, and has been quoted many times as 

saying, the measure of any society is the degree to which it 

provides for the least fortunate of its citizens. The measure of 

any society is the degree to which it provides for the least 

fortunate of its citizens. 

 

And I would suggest, Mr. Chairman, that if there is anywhere 

that we can clearly define the abject failure of the PC 

government in its administration, it is found in its track record 

related to social assistance in this province  

– not just social assistance in isolation, but social assistance in 

combination with the most serious social problem in 

Saskatchewan, and that is the issue of unemployment. 

 

And I’d like to take a review, a review of the facts because the 

facts cannot be denied. The facts cannot be denied in tracing the 

track record of the PC government and its sensitivity to the real 

needs of real Saskatchewan people. And if we look at the track 

record, if we look at the track record of the PC government 

from the time it came to office in 1982 until today in 1987, 

what is the legacy? What is the legacy that the PC government 

can leave for Saskatchewan people? 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, let’s start with unemployment. When your 

Premier came to office in 1982, he came to office in a province 

that had 27,000 unemployed people – 27,000 people who were 

capable of working and wanted to work and couldn’t find 

employment. In March of 1987, five years later, we find that in 

Saskatchewan there are 41,000 – 41,000 Saskatchewan people – 

honest, hard-working Saskatchewan people who would give 

anything to have a job. And the legacy of five years of PC 

government is an increase . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Crocodile tears. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — The member from Maple Creek says crocodile 

tears. Well I’ll tell you Madam member from Maple Creek, this 

is not crocodile tears that the people of Saskatchewan are 

looking for. They’re looking for action from your government 

and they are being denied that and you know that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Five years, five years of PC government and the 

administration of the Premier we have today, and what is the 

legacy of employment? Fourteen thousand more people looking 

for work. And so what do we find? What do we find when we 

look at the social safety net and the . . . the bottom line, the 

bottom line in the social safety net is social assistance, when 

people have had to rely on public assistance in order to survive. 

And what, Mr. Minister, did your Premier, what did your 

Premier inherit? 

 

And I’m not proud to say, but at the end of the New Democrat 

term of government, Mr. Minister, there were 23,613 cases, 

people who had applied for social assistance. And that 

translated, Mr. Minister, into 48,396 – 48,000 people who lived 

in the families of people who were dependent on social 

assistance. And how does that compare? We come to 1987. In 

1987 we find 30,544 social assistance cases in the province of 

Saskatchewan. In five years an increase from 23,000 to 30,000, 

an increase of 7,000 cases dependent on social assistance to 

survive. 

 

But more important, more important, Mr. Minister, because we 

must understand these serious social problems in terms of 

human reality; and what is the human reality? The human 

reality, Mr. Minister, is that the number of  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2449 

 

people in Saskatchewan today, the number of people in 

Saskatchewan today who live in families dependent on social 

assistance in order to make ends meet from day to day is 62,061 

in March of this year. A legacy, a legacy, Mr. Minister, after 

five years of PC government – 14,000 more people looking for 

work and 14,000 more people dependent on social assistance, 

just to make ends meet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And what about those people who have had to 

apply for social assistance? And I say “had” because it’s not 

something that Saskatchewan people do easily. 

 

In 1982 there were 11,800 people who were living on social 

assistance who were capable of working. And in 1987, Mr. 

Minister, slightly in excess of 20,000 of those cases of people 

who are dependent on social assistance, those applicants are 

capable of working. An increase in five years of 70 per cent – 

70 per cent more people who are capable of working who are 

dependent upon social assistance in order to make ends meet. 

What a legacy. What a legacy! 

 

And, Mr. Minister, you and the Premier of this province have 

tried to make light of the seriousness of this problem. You’ve 

tried to imply that through your insensitive references to people 

on assistance – and there’ve been a number of cases; we don’t 

need to repeat those now – but people on assistance in 

Saskatchewan are people who are shiftless and lazy. And is that 

true? I suggest not, Mr. Minister. I suggest not. 

 

When we look at those 62,000 Saskatchewan people who were 

living in families dependent upon social assistance, Mr. 

Minister, you and I both know that 29,000, nearly half of them, 

are of the age of 19 or younger. You and I both know, Mr. 

Minister, that 23,000 of them are the age of 14 or younger – a 

young person by anybody’s definition. And saddest of all – 

saddest of all, Mr. Minister – in the province of Saskatchewan 

today there are 10,000 pre-schoolers, four years old or younger, 

living in families dependent upon social assistance; living in 

families without a lot of hope; living in families struggling to 

preserve their sense of dignity. That’s the reality. 

 

Now the Premier will stand and he will brag. He will brag that 

the PC government today is spending more money on social 

assistance – and so it is, so it is – spending more money on 

social assistance than the last term of the Democrat 

government. The record you inherited, there were $105 million 

spent on social assistance in the province of Saskatchewan. Last 

year, Mr. Minister, last year in the province of Saskatchewan 

$204 million was spent on social assistance. 

 

Was that because conditions have been improved for the 

poorest of the poor who are dependant? I suggest not. The 

reason that amount of money – double the amount of money 

spent under the last term of the New Democrat government – 

the reason the amount of money was so high, Mr. Minister, is 

because of the failure of your government to deal with the 

employment problems and condemning 14,000 more people to 

live on social  

assistance, and that’s the reason we’re spending more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Nobody likes to be spending public money on 

social assistance. It’s not a popular thing to do, and I join that 

sentiment in a sense, Mr. Minister, because I would much rather 

see Saskatchewan people capable of working – working so that 

social assistance is the security of last resort, only for those who 

are forced there through no reason of their own. That is the 

objective that we should all have, to reduce the social assistance 

expenditures out of our province, not to cut and slash and 

infringe on their ability to survive, but because the need has 

gone down and, Mr. Minister, I suggest that the track record of 

your Premier and your government has been abysmal in this 

regard. 

 

You’ll know, Mr. Minister – you will know because I gave you 

a copy of the report – that earlier this year the new Democrat 

caucus formed a social services task force to travel 

Saskatchewan and listen to Saskatchewan people, to real 

Saskatchewan people talking about real Saskatchewan problems 

and real Saskatchewan solutions. And we’ve heard from, 

among other, many other presentations; we have heard from 

some of those real people who have been forced to live on 

social assistance, and they told us over and over, Mr. Minister, 

that living on welfare is a demeaning experience that saps their 

hope and their dignity. And they told us over and over and over 

again that they would do anything for a job – anything for a job 

to get off. 

 

I will long remember, Mr. Minister, I will long remember one 

gentleman in his mid-fifties who spoke to the task force, and 

who told us how difficult it was to live on $123 a month after 

rent — $123. And he wasn’t a whiner; he wasn’t a complainer, 

but I remember him saying, Mr. Minister, that he doesn’t mind 

eating a lot of macaroni, but it would be nice to have some 

cheese and some tomatoes to put with it on a regular kind of 

basis. And I remember, Mr. Minister, as he sat and he spoke to 

those of us in the social services task force, as he sat in his 

well-washed shirt but with his elbows sticking out, and he 

talked about how difficult it was because to get off . . . he talked 

about the fact that he couldn’t get a travel allowance to look for 

a job; he talked about the fact that he couldn’t get funding for a 

phone, for a phone to look for a job; and he told us that he felt 

trapped on welfare and didn’t know how to get off. And I will 

long remember, Mr. Minister, that gentleman in his mid-50s 

breaking down and crying, not because he was looking for 

sympathy, but because of his reflection of his sadness and the 

despair that he felt as a recipient of social assistance. And all he 

wanted was a job, a job to get out of the trap. 

 

We’ve all had the experiences and contact with people, the 

poorest of the poor in our province. And I’ll never forget . . . I 

don’t think I will ever forget something that happened about a 

year and a half ago in Moose Jaw. There is an office in Moose 

Jaw, in my constituency, Mr. Minister, in which trustee services 

are given to people who are social assistance recipients. And I 

remember walking out the door of the building and seeing an 

elderly  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2450 

 

gentleman coming across the parking lot on crutches, and I 

knew, I knew from what he said, that for him being on social 

assistance was a new experience. He was not one of these 

people that you like to refer to as long-term dependent people 

because he referred to it as relief. 

 

I will never ever forget, Mr. Minister, as I held the door open 

for him and he went through on his crutches, he stopped and he 

turned, and he said to me, he said: oh, you can’t be on relief, 

you look intelligent. And he wasn’t making a statement, Mr. 

Minister, about me. He was making a statement about himself. 

He was telling me in his own words what it felt like to be on 

social assistance. 

 

I’m sure you got calls. I know I got them, and I know many of 

the members on this side of the House got them just a few days 

ago. Calls . . . I recall very clearly one call that I got from a 

mother and a family dependent on social assistance who was 

calling to see if there was any way that she could get the 

education allowance in advance of the first day of school, 

because her little five-year-old girl was starting kindergarten, 

and she said that she just wouldn’t, she wouldn’t send her to 

school the first day along with the rest of the kids because she 

had no money for school supplies, and she didn’t have a new 

pair of jeans like the rest of the kids in school. 

 

I don’t bring these experiences to this Assembly to be dramatic. 

I don’t think my experiences are unique. But simply to spell 

out, Mr. Minister, the reality, the reality for people who are 

condemned to live dependent on social assistance. And this 

government, this government, Mr. Minister, under the 

leadership of your Premier in the past five years, has 

condemned 14,000 more people to the indignity of welfare. And 

the minister knows that the Premier cannot wash his hands of 

the issue. 

 

Let me refer, Mr. Minister, to a Saskatoon Star-Phoenix article 

of Saturday, August 22, entitled: “Welfare reforms done out of 

love – Devine.” And this was, Mr. Minister, this was after you 

had in August issued your release announcing policy changes. 

 

And the Premier of this province, the Premier of this province 

talking to an audience made reference, and let me quote, 

reference to: 

 

The three-year-old decision to cut the basic monthly 

allowance for single, childless recipients, capable of 

working, to $123. 

 

He thought it was an excellent idea to cut single people capable 

of working, people who were not able to find employment in 

the province of Saskatchewan, to cut them to $123 a month 

after rent in order to live. And the irony – the irony. 

 

The article goes on to say, and let me quote: 

 

He told the enthusiastic crowd at the $100-a-plate fund 

raiser for the Progressive Conservative Party . . . 

 

At $100-a-plate fund raiser for the Progressive Conservative 

Party, he talked about treatment of the poor — $100 a plate. Mr. 

Minister, you and I know that for $8  

more, $8 more on top of that $100-a-plate PC fund raiser, $8 

more spells the amount of money available in the province of 

Saskatchewan for an adult to eat three meals a day for 31 days. 

You and I both know, Mr. Minister, that $100 a plate is $8 

more, $8 more than what is provided for a teenager in 

Saskatchewan to eat three meals a day for 31 days. You know, 

Mr. Minister, that that $100-a-plate dinner that the Premier 

spoke to is $13 more – $13 more than for that kindergarten 

student to go off to school and to eat three meals a day for 31 

days. 

 

(2115) 

 

What did the Premier say? What did the Premier of 

Saskatchewan say? He said, in describing this message to 

people on social assistance, he said: in fact it’s because we do 

love you that we’re going to do what’s right – Devine said to a 

burst of loud applause. 

 

What an expression of love. Picture if you will for a moment, 

Mr. Chairman, picture if you will for a moment, the Premier of 

this province going to those living in poverty and telling them 

he’s treating them this way because he loves them. Can you 

picture the Premier of Saskatchewan going to the poorest of the 

poor in Saskatchewan and whispering sweet nothings in their 

ears? Sweet nothings. 

 

Well I tell you, Mr. Minister, that if, as a matter of fact, all he 

gave them was sweet nothing, they would be better off than 

they are under the so-called welfare reform that you introduced 

in August. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Because, as a matter of fact, Mr. Minister, those 

poorest of the poor in the province of Saskatchewan who are 

dependent upon public assistance, virtually all – if not, as a 

matter of fact, every one – are worse off today than they were 

before your introduction of your so-called welfare reform. And 

how sad it is to say that it would be to their advantage if all they 

got from the Premier of Saskatchewan was sweet nothing. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, we will all at some point in time find 

ourselves being held accountable and measuring the 

contribution we brought to this House and to this Assembly. 

And I suggest, I suggest that the measure of success with which 

we functioned as legislators will not be found in how much we 

helped Peter Pocklington. I suggest that the measure of success 

as to how we functioned in this Legislative Assembly will not 

be found in how we helped Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, 

Washington. I suggest that the measure of success that we will 

find in determining whether we were effective as legislators in 

this Assembly will not be found in how we helped George Hill 

and Paul Schoenhals and Tim Embury and Gordon Dirks, 

because those people are all capable of taking care of 

themselves. 

 

But I do suggest, I do suggest that in whatever way each of us 

chooses to measure our contributions to the Government of 

Saskatchewan as legislators in this Assembly, that we will 

measure them in terms, and we will be measured in terms, of 

how we contributed to providing opportunity to those least 

capable of  



 

September 10, 1987 

2451 

 

determining their own fate. 

 

The back-benchers opposite and some of the front-benchers, 

some of them sit here, Mr. Chairman, and make light of this 

issue. There’s the member from Wilkie; he’s got lots to say as 

he sits in his back bench. And, Mr. Member from Wilkie, you 

have not contributed, I suggest, a great deal of anything at all in 

the time that you have served as a member of this Assembly to 

improve the lot of those who are least fortunate in the province 

of Saskatchewan. And you can count many in the numbers of 

your back-benchers and front-benchers . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. It’s getting . . . Order. Order. 

Order. It’s getting pretty rowdy in the House and I would ask 

members to allow the member from Moose Jaw to make his 

comments. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your 

assistance in drawing some order to the House. 

 

But I would say, Mr. Chairman, that all of us as legislators will 

determine whether we were successful or not in terms of how 

we contributed to opportunity for Saskatchewan people to find 

jobs, and what we did – what we did to allow those who were 

forced to rely on social assistance to do that with a sense of 

dignity and hope. And I say, Mr. Minister, that I believe in the 

vision of Tommy Douglas, who saw Saskatchewan as a society 

of people who believed in caring and sharing, who believed in 

pulling together and using their government as an instrument of 

their will to provide for those who had less opportunity in 

Saskatchewan society. I believe in that vision. It’s just as real 

today as when Tommy gave it to Saskatchewan people more 

than 40 years ago. It’s a vision that has lived for decades, and it 

will live for decades more. I suggest, Mr. Minister, that any 

government which contradicts that vision and that belief and 

that faith of Saskatchewan people is a government that’s not 

destined for longevity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And I condemn . . . I stand in this Assembly on 

record as condemning the track record of the PC government in 

addressing the problems of unemployment, and addressing the 

problems of allowing people in Saskatchewan, the most 

unfortunate, to live with a sense of dignity. 

 

In estimates now, Mr. Minister, I have some questions that I 

would like to address to you, to ask you, Mr. Minister, whether 

– not just you, because I understand that what you’ve done in 

the Department of Social Services has not been your decision 

alone. You are operating, Mr. Minister, I believe, by the 

direction of the Premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — You are making decisions, Mr. Minister, in your 

Department of Social Services which are condoned, and in fact 

applauded, by your colleagues in the PC caucus of this 

government. And so you alone cannot be held accountable, Mr. 

Minister; you’re the mouth piece; you’re the mouth piece. But 

it’s the Premier of  

Saskatchewan who is ultimately to be held accountable. 

 

I have a number of questions, Mr. Minister, that I want to 

address to you as to whether you have the political will, you and 

the Premier and your caucus colleagues have the political will 

to address the real problems of the real people of Saskatchewan, 

those people, Mr. Minister, who rely on us in this Assembly. 

They rely on us in this Assembly to provide opportunity for 

them. 

 

And let me begin, Mr. Minister, by making reference back to 

question period of July 7th, earlier this year. When I asked you 

about an increase that was granted to disabled people by the 

Canada Pension Plan on January 1st, it amounted to $152 per 

person per month – $152 per month, Mr. Minister. And I asked 

you at that time if you would reverse your decision to reduce 

the amount of social assistance paid to disabled social 

assistance recipients who were receiving the Canada Pension 

Plan disability pension, because as you know, Mr. Minister, in 

Saskatchewan today you deduct dollar for dollar from that $152 

increase that they got on their Canada Pension Plan disability 

benefits. 

 

And you responded that day, Mr. Minister, that there was not a 

dollar for dollar deduction. Let me ask you, Mr. Minister, if you 

would like to stand and correct your statement when you 

responded to that question, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, in the 

Department of Social Services the welfare case-load has been 

reduced by 1,000 cases in the last two years, 500 cases this year 

alone. 

 

When you talk about unemployment, you have to also consider 

the labour force in Saskatchewan. And it is clear that today 

there are 550,000 more people working in Saskatchewan than 

there were five years ago. You also have to consider the 

participation rate and the percentage of people between the ages 

of 18 and 65 who have applied for work. 

 

And those are statistics, and it’s hard to determine how many of 

those applicants are people who would get a job if they liked it, 

or if they are people who need a job or people who have put 

their name in saying, well if something that I like comes along, 

I’ll get a job. That factor has to be taken into account because 

the participation rate is at a record high. And in addition, there 

are 55,000 more people working in Saskatchewan at this time. 

 

So as I’ve indicated earlier, the case-load we anticipate this year 

will be down 5.8 per cent at the Department of Social Services. 

Since we have introduced welfare reform, the number of single 

employables on welfare has been reduced from 6,300 to 4,800. 

In addition we have come up with projects to put people to 

work doing something, rather than paying them to do nothing. 

 

We have the example of Par Industries in Prince Albert. In that 

situation people have been trained for jobs. They’ve been 

trained – working, running equipment in the forest,  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2452 

 

cleaning up the forest, salvaging lumber, salvaging firewood. 

People that were – and I will compile the total statistics – the 

people that were working for Par Industries are now working in 

private industry in the lumbering business. Two people that 

were there are now working on the construction site at the 

Weyerhaeuser plant. 

 

So we’ve got them from being on welfare, to working on a 

community project, to now having been trained and 

rehabilitated so they are working on a construction project on 

the Weyerhaeuser pulp and paper mill. And, of course, you 

don’t acknowledge that anyone works there. You don’t 

acknowledge that that is useful, but ask those two people who 

have come all that way now to a good paying job. 

 

Other people are working in other parts of industry. In addition, 

some people did not want to work a Par Industries. One 

individual said, oh, I don’t want to do this; I’ll go get a different 

job. I think that’s perfectly fine. The individual is free to get a 

different job, but why wasn’t that individual motivated to get a 

different job until asked to come and assist at Par Industries and 

do something useful in society. 

 

In addition, Saskatchewan employment development program 

and the Saskatchewan skills development program, you have a 

considerable change in the number of people who are now 

being educated or trained. Twenty-five hundred people right 

now are being educated and retrained rather than be on welfare. 

 

I had some figures here on the total welfare reform situation. 

Since our government introduced welfare reform, in the last two 

years $9 million has been an increased benefit to families. 4,310 

have been created, benefiting a total – because of the over lap – 

of 5,100 welfare recipients who in the last two years have been 

working rather than be on welfare; 3,500 in total over those two 

years have been offered training, with over 5,560 enrolments 

benefiting 3,900 clients. We have taken some positive action to 

solve these problems. 

 

In addition, you refer to a gentleman in his fifties who could not 

find a job. If you will send me the name of that gentleman, he 

will have a job offer before the end of the month, and I await 

that name and address tomorrow. 

 

In addition, while I agree it is not easy to live with a low – a 

small amount of money; I agree that poverty is not pleasant. But 

I also want to point out to you that over the years even the 

poorest people in Saskatchewan have increased their standard of 

living considerably. 

 

Saskatchewan now has for families the third highest welfare 

rates for families in Canada. When our new increases come into 

effect, they will be again the second highest rates next to 

Alberta. We may even get to the first highest. 

 

But the members opposite like to consider statistics, and I 

would ask them to consider this – that according to Statistics 

Canada, 90 per cent of the families living under the poverty line 

had colour television sets; two-thirds owned automatic washing 

machines and clothes dryers;  

approximately half had freezers; approximately one-quarter had 

automatic dishwashers; and 28.2 per cent owned video cassette 

recorders. 

 

(2130) 

 

So the question then is: what is poverty in our society today, 

and where is the poverty line? I agree that there is certainly a 

vast difference in the affluence of the members in this 

Assembly – between the affluence of the members in this 

Assembly and the poorest citizens of this province. But 

certainly conditions for all people in this province have 

improved considerably in the last few years. 

 

With respect to the issue you raise of the standardized education 

allowances, the standardized education allowances were sent 

out on August 25, 1987, with the August welfare cheques. That 

is the information that my department has indicated. We were in 

a great rush, and you will recall I announced it in the House 

here that we would try to get them out before the school year 

started. Now I don’t know when the school year started in 

Moose Jaw, but the cheques were mailed out on August 25, 

1987. My son started kindergarten this year – he’s five years 

old – he was given last June from his school a list of the books 

that would be required, so we had plenty of notice as to what 

my son would need. I don’t know if all the schools operated that 

way; certainly the school in Melville operated that way. 

 

And so you have the NDP with their usual rhetoric. Their 

campaign slogan I recall, in the Melville election, was 

something about working together and sharing together, and I 

didn’t believe that was quite what they meant. What the NDP 

usually mean and their motto is: we care, you work, and we 

share; that’s the NDP’s philosophy. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Say that again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Some of our members didn’t hear that. 

The NDP’s philosophy is: we care, you work, and we share. 

That’s the NDP’s philosophy of sharing. 

 

What I submit is that all people in this province have to do their 

share to benefit society as a whole, and I believe there will be a 

fair distribution, and there is a fair distribution of the assets in 

this society. 

 

With respect to the question you finally did ask – the Canada 

Pension Plan disability benefits. I advised you earlier that they 

were based on need. You asked the question: were they 

deducted dollar for dollar? I acknowledge that you were correct, 

and I was wrong, that they are deducted dollar for dollar. You 

were correct in that regard, but I do not believe it would be fair 

to change the system. 

 

And I realize there is quite a problem here; it is a decision that 

requires the wisdom of King Solomon, but it’s not a decision 

that I’m making an isolated case, and that all of the other 

provinces are taking the same position, whether they are from 

your political party, the Liberal political party, or the 

Conservative. All of the provinces are taking the same position 

at this time, and that position is that social services is based on 

needs. And it would not be fair to pay more to have a person 

who is on Canada pension  



 

September 10, 1987 

2453 

 

disability, and on social services, to receive more money than a 

person who is simply on social services and does not have 

Canada pension. 

 

Now I do acknowledge that the individual did pay into Canada 

pension and that one-half of the premium was paid by the 

individual, so the individual did make some provision for 

disability. I do agree with that, but that is certainly a concern. I 

would like to rectify that. However, how do you justify paying a 

person, who has Canada Pension Plan disability income, Social 

Services money in excess of other individuals who have no 

other income? And where do you then calculate? Does a person 

who has savings and interest income also get more social 

services than a person who has no savings? Does a person who 

owns land, farm land, and rents it out, qualify for social services 

to a greater extent than other people who have no assets? 

 

So the test has been, it is based on need, and you are to provide 

for yourself as much as possible. And when you cannot provide 

for yourself up to the required need, then Social Services picks 

up the difference. To make the change you suggest would not 

be fair to other social service recipients. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you stand and speak glibly in this 

House, and I invite you, Mr. Minister, I invite you to send your 

Premier out to tell the 41,000 people in Saskatchewan who are 

looking for work that they’re better off. I invite you to ask your 

Premier to go and see those 62,000 people in Saskatchewan, 

dependent upon social assistance, and tell them that they are 

better off. I invite you and your Premier to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan that we are spending $200 million a year on 

social assistance and to explain to them, because you have been 

an abject failure in dealing with the need for employment in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And I contest, Mr. Minister, your statement that 

following the welfare reform changes, that social assistance 

families in Saskatchewan will move from third best to second 

best, because as we proceed here, Mr. Minister, I will show you 

that, as a matter of fact, Saskatchewan families dependent on 

social assistance are worse off, not better off. And if they’re 

rising in the relative terms in the country of Canada, it’s only 

because the other provinces are going even further backward 

than you are going. And I challenge you, Mr. Minister, to get 

honest. I challenge you to get honest, and be straight when you 

talk about comparisons for family incomes who are living on 

social assistance, because you know and I know that there is 

only one province in the nation of Canada, there is only one 

province in Canada which deducts, dollar for dollar, the family 

allowance cheques that Saskatchewan families living on social 

assistance receive. There is only one province in Canada that 

does that; that is Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. And so, if you’re 

going to make comparisons to other provinces, you have to take 

the family allowance off. That’s what you have to do if you 

want to be fair. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, let us come back to the topic that we’ve 

started out discussing here, and that’s the Canada  

Pension Plan disability benefits. And I’d like to read and to 

quote to you, Mr. Minister . . . I have here a letter from the 

Minister of National Health and Welfare. It’s dated June 9, 

1987, and it’s addressed to one of the members of parliament in 

the House of Commons. And what does the national Minister of 

Health and Welfare have to say about this disability pension 

plan benefits that were granted, $152 a month to disabled 

people who qualified for benefits since January 1 of this year? 

And what does he say? Let me quote, Mr. Minister, let me 

quote the Minister of National Health and Welfare. He says: 

 

As you know, last June parliament passed certain 

amendments in the Canada Pension Plan legislation. One 

of these amendments was to increase the disability flat 

rate benefit from $91 to $243 per month. 

 

An increase, I add, Mr. Minister, of $152 per month. 

 

And in referring later in his letter to those who are receiving the 

disability pension and also on assistance, the poorest of the 

poor, he says, and let me quote again, Mr. Minister. He says: 

 

It was my intention that the provinces/territories would 

pass on the increases. I assumed that this would occur 

because I understood that there was sufficient flexibility 

under the Canada Assistance Plan to allow this to 

happen. 

 

Those are the words of the national Minister of Health and 

Welfare. He said very clearly, if the provinces want to pass on 

these benefits to those who are disabled and living on social 

assistance, that they can do that, and that the national 

government, the Government of Canada, will not interfere. 

 

And then he goes on to say: 

 

I have informed the provinces/territories that effective 

January 1, 1987, increases in the CPP (Canada Pension 

Plan) flat rate benefits for the disabled are to be excluded 

from the definition of income maintenance payments 

under the Canada Assistance Plan with respect to current 

social assistance beneficiaries. The effect of this decision 

will be that the provinces/territories, in order to sustain 

cost-sharing under CAP (Canada Assistance Plan), will 

not be required to deduct these particular payments from 

social assistance payments. 

 

Very clearly it’s the will, the political will, of the ministers of 

Social Services across the nation. He then says: 

 

Provinces/territories will then have the freedom to pass 

on these federal increases, and continue to receive 

cost-sharing for social assistance payments made to these 

same individuals without any increase in their own 

expenditures. 

 

And then he concludes in the final page of his letter, Mr. 

Minister, by saying: 

 

I recognize that ultimately it will be up to each  

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2454 

 

province/territory to make the decision to pass on the 

CPP disability flat rate increase and at the same time to 

continue providing social assistance benefits. 

 

He said in his final statement, Mr. Minister: 

 

I see no reason why provinces/territories would refuse to 

do so since I am sure that they are as anxious as the 

federal government to improve the financial situation of 

this particular group of Canadians. 

 

Let me repeat and underline that sentence written by the 

Minister of National Health and Welfare: 

 

I see no reason why provinces/territories would refuse to 

do so (to pass on those benefits) since I am sure that they 

are as anxious as the federal government to improve the 

financial situation of this particular group of Canadians. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you explain to me – and don’t give me this 

mumbo-jumbo about what other provinces are doing. You are 

the Minister responsible for Social Services in the province of 

Saskatchewan. You and the Premier of this province determine 

how these benefits will be implemented and whether 

Saskatchewan people will receive them or not. You made a 

decision – you and the Premier of Saskatchewan made a 

decision – to take this $152 increase paid to disabled recipients 

receiving social assistance, to take that $152 a month from the 

Canadian government out of their pockets so that they benefited 

to a sum total, Mr. Minister, of not a penny. Will you justify for 

Saskatchewan people, not this mumbo-jumbo about other 

provinces, will you be accountable to Saskatchewan people? 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister: will you consider reversing the 

decision made by you and your Premier, and will you allow 

disabled recipients on social assistance who can get this $152 a 

month from the Canadian government to retain that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, let’s look at specifically 

Saskatchewan. The policy that the member from Moose Jaw 

North – the NDP member from Moose Jaw North – complains 

of was started by the NDP government before we became 

government. So if he could publicly have their future leader, the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale, admit that he did the 

wrong thing when he started this policy, then I will consider 

changing it. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, you have the authority. You 

have the authority to make decisions, to consult with your 

Premier, and I ask you simply whether you have the political 

will. As we come into this House to review Social Services 

estimates, they are your department. It is your Premier who is 

heading the Government of Saskatchewan. And if you see that 

there is an error that needs correcting, then I encourage you, Mr. 

Minister, in the interest of Saskatchewan people in need, to 

correct that error so that Saskatchewan disabled people on 

social assistance can benefit that $152 that are paid to them by 

the Canadian government. I invite you, Mr. Minister, to  

review your policy and to make a fair and just decision in the 

interest of disabled Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Minister, you will also know that there was another change 

that was implemented on January 1, having to do with the 

Canada Pension Plan. The Canada Pension Plan, Mr. Minister, 

you’ll know, as of January 1st, allowed for people at age 60 – or 

any time between age 60 or prior to the age of 65 – to take an 

early retirement. And you know, Mr. Minister, the rules for that 

are this: that for every month prior to the age of 65 that you take 

that early retirement, your benefit is reduced by half a per cent. 

 

What that means, of course, Mr. Minister, is that someone who 

at age 60 opts for the early Canada Pension Plan retirement has 

a reduced pension of 30 per cent – 30 per cent for life. Now, 

Mr. Minister, I ask you if you will consider reversing your 

decision to require absolutely every social assistance recipient 

in Saskatchewan who is 60 years or older to apply for the 

Canada Pension Plan, the early retirement benefits, and then – 

and then deduct that pension from their benefits, dollar for 

dollar, at the same time, Mr. Minister, condemning 60-year-old 

people in Saskatchewan to reduce Canada Pension Plans for the 

rest of their life and not receiving a single penny benefit as a 

result of taking their early Canada pensions. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you consider reversing your decision and nor 

forcing, at the threat of being cut off of social assistance, 

60-year-old Saskatchewan social assistance recipients from 

being required to take that early Canada Pension Plan 

retirement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I won’t reconsider that 

decision because I never made that decision. The decision I 

made is a very fair decision, and the member opposite hasn’t 

been following welfare reform very closely because at no time 

have we forced people over 60 to apply for Canada Pension 

Plan early retirement benefits. 

 

(2145) 

 

As a matter of fact, my most recent announcement on welfare 

reform said that we would encourage them to do it, but we 

would leave it as an option. We would encourage them because 

they can be self-sufficient, and only at the highest income levels 

will it cost them any future money after they retire at the age of 

65. In some cases they will be better off financially to do it 

now, in other cases they would be slightly worse off after 

they’re 65. We encourage them to do it; we do not require 

people to do this. 

 

In addition, the other reason we encourage them is that if they 

can be self-sufficient at very little future cost to them, that that 

would be a good thing for them to do. Most people tend to 

believe that if they can be self-sufficient, they will be 

self-sufficient. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, will you explain the meaning of 

this letter that I have in my hand – a letter dated in April that is 

on the letterhead of the Department of . . . the letterhead reads, 

Saskatchewan Social Services, Saskatoon region, east district. 

 

  



 

September 10, 1987 

2455 

 

Let me read this letter to you, Mr. Minister, because the 

explanation, the interpretation I get from the message in this 

letter just simply does not wash with your explanation. It’s 

addressed to a social assistance recipient, and it reads, and I 

quote, Mr. Minister: 

 

We have received your Canada Pension Plan information 

as we have requested and are returning it enclosed. Our 

interpretation of this information is that you would 

receive about (blank, a figure per month) Canada Pension 

by applying now. 

 

We therefore request that you apply for Canada Pension 

now. Failure to do so will result in a cancellation of your 

assistance. 

 

Let me repeat that, Mr. Minister. Let me repeat that for clarity. 

This does not sound like encouraging someone to take the early 

Canada Pension Plan. Let me read these words, Mr. Minister, 

and encourage you to listen very carefully because I read 

verbatim to you. It says: 

 

Failure to do so will result in a cancellation of your 

assistance. (A cancellation of your assistance.) Please 

report your CPP when received . . . 

 

And then it goes on to give information about how appeals, 

meaningless appeals, could be launched by the individual. 

 

And this is a form letter, Mr. Minister. You know that; I know 

that. It’s a form letter that was sent to people who were 60 years 

old or older, advising them that if they did not apply for Canada 

Pension Plan early retirement benefits, that their assistance 

would be cancelled. And also you and I both know, Mr. 

Minister, that those benefits were deducted dollar for dollar 

from their assistance, and you were condemning them to up to 

30 per cent reduced Canada Pension Plan for life. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, our Saskatoon office 

made an error when they followed that letter. They didn’t get 

the policy straight. They should have checked with Regina to be 

certain before they followed that policy. They’ve made the 

error, and I would hope they would have corrected their error by 

now, and I leave it open to you what punishment you suggest 

for the individuals involved. I was about to forgive them, but if 

you suggest a greater punishment, I would consider it. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, then let me ask you to repeat for 

clarity, because there are obviously a lot of people – there are a 

lot of people who do not have the same interpretation about the 

ruling of your department as you present in this House tonight. 

Let me ask you to repeat for clarity, Mr. Minister: are you 

saying that Saskatchewan residents who are receiving social 

assistance and who are eligible for the early Canada Pension 

Plan benefits shall not be required by your department to apply 

for that early Canada pension, and shall not have that benefit, if 

they apply for it, deducted dollar for dollar? 

 

Will you be specifically clear in answering that question, Mr. 

Minister, and clarifying this very important issue for many 

Saskatchewan seniors who are among the poorest  

of our poor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would hope that 

the members of my staff . . . that all of the employees in my 

department would try to follow department policy, and if 

they’re not certain, they would try to get an explanation. The 

policy is – and it was spelled out clearly in my most recent 

announcement on welfare reform – the policy is that we will not 

require people to apply for early retirement under Canada 

pension; that the department is to encourage people to apply, 

but we do not force people to apply. 

 

I would hope that many of the employees of the Department of 

Social Services would now be listening and that would be clear 

to them, that they are to follow this policy. But if not, they’re to 

phone their supervisor tomorrow morning and get it clear in 

their minds. The individuals involved there did not understand 

the policy of not requiring people to apply. If people do apply, 

it is treated as income. 

 

And therefore, I would think the matter is cleared up with my 

staff. I would hope that they would follow department policies 

correctly in the future. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I hear you saying very clearly that 

you are no longer requiring people to apply for the early Canada 

Pension Plan benefit. I hear you saying that very clearly and on 

record in this House. And I heard you say that if they do, it 

would be treated as income. 

 

Now let me ask you, Mr. Minister: would it be treated as 

income which is deducted dollar for dollar from their 

assistance, or would it be treated as income which they’re 

entitled to keep the first $25 and then lose 80 per cent of every 

dollar after the twenty-fifth dollar? Which way would it be 

treated, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I believe you heard me correctly, 

and I believe you understand that we are not forcing people to 

apply. We are encouraging people to apply; that if they apply 

the income will be deducted dollar for dollar as pension income 

available, and it’s not earned income. Earned income is treated 

in a different manner. 

 

And in addition, I would encourage people to apply for their 

Canada pension because it will not substantially affect the final 

result of their income. The province of Saskatchewan has, as 

you know, increased substantially the Saskatchewan 

supplement. The people who are in the poorest positions will 

have that money made up with Saskatchewan supplement when 

they turn 65. We would encourage them to take their pension 

rather than to take welfare from the province of Saskatchewan. 

But we will not force them to do it. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:55 p.m. 

 


