













































October 2, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 2, 1987 

 

 

3047 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 

for me this morning to introduce a school from Bredenbury, 

Saskatchewan. They’re grades 7, 8’s, and 9’s. They are seated 

in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bredenbury is on No. 6 Highway in the Yellowhead, over east 

of Yorkton, between Yorkton and Langenburg. They’re visiting 

Regina today and I wish to inform them that I’ll meet with them 

for a chat afterwards in 218, and we’ll have some questions and 

some drinks. 

 

Welcome to Regina. We hope that you enjoy your stay in 

Regina and enjoy the proceedings in the legislature this 

morning, and I’ll see you after question period. So I’ll ask all 

members to please join me in welcoming these students to 

Regina. Their teacher, Charlotte Thies, is with them, along with 

their . . . and Rob Wilson, and bus driver, Ian Ziprick. 

 

So if we would welcome them in the usual manner. thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Collective Bargaining for Technical Institute and Regional 

College Employees 

 

Mr. Shillington: — My question is to the Minister of Labour 

who has arrived, although somewhat belatedly. It deals with the 

. . . He is just taking his seat, so I’ll give him a moment to 

collect his thoughts. 

 

It deals, Mr. Speaker, with the government’s latest attack on 

working people in this province. Specifically, it deals with the 

arbitrary decision of your government to deny 1,500 employees 

of the newly centralized technical institute and regional colleges 

their rights onto existing contracts and collective agreements. 

 

With the stroke of a pen, Mr. Minister, your government has 

unilaterally brought to an end their collective agreement. It has 

wiped out people’s seniority rights. You’ve denied their right to 

continue t belong to the union, and you’ve even gone so far as 

to define what is an appropriate bargaining unit in the 

centralized institute. 

 

Mr. Minister, how does your government justify this naked 

abuse of power in its ongoing attack on working people in this 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, there are several points 

here, and I’m not going to answer the question fully and I’ll 

give you the reason why. But first of all, we have denied 

nothing. The workers have a choice to choose  

which union they want to represent them, and there’s no major 

change here. 

 

We are talking here about an educational institution and they 

have a choice. I won’t answer the question any further, Mr. 

Speaker, because the member opposite knows the Bill is before 

the House. The question is out of order; we cannot raise a point 

of order during question period, but he knows the question is 

out of order and he can raise those points in debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well I thank the minister for that, although 

it was enlightening neither with respect to the section 3 nor with 

respect to rules of the House. You’re wrong on both points, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. speaker. Mr. Minister, 

you not only wiped out their membership in the union, you also 

terminated their collective agreement. So you did take 

something away from them, something that they have bargained 

for over many, many years. 

 

Mr. Minister, last spring with 36,000 people unemployed you 

terminated the employment of 2,000 people and then were 

boorish and insensitive enough to run around the province 

bragging about it. That’s the kind of commitment that you’ve 

shown to working people, and the polls suggest that the people 

are getting kind of tired of it. What I want to know, Mr. 

Minister, is why your government decided unilaterally and 

arbitrarily to deny all the employees of the centralized technical 

institute and the regional colleges the rights that they’ve 

bargained for over many, many years in the collective 

agreement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, we are talking here about 

a new educational institution, and the employees will be 

retained at that educational institution and will have a choice 

whether they wish to be represented by their existing union, any 

other union they wish to form, or a faculty association if they so 

choose. They have those choices. I don’t know what is radical 

or undemocratic about choice. There is nothing radical or 

undemocratic about people having a choice. They can still be 

members of whichever union they wish. Anyone in this 

province can join any union. This has absolutely nothing to do 

with their union membership. What it has to do with is who is 

the bargaining agent for the employees, and that they will have 

to determine for themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Three years ago . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Is it a supplementary or 

a new question? 

 

Mr. Shillington: — It’s a new question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — New question. 

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3048 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Three years ago, Mr. Minister, another 

member of the cabinet to which you belong gave people the 

option of transferring to the private sector. Now you’re giving 

them the choice of renegotiating a contract which they have 

bargained for over many years. 

 

I want to know, Mr. Minister, if anyone in your government had 

the courage to attempt to justify this to the executive of the 

union who are the democratically elected representatives of 

those employees? Did you have to the courage to justify it to 

them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, his question is 

contradictory. He said they had lost their membership, and then 

he tells us that they still have an executive. It sounds to me like 

they still have an executive; they still have membership; they 

still have a union, and that they still have jobs, and that this 

province has a new educational institution. It seems to me that 

they can now bargain the details of their working conditions 

and how this educational institution is going to be operated. It 

also seems to me that the faculty can decide whether they wish 

to have a faculty association or SGEU (Saskatchewan 

Government Employees Union) or CUPE (Canadian Union of 

Public Employees) or the postal workers’ union, or any union 

they choose they can have them. That’s up to them. 

 

Now you want us to maintain a law that forces them to take a 

union that they already have. They can decide for themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. The purpose, 

Mr. Minister, behind this section is rather clearly set out in a 

memorandum with respect to the privatization of the corrections 

institutes and turning them into Crown corporations. Mr. 

Minister, and I quote from document, from a letter from an 

internal memo from McPhail to Terry Thompson, sets out the 

implications with respect to labour relations of the privatization 

of the corrections institutes and says, as one of the advantages: 

 

It may allow the new employer to make important changes 

to working conditions and work rules. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you deny that this arbitrary action taken by 

your government with respect to employees at the technical 

institute is going to be repeated every time you privatize 

something or transfer something to the private sector or into a 

Crown corporation, that the people who are going to pay most 

for it are the employees who will lose all of their rights which 

they’ve bargained for and won. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — With regard, Mr. Speaker, to any review of 

the correctional system and whether or not the correctional 

system should be moved to a Crown corporation, that matter is 

being reviewed, Mr. Speaker. There are other advantages in 

ability to finance new  

correctional institutions in the province of Saskatchewan 

through a Crown corporation. So, yes, it is being looked at. 

 

Secondly, the hon. member will have the following assurance 

from this government, that upon the privatization he will have 

the ability to vote in this Assembly on each privatization; he 

will be able to ask questions during the debate as to the 

privatization; and he’ll be able to stand up before the people of 

this province and tell the people of this province . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Labour. Mr. 

Minister, under the legislation that was brought down 

yesterday, will you not acknowledge that for the first time 

employees in this province who were unionized are going to be 

arbitrarily told now that they can be switched from one 

bargaining unit to another; if they choose to unionize again, that 

their certification orders are being arbitrarily taken away from 

them; that you are in effect rewriting the rules of labour in this 

province under the auspices of an education Bill; that you’re 

changing The Trade Union Act under the auspices of an 

education Bill in this province. Will you acknowledge that 

that’s what you’re doing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, in deference to your 

rulings of yesterday, I will be as polite as possible and point out 

that the member opposite is mistaken. The same type of Bill 

was used, and the same type of situation took place when we 

changed the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, the 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation and Saskoil. 

And the employees were treated fairly, and they made their 

choice as to which union they wished to have representing 

them. There’s nothing novel about this. 

 

So the member opposite is mistaken, and I’m pleased to correct 

him on that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question to the Minister of Finance, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, a contract is a contract. It used to be 

that the word of the government of the day used to be its bond. 

This government, your government, has broken its word. This 

government has arbitrarily broken an agreement which it agreed 

to with this action. I ask you, who is going to be next? Can 

anyone rely on this government to keep its word? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, one thing that’s come through 

loud and clear on this $90,000 a day Legislative Assembly 

session is the inability of the public to believe any of the facts 

being misrepresented on a daily basis by the members opposite 

who are so bankrupt of questions that they are simply repeating, 

Mr. Speaker, repeating questions from last June and throwing 

out spurious false accusations, false information, Mr. Speaker. I 

think, Mr.  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3049 

 

Speaker, that’s what’s become evident in this Assembly, and 

the members of the press know it. 

 

To the hon. member opposite, the hon. member knows full well 

that the members of the union will have the right to make their 

choice once this new educational institution is established, Mr. 

Speaker. You can vote against this new educational institution; 

you can vote against the change; you have to right to do that. 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that both parties, the government and 

the opposition, will be judged which is the best for the people of 

this province — a new educational system or the old ways of 

the New Democratic Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Status of Manager of STC 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

minister responsible to the Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company, and of course it deals with the status of STC’s 

transportation manage, one Rick Millar. 

 

Mr. Minister, last Friday you were unable to tell us in this 

House and to tell the taxpayers whether this senior executive 

was still employed by STC or not. And yet just this Wednesday 

of this week you told the news media that Mr. Millar had been 

dismissed last Wednesday. Was Mr. Millar dismissed with 

cause? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I will confirm that Mr. 

Millar is no longer with the Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company. Mr. Millar was relieved of his duties. I believe the 

date was Wednesday, September 23, and I would say that it was 

with cause the he was relieved of his duties. 

 

Free Trade Discussions 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question will be 

for the Deputy Premier, and it has to do with the free trade 

discussions with the United States. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, yesterday after question period the 

Premier was quoted as saying that he would be going to a 

meeting in Ottawa today, prepared to accept a trade deal with 

the United States that is “less than perfect.” 

 

By the time this House meets again on Monday, the whole thing 

may be over and done with, and therefore I would want to ask 

the Deputy Premier today, in relation to that first ministers’ 

meeting that is taking place virtually at this very moment in 

Ottawa: was the Premier quoted accurately yesterday in the 

news reports about what he said after question period? And if 

so, what does your government regard as “acceptable” but “less 

than perfect”? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t comment on as to 

whether the quote was accurate or not. 

 

I do know that the quote that I saw was words to the effect that 

it would take a great deal of courage to support a deal that was 

economically correct but less than perfect politically. And that 

was the quote that I heard, and so that one I cannot deny. 

As it relates to the meetings going on this very moment, I 

suspect that the hon. member is right — those meetings are 

going on at this moment. And I expect that once those meetings 

are concluded, we will receive a communication from the 

Premier or his staff spelling out to us what is going on in that 

particular discussion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, in those discussions — because 

these may well be the final hours of the talks going on with the 

United States — can the Deputy Premier indicate whether or 

not the Premier of Saskatchewan will be giving in or giving 

away anything with respect to dispute settlements, agriculture, 

or regional development? And could he specifically say if there 

is any risk that these discussions with the United States, now in 

their final stage, could hold up or derail a plan to make a 

deficiency payment to grain farmers in Saskatchewan for 1987. 

Is there any risk of that whatsoever? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Number one, Mr. Speaker, to answer in 

reverse order, I don’t see how this would impact on a deficiency 

payment. And we’ve already talked on more than one occasion 

about the unanimous consent across the country for the need for 

a deficiency payment. 

 

As it relates to the earlier part of the question, what is the 

Premier prepared to give up, I think that he’s made it very clear 

in this House on more than one occasion as to what the bottom 

line is for the Premier of this province and for the people of 

Saskatchewan. He’s made that very clear. 

 

As it relates to us here negotiating what may or may not be 

possible at these discussions, I think it’s terribly inappropriate 

when the discussions are going on at this very moment in 

Washington and briefings going on at this very moment in 

Ottawa. And I think it’s very inappropriate for us to be putting 

it on the Table here if, in fact, there is anything to be backed 

away from. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Increase in Licence and Registration Fees 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Highways. And, Mr. Minister, at a time that our 

economy is deteriorating and unemployment is increasing and 

rural families are hard pressed to make ends meet, I wonder 

why your government has decided to hit all Saskatchewan 

motorists with a huge increase in vehicle registration fees and 

double the cost of drivers’ licences. You know that those 

increases took effect yesterday, or at least that’s what your 

August 14 . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. It sounds like the hon. members 

is kind of getting into kind of a long preamble, and I know he 

doesn’t want to do that. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — My question, Mr. Speaker: your August 

14 news release said that those increases would take effect 

October 1, and I’m wondering if you can clear up the confusion 

for those of us that have a birthday in September and who had 

to end up paying the increase in  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3050 

 

September already. What’s happening here, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member well 

knows that the increases in drivers’ licences fees, as well as the 

increases in vehicle registration fees, were part and parcel of the 

budget that was announced a good number of months ago. 

There was lots of opportunity for the hon. member to debate the 

issues during the budget. 

 

Further to that, I can say that with respect to the implementation 

date of the vehicle registration fee increases and the drivers’ 

licence fee increases, the date that they became effective was 

October 1. 

 

I will certainly concede that to some members of the public it 

may have been somewhat confusing. You may well know that 

drivers’ licences and vehicle registrations are sent out in 

advance of the actual effective date to give all the people an 

opportunity to buy their registrations a little earlier. But the 

actual date of implementation clearly, as stated, was October 1. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Confusing 

it is; certainly, and I would recommend to you some 

clarification in light of future increases. 

 

I wonder if the minister can assure the motoring public in 

Saskatchewan that all those increases which have gone into 

effect that the additional net revenues from that will in fact go 

to help repair the highways in this province which are in a sorry 

state. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

will know that the funds raised by these measures go into the 

general Consolidated Fund. You well know that with these 

increases in revenues to the general fund, that there will be 

more moneys available for all departments to draw on. And if 

you want to enter into a debate as to the condition of our 

highways, I am very certain that the hon. member, during the 

estimates of Highways and Transportation, will have all sorts of 

opportunities to intensely question me requesting the highways 

in this province. 

 

Errors in Saskatoon Telephone Directory 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, in Crown corporations last 

week you told us, Mr. Minister, that . . . I’m sorry. It’s a 

question to the Minister of Finance. I said that, but it may not 

have been heard — to the minister in charge of SaskTel. 

 

Mr. Minister, in Crown corporations you told us the number of 

errors in the Saskatoon telephone director had been definitively 

fixed at 127. Mr. Minister, the number is now 300 and still 

climbing — another one of your finely honed arithmetic 

calculations, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you’ve proved you can’t  

run a corner grocery store or administer a three-house paper 

route, much less something as complex as a telephone book. 

 

My question, Mr. Minister, is: will you confirm that the known 

errors in the new Saskatoon telephone directory have now 

passed 300? And what corrective action do you intend to take to 

assist businesses, churches, and individuals, professional 

people, who have been very seriously injured by these errors 

and omissions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, when the hon. members asks 

a question about running things, I think I recall that it was that 

hon. members who was dropped from cabinet by the New 

Democratic government because he insisted on putting 

television sets on the ski-doos for the trappers of northern 

Saskatchewan and spending $30,000 to repair a grandfather 

clock in his office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — When the hon. members wants to talk 

about running things, I suggest that his record is there for the 

public to look at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I indicated at the time of the Crown Corporations 

Committee . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I know the hon. member doesn’t want to 

hear about being dumped from the cabinet, but if the hon. 

member would pay attention, at the date of the time of the 

Crown corporations meeting that was the information as to the 

number of errors in the Saskatoon directory that they had at that 

time. There have been others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it would be rather strange for any member of this 

Assembly, when you have the information as to the number of 

errors at the particular time that the question is asked, if there 

are subsequent ones coming to their attention that you would 

know those at the time. Mr. Speaker, I think that would be 

rather strange. And perhaps the now Leader of the Opposition 

was right when he dumped the member from cabinet, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I thank you, Mr. Minister, for that 

non-answer. Mr. Minister, the question is not whether or not 

you can count. You’ve given us the answer to that in vivid 

terms on different occasions. 

 

The question, Mr. Minister, is: what are you going to do for the 

dentist who has a street-side practice who is left out entirely? 

And are we now starting the time when school children are 

going to dentists. What are you going to do for the doctor’s 

office which was left out entirely; for St. Timothy’s Church 

which was left out entirely, and for the other 300 people who 

are out of the telephone book? It’s devastating for a business or 

for an institution such as St. Timothy’s Church. Mr. Minister, 

what are you going to do for these people? 

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3051 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I noticed that the misspelling 

of the hon. member from Riversdale’s name didn’t seem to 

cause a whole bunch of people to rush into a leadership 

campaign, so I’m not sure that that error impacted negatively on 

him. 

 

But I suggest to the hon. member that we have already set out 

what we propose to do, that there are intercepts to get the 

correct information. We explained in Crown Corporations that 

the reason for the errors in Saskatoon — and they are serious, 

Mr. Speaker — is because of a transfer to a new computer 

system. It’s the same printers that have been doing it for a 

number of years, and it’s the transfer to the computer system. 

There will be an intercept. 

 

If the problems remain serious for specific individuals — we 

indicated, as well, in Crown Corporations another example of 

the need to repeat answers, Mr. Speaker — that advertisements 

will be put in the newspaper outlet in Saskatoon as often as 

necessary to ensure that the public does know the correct 

numbers of those affected, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Hospitalization Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading to 

amend The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 49 — An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Change of Name Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Hospital Standards Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Hospital Standards Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. All 

members will receive adequate opportunity to debate the Bill. I 

would ask them to co-operate in keeping quiet while the 

Speaker is on his feet. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Sitting Hours 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Before orders of the day, by leave  

of the Assembly, I would like to move a couple of motions: one 

dealing with change in sitting hours relative to the 

Thanksgiving weekend, and the other one dealing with 

estimates and supplementary estimates for the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

First one I will move, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

seconded by the Minister for Consumer Affairs. 

 

That notwithstanding rule 3 of the Rules and Procedures 

of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, that when 

this Assembly adjourns on Friday, October 9, 1987, it do 

stand adjourned until Tuesday, October 13, 1987. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Estimates for Legislative Assembly referred to Standing 

Committee on Estimates 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly 

I move, seconded by the Minister of Consumer Affairs: 

 

That the Estimates and Supplementary Estimates for the 

Legislative Assembly, being subvotes 1-3, 5-7, 17, 20-23, 

and 26 of vote 21, be withdrawn from the Committee of 

Finance and referred to the Standing Committee on 

Estimates. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Excuse me, before we proceed I would like to 

take this opportunity to table a special report by the Provincial 

Auditor to the Legislative Assembly, dated September 30, 1987. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Tourism, Small Business and Co-operatives 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 45 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Last night we just 

nicely got into our opening remarks and the rebuttal. And just to 

refresh your member, Mr. Minister, last night I spoke of the 

need for renewed and revigorated department of co-ops. And I 

spoke about how the department of co-op activities should be 

geared towards active promotion and development of new 

co-operatives in Saskatchewan. 

 

I outlined many types of co-operative enterprises that we  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3052 

 

should be entering into. I’ll just cite a few examples to bring 

you back onstream; worker co-ops to help the huge 

unemployment lines that we have in Saskatchewan, and there’s 

great hope for many, many jobs to be created in that one area 

alone. I spoke of co-op farms; I spoke of machinery co-ops; I 

spoke of harvesting co-ops; day-care co-ops, and I also spoke of 

things as small as the snow-plough co-op, pointing out that the 

need has never been greater than it is today for co-op 

organization. 

 

And I outlined, Mr. Minister, some of the devastation that I see 

to the once proud department of co-ops. I will discuss that 

devastation further in the estimates as we get to specific 

questions, so I’m not going to dwell on that right now. 

 

But in your rebuttal you spoke of the strength and the resilience 

of the co-operative spirit, and it is indeed a spirit that is resilient 

and it is hard to kill because that’s the very core of the spirit of 

the CCF. That co-op spirit, Mr. Minister, continues today, no 

thanks to you. 

 

In your rebuttal you also mentioned that you had had a meeting 

with the major co-operatives, I believe you said at the Regina 

Inn. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, the Sask Hotel. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Hotel Saskatchewan. My apologies; I recalled 

the wrong hotel. I remember your remarks, but the wrong hotel. 

 

I was somewhat amused to hear that because in the Tourism 

estimates I’d found out that you’d had two meetings with 

people regarding tourism. So now in the past . . . since October 

20 you’ve had three meetings, two of them in Tourism and one 

in Co-ops. It’s not a wildly active year, if I might say; the only 

thing you’ve been active at is slashing the department of co-ops 

budget, and I outlined some of the numbers that went down in 

that respect. 

 

Minister, while the provincial government has gotten rid of the 

department of co-operation, the federal government has recently 

set up a new co-operatives secretariat, and it has a permanent 

executive director’s office and a system of committees to 

provide links between co-operatives and federal government 

departments. 

 

Why is this government abandoning co-operatives and the 

co-operative development at a time when the federal 

government has recognized it has huge significance for all 

Canadians, and indeed the federal government has made that a 

new priority, while in Saskatchewan we have apparently 

abandoned that? Will Saskatchewan be losing out in terms of 

funding for programs because of your untimely decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly not, Mr. Speaker, and I think I 

should correct a couple of . . . or inform the member of a couple 

of initiatives here regarding the development and the work that 

is going on with co-ops within the Department of Tourism, 

Small Business and Co-operatives. 

You mentioned about employee co-ops, and I just draw to your 

attention that already in this year of April to August, and that’s 

the statistic I have before me, there’s been formed two such 

co-ops, two employee co-ops, and we have a person in the 

Saskatoon office that is working actively with groups who 

would like to start those types of co-ops. And I could say that’s 

an improvement over last year where there were no employee 

co-ops formed. 

 

Also I think it is wrong to indicate that there isn’t the emphasis 

on co-ops. In fact, as I stated to you last night, through the 

business resource centres I believe there is even an increasing 

emphasis at the grass roots upon co-op movement and co-op 

development. Regarding the meeting with the chief executive 

officers of the co-ops of Saskatchewan, it’s true I met with them 

in May, as I told you, at the Saskatchewan Hotel. The other two 

meetings I was telling you about were large, grass roots 

consultation meetings, and not just on tourism. 

 

In those meetings — and perhaps I should explain those to you 

for a moment, that all my CEOs accompany me to those 

meetings and all the areas that I’m responsible for. Now I’ll 

give you an example of how these meetings take place so you’ll 

see that co-ops are not down-played in them at all. At those 

meetings there are Mr. Otto Cutts, who is the president of the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, and of 

course under that falls the Buy Saskatchewan program, and I do 

take my second-line administrators there too. In that case it’s a 

man by the name of Mr. Dennis Wieler. 

 

The people from Tourism and the questions on tourism and on 

small business and co-ops are headed up by Mr. Ken McNabb, 

my acting deputy minister. So the co-op input is there. 

 

Also at these ones is Mr. Price, from Sedco, because people are 

wondering about opportunities for financing and so on in 

businesses, as well as Mr. Urness, who heads up the Liquor 

Board. So on these consultation workshops that we have, all the 

CEOs for the areas of economic development that I am 

responsible for in this government accompany me to these 

meetings. So there would be a component there for co-ops. If 

there are any co-op questions come up, I will answer them, or 

Mr. McNabb would be more than willing to do that. 

 

Further to that, though, I have . . . I will be meeting — I believe 

it’s scheduled for next month — with the second round of 

meetings with the CEOs (chief executive officers) of the major 

co-ops in Saskatchewan, as well as some meetings with the 

credit union movement. 

 

So I think to indicate that there is not an emphasis upon co-ops, 

under the new structure would be misleading, would be wrong. 

Certainly we have dialogue ongoing, and as I said to you 

yesterday, co-ops from some of the largest companies in our 

province, in Saskatchewan. And Saskatchewan has a tradition 

of co-op development, and if people in whatever walk of life 

they may be in, be they employees, be they feeders — and I 

think we had this year already 16 feeder co-ops start, and I’m 

glad to see that because obviously that indicates that the red 

meat industry in this province is thriving. 

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3053 

 

If people are coming together to develop further value-added 

processing and value-added aspects of agriculture — what the 

Premier’s been talking about for the last five years — obviously 

some of these people are choosing to do it in the co-op fashion, 

and that’s fine, well, and good, and I’m glad to see that kind of 

development take place. 

 

Further, I should just for — this is for your information — 

indicate that we do, through our people in the portion of co-ops 

within my department, have ongoing dialogue and discussion. 

And I have a paper here that shows — it’s called “Inter and 

Intra Government Committees,” — and there’s a large number 

of them, and I won’t take the time of the House to read them all 

out. But just to give you a few, for example: Co-op Housing 

Association of Saskatchewan, the Indian and Native Affairs 

committee, PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration), 

and Soil Conservation committee, Department of Agriculture 

— well some of those are added, but there’s other ones here — 

centre for co-op studies and Co-op College of Canada. So there 

is a large number of ongoing consultations between co-op 

movements and my department that are ongoing at any time. If 

you would like this list, I’d be more than pleased to give it to 

you. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Minister. I may find that list of some 

value, and I would appreciate it if you would send it across at 

your convenience. What I garnered from your remarks is that 

co-ops are discussed in the same breath as liquor and tourism, 

and you listed two or three or maybe more other areas than 

meetings. 

 

(1045) 

 

Indeed, if that’s the thrust of co-operative development in this 

province, I suggest to you, sir, that the co-op movement is being 

served a great injustice by your government because co-ops do 

not deserve to be part of things like a discussion on liquor. I just 

fail to see any connection there whatsoever other than some 

co-op members and indeed some of the board of directors and 

employees of co-ops perhaps drink some liquor on occasion. 

They’re no different than any other people, but that’s the extent 

of the connection. 

 

You mentioned the business resource centres, Mr. Minister, and 

I was really pleased to hear you mention those resource centres 

for the simple reason that much earlier in this session in 

question period, in response to a question I was asking you, you 

spoke in glowing terms about the business resource centres and 

how the co-operative movement, if you like, was being 

represented there. You spoke at that time about people coming 

in, investors from out of province, coming in, stopping at a 

business resource centre, and then seeing the co-op mode of 

doing business. And they could set up their business after the 

co-op method. 

 

Well, Minister, that’s absolutely absurd to even suggest that an 

investor is going to come into the province with . . . name the 

amount of money, but I’ll use $100,000 as a simple illustration 

— that amount could be anything. But if I’m an outside of the 

province investor and coming in, I am going to set up a sole 

proprietorship. I may look for a partnership, but it is highly 

unlikely that I would come  

from Alberta or B.C. or Manitoba or Ontario and try and set a 

co-op with $100,000 of my own money. I would set up 

certainly a business, as I say, a partnership, a corporation, but 

not a co-operative. The changes of that happening are so remote 

as to almost be ludicrous. 

 

Minister, I asked you a question about funding and we losing it, 

and specifically us losing the funding because of the lack of 

co-operative development thrust by your government and 

because of the federal government’s new initiatives in the 

co-operative area. And to be a little more specific, housing 

co-ops have been a thriving part of the co-operative milieu over 

the years. And I’m wondering, what are the numbers of new 

starts that you see coming and how many people have you got 

out actively promoting housing co-ops? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As my officials are discussing this, I will 

just get up for a minute and indicate to you that I think you fail 

to understand or grasp what the consultation meetings are. As I 

said, I am responsible for a number of aspects of economic 

development in this province, and we take all those people out 

and discuss a myriad of problems. So to say that co-ops 

shouldn’t be discussed in the same forum as changes and 

development in small businesses, changes and requirements for 

Sedco, or as changes in the distribution and the sale of liquor, 

just doesn’t make sense. Those are the things I’m responsible 

for, so I go out and talk to the people to hear what they think 

should take place within these fields. So to try and say that 

somehow we’re meshing liquor and co-ops together is drawing 

an extremely long bow and is certainly not very credible. 

 

Your second statement about someone coming in from out of 

the province to the business resource centres, it may well be, it 

could be. How am I to know that some doesn’t come into 

Saskatchewan to a business resource centre and say, look, I 

want to do this. I see an opportunity here. I don’t have the 

capital to do exactly as much as I’d like to. And the solution or 

the idea that comes to him or is suggested is, maybe you should 

form a co-operative with some other people in this province 

who have the same ideas and hopes and aspirations. 

 

So therefore there is a possibility that could happen. But more 

than likely is that there are people in our province, our own 

Saskatchewan people who are wanting to take part in some 

economic endeavour who will go to the business resource 

centre, find out the amount of capitalization that is necessary, 

look at the different kind of structures of how you could do this. 

And many of these people are not informed in this type of 

decision making, and it is shown to them that you can certainly 

go the individual proprietorship. There’s partnerships, there’s 

corporate structure, and there’s co-operative structure. 

 

And it may well be that the structure that that person sees fits 

his particular economic endeavour is the co-operative. I would 

cite, for example, the feeder co-ops. As you know, and I think 

you did come from a rural background, that the opportunity 

today with cattle prices looks quite good to get into the feeding 

and the finishing of cattle. But you know it’s a rather large 

expenditure for an individual to undertake alone. To start a 

feedlot with the most modern ways of feeding takes  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3054 

 

considerable amount of capital, let alone looking at stocking it 

with the feeder cattle. 

 

So therefore a young person with that hope or aspiration may 

say, well look, I can’t handle this all by myself. But there may 

have been five other guys in with the same type of desire and 

hope. Well it may well be that these fellows by coming together 

and pooling their resources and forming a co-operative are able 

to get this thing up and going. I think the figure of 16 feeder 

co-ops since April of this year indicates that that is exactly what 

is taking place in our province right now. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Minister, we’re getting very little — making 

very little progress in that area, so I’m going to switch, and 

perhaps we’ll come back to that. 

 

Mr. Minister, how many people were employed in the 

co-operation and co-operative development department at the 

beginning, and how many people were employed at the end of 

fiscal year ’86-87? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, in answer to your question, I think 

you asked for the last fiscal year, and there were 59 positions at 

the beginning and at the end of the fiscal year. I think what 

you’re really wanting to know is: what is the situation now, 

though? Yes. 

 

So if you take 59 positions, 35 of those were transferred to my 

department and to Consumer Affairs. That’s 35 over to the two 

departments. Of the number that I actively have today is 22 

positions. I can’t speak for Consumer Affairs; you’ll have to ask 

the minister when her estimates come up as to the number that 

she has at this point in time, but 13 were transferred. 

 

Mr. Trew: — You have 22 positions in your new department 

of Tourism, Small Business and Co-operatives from the old 

co-op department? You have 22 positions? How may people 

have you assigned to the Co-operatives area alone, of those 

employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Of the 22 people, person-years, that I 

have now, I have one person-year in administration; I have two 

person-years in communication; I have one person-year in 

business information resources; I have 14 person-years in 

regional services; and I have four person-years in 

Co-operatives. The last one, I am told, is called co-operative 

development. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Minister, how many people were in the co-op 

development part of the branch before the reorganization? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We will get you the exact number. This 

officials are indicating approximately seven or eight — let’s 

take eight as a figure. 

 

I should indicate to you, if you look down the figures I just gave 

you, on the 14 that I have in regional services, that is the trust 

that I’m putting in into co-operative development is to be, in my 

mind, more grass roots and more to people who may not be a 

co-op member or something of this nature. Those people will be 

going into business resource centres. 

So I believe by doing that, by having people right out there on 

development and on policy, working right out of those business 

resource centres, that probably we will be able to touch more 

people who have not perhaps had the opportunity, shall I say, of 

seeing the benefits of the co-operative method of organizing for 

certain business practices — so if you take those 14 and see that 

is what we plan to do on phasing them into what one would say 

co-operative development. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Minister, you’ve gone, taken you department 

from 59 people all the way down to 22 positions — it is a 

nearly one-third the size department relating directly to co-ops 

— and that’s including, that’s including the 14 regional services 

people you have that are also talking about small businesses, 

also talking a little bit about tourism, how to make things 

happen in those areas. 

 

(1100) 

 

So, Mr. Minister, you have reduced the work-force from the 

once proud department of co-ops — cut it, slashed it to less, for 

all practical purposes less than one-third what it was when you 

took over at the end of the past year. How in the world has that, 

such a drastic reduction of people, been achieved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s not, that’s not correct, Mr. 

Member, in that there are 22 housed within my department of 

the original 59. There were 13 transferred to Consumer Affairs, 

so it isn’t cut by a third, it’s from 59 to 35. But let me illustrate 

to you and explain to you how I feel really we have, through 

this, brought in some dimensions to the co-ops that were not as 

easily accessed before. For example, all the expertise and all the 

data and the research that we have in the whole small business 

department which was once separated from the co-ops is now 

meshed together — complete access to all that research that is 

there in small business in Saskatchewan. 

 

I cite, for example, as I did last night when we were talking 

about venture capital, that now because of the amalgamation we 

are seeing some of the retail co-ops in Saskatchewan actively 

pursuing the VCC (venture capital corporation) method of 

financing. And I believe that kind of thing has come about or 

been made easier because of the amalgamation of the 

departments. 

 

Also, and you will have to speak to the other minister, but it is 

my belief and understanding that with some of the function in 

Consumer Affairs there’s also going to be some benefit there 

also; that maybe before when it was isolated as one department, 

and as you know how . . . and I don’t mean to be too critical 

here of governments and bureaucracies, but there is always a 

little more difficulty in annexing from one structure over to the 

other. When they are working together and in the same building 

and in the same . . . under the same administration — they 

aren’t all in the same building yet, but under the same 

administration — you get that, what I would call, 

cross-pollinization or transfer of knowledge or access, ease of 

access. And I think that’s a benefit. 

 

So just to go back on what we have been saying, that I don’t 

think we can say that the amalgamation has weakened  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3055 

 

the co-op movement at all, and I’m advised that most of the 

positions that were lost were mostly overlap in common 

administrative services. And I’m sure you would concur with 

me, as we look to try and streamline government and to spend 

the taxpayers’ money as efficiently as possible, where we can 

have one administration doing what previously two 

administrative arms had done before, those are savings that can 

be recouped by the treasury. 

 

So I think . . . I feel quite certain that what has taken place in 

co-ops, I believe, can even increase or further strengthen the 

amount of information that people wanting to form co-ops, 

people in existing co-ops, can access. I cite again the VCC as a 

case in point. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, I’m not at all happy with your 

statement that the Department of Consumer Affairs now is, you 

think may be, may be picking up some of the co-op function. 

You talk about a cross-pollinization, and yet you’re the minister 

responsible for co-operative development and co-operation, and 

you say maybe the Department of Consumer Affairs is picking 

up some of the work. So obviously you don’t know. You don’t 

have a cross-pollinization. You have a loss of thrust for the 

co-operative movement, and I say that’s a real crying shame. 

 

You spoke, Minister, of the positions being saved as primarily 

in the administrative areas. Will you give me a list of positions? 

I don’t need the names, but I need the positions before and after 

reorganization so that I can check that what you’re saying is so. 

And it would help me perhaps, me or whoever the critic of this 

department is next year, in following up on this. 

 

Minister, particularly at the management level, I want to know 

how the priorities and policies of the department are now being 

set. For example, is it co-op officials or is it tourism officials 

that are making the decision? And undoubtedly the 

reorganization has caused some problems; it simply has to have. 

How are you handling those problems? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Now to go back on these questions and to 

give you some more information. You asked us for a list of 

names, and we will concur with giving those to you. 

 

You had asked about who is making the decisions regarding 

co-ops at this time. Well I guess it’s the same as the decisions 

for Tourism, decisions for Small Business — it’s myself and 

some of my head officials. Of course, Mr. McNabb, the acting 

deputy minister, would have a considerable amount of influence 

in that, as did Mr. Folstad, who had a long and lengthy 

experience prior to joining our government, with Federated 

Co-ops; and Mr. Vern Kaisler, who is the head of the co-ops in 

our department. Those are the people, along with myself, with 

input from discussions with people across Saskatchewan. 

 

I just wanted to indicate to you a couple of interesting statistics 

I think you would be interested in. And that is that in 1984-85 

there were 55 new co-ops started in this province; in 1985-86 

there were 45 new co-operatives  

started; in 1986-87 there were 76 new co-operatives; and in 

1987-88 there are 31 new co-operatives to the end of August. 

So I think the development is going on quite well and at quite a 

good speed. 

 

And also it’s been brought to my attention that co-operative 

officials have advised us that with the new alignment and with 

having two ministers, that this government is very open and 

responsive to the unique needs of co-operative organizations, 

and I will go back to the venture capital corporations as an 

example of that. 

 

Further to this, it might be interesting for you to know that we 

have looked at rural economic development corporations. My 

colleague, the Minister of Rural Affairs, has been out 

dialoguing a great deal with various municipalities across the 

province of Saskatchewan, encouraging them to form rural 

economic development corporations so that they can come 

together in a joint type of venture — jointly to attract new 

industry and perhaps to join together in the building of 

necessary type of facilities. I think it would be interesting for 

you to see that, of the three new . . .the first three new rural 

development corporations that have sprung up in Saskatchewan 

have all chosen to be co-operatives. 

 

So I just want to indicate to you and to all members present that 

with the new alignment I believe — and I will be straight and 

forward with you — that I’m sure there was some concerns and 

some worries about, will co-ops be down-played? And I think, 

as I told the members at the meeting in May, I said, we will see 

the proof is in the eating of the pudding. 

 

And I would think, from the statistics that I have provided to 

you today you will see that the development is ongoing, new 

co-ops are being formed, and that some of those in record 

numbers. And some of those perhaps fears or concerns are 

being allayed as both myself and my fellow minister, the 

Minister of Consumer Affairs, are actively trying to dialogue 

and meet with those who are the leaders of the co-op movement 

and those who are interested in the development of co-ops. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Moving along, Mr. Minister. The advice and the 

supervision of the co-op department officers and the levels of 

services that used to be provided in Saskatchewan is what made 

our province, for all purposes, Canada’s banner co-operative 

province. There’s been an especially detrimental effect on the 

smaller, non-aligned co-ops. I’m specifically think of day care 

co-ops. I’m thinking of employment, community service 

co-operatives, and those sorts of things. 

 

Mr. Minister, there’s a number of socio-economic needs in 

Saskatchewan to which the co-operative movement really could 

respond in a very meaningful manner. It could address the 

problem of unemployment. It could take up the challenge of 

providing social security and lost public sector services to 

people. It could contribute to the industrialization and economic 

diversification of the region; and come to grips with the new 

social reality in Saskatchewan, that is, the ever-increasing 

number of divorced couples, single-parent families, and 

children outside the traditional family structure. 

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3056 

 

Why not reinforce some of these creative avenues of 

development rather than throwing your money at Peter 

Pocklington and Weyerhaeuser and the oil companies for very 

questionable returns and very, very expensive jobs, if any. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I just want to assure you that the 

services that were previously there for co-ops . . . and I agree 

that co-ops have been a part of the development of the province 

of Saskatchewan. I think, if you remember last night as we were 

closing off, that I indicated that my first job, the first five years 

I worked in this province was at the Consumers’ Co-op 

Refineries and have fond recollections of my days there. 

 

But we’re informed that we have had very . . . I guess no 

complaints from small co-ops because many of the things, the 

services that they have required are still there. And I’ll just go 

through some of the things that the department are doing for 

co-ops. 

 

We have workshops and seminars, and accounting and 

bookkeeping for day cares, and preschool co-ops, feeder 

associations. We have board of director training seminars, we 

have the co-op merit awards, co-op week festivities. Co-ops 

have trade show displays, the co-op junior achievement 

program, the feeder association loan guarantee program, youth 

employment co-ops, soil conservation co-operatives, special 

emphasis on employment co-ops. As I said, there’s been two 

new ones formed already this year. Women in employment 

co-op workshops, grazing co-op workshops, and employment 

co-op workshops. 

 

So those type of supports to what one might say the smaller 

co-ops are still in place. And my officials indicate to me that 

they have not had people from the smaller co-ops indicating to 

them that they’ve not been able to access the type of support 

and services that they require. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, you say you’ve had no complaints 

from small co-ops and specifically I take it you’re referring to 

the non-aligned co-ops, and it’s quite natural that you would not 

have complaints from a fire hall co-operative for instance that 

. . . from a fire hall co-operative it’s quite natural that you 

would not have a complaint from that. 

 

(1115) 

 

Most of those co-ops have been ongoing for quite a number of 

years. They’re set up and functioning quite well, and they don’t 

have paid staff to just pay attention how you’re decimating the 

department of co-ops. They don’t pay attention that. In other 

words, their world doesn’t hinge on everything we do in this 

marble palace, and thank goodness that the world is that way. 

There is a real world out there and I wish that you were a little 

more in touch with it. 

 

I have to question the effectiveness of the reorganization, Mr. 

Minister, in terms of the availability of support and advice for 

people that desperately need to set up co-operatives and to keep 

them going, and to help provide some advice when 

co-operatives get into some difficulties. Because as you should 

be aware, there are a  

great number of co-operatives that are very small in nature and 

they do not have chief executive officers readily at their 

disposal. In fact, there are some co-operatives where the chief 

executive officer has to be picked from a handful of a dozen or 

so people, and then it’s more or less a volunteer position. 

 

Who’s going to be affected most, Mr. Minister by your 

realignment? I’ve said it before and I’ll say it again, it’s 

probably the non-aligned, the smaller non-aligned co-operatives 

such as day care co-ops, community service co-operatives, 

employment co-operatives, I mentioned fire hall co-operatives, 

and farm machinery co-operatives, those organizations that 

don’t have paid managerial staff to handle your new 

bureaucracy that is being created. And they don’t . . . those very 

co-operatives don’t complain about the services that are offered 

or not offered. They simply accept whatever tidbits you are able 

to put out to them. 

 

What I am saying is it shouldn’t just be tidbits, it shouldn’t just 

be platitudes, we should be genuinely out there and helping 

them to organize themselves so that they can make their corner 

of the world a better place for them and their neighbours to live 

in. That’s what the department of co-operative and co-operative 

development is all about, Mr. Minister. 

 

I spoke earlier in the estimates about what’s happened to the 

co-operative development officers assigned across 

Saskatchewan. You’ve indicated that those have been cut in 

half in numbers. Another concern that I have in that area is that 

their functions are now being taken over by people in the 

Tourism and Small Business portion of your portfolio and 

people who are only, if you like, mildly familiar with 

co-operatives. They may be a member of a co-operative, but 

many of those people, I suggest, have not studied co-operatives 

in depth and simply don’t have the background, the wealth of 

information and knowledge to advise co-operatives on how to 

set up a co-operative or how to continue to manage a 

co-operative in an ongoing manner. And there’s some real 

special needs that co-ops have. 

 

So that’s a concern that I have, and I would appreciate it if you 

would address how this is going to be looked after in terms of, 

specifically, people that are working in Tourism and Small 

Business now also taking on the co-op function in the . . . I 

believe, in the business resource centres is where that is 

beginning. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, regarding the small co-ops, the 

non-aligned ones as you indicate, certainly a number of these 

. . . In fact, what I am informed is that some of our field staff 

are really proactive in this and are going to them to see if they 

have any problems or concerns. I would say to you if you know 

of a fire hall co-op — you indicated that as an example that had 

some problem or concern — certainly if they would let us 

know, we would be more than glad to go out and counsel them 

and discuss with them. 

 

I won’t go back through the list but I just read out some of the 

services like the training of the board of directors, and things of 

this nature. Workshop seminars are held for many of these 

non-aligned co-ops. We haven’t cut the  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3057 

 

staff of the people that are out there helping them. I told you 

that was 14 and it has stayed at that, but the improvement that I 

see taking place is, and let’s take a situation of say a small 

co-op outside of . . . maybe let’s take the town of Bredenbury. I 

remember the students were in today, and say Bredenbury has a 

co-op, fire hall co-op. 

 

If they’re having some kind of difficulty or so on, I see it much 

easier for them now — they’re not that far from Yorkton — to 

go to the business resource centre. If they cannot go, they’re 

probably all working people or something of this nature, doing 

volunteer co-op fire work, if that was the situation. 

 

Well then we have the business resource vans. We have the 

vans that go out from the resource centres, so all it takes is for a 

phone call into the people in the business resource centre in 

Yorkton. They will come out, meet with them at their 

convenience — at the convenience of the co-op group — see 

what the problem is, if there is a problem. They will then either 

come in and get the best information from the people in the 

department or if the need is for a field staff person to go out 

there, sit down with them, and try and help them alleviate this 

problem whatever it may be. 

 

So I really see, and I think you will find that too, that there will 

be a greater network, there will be more contact at the 

community level, and also it brings with them, if it is a different 

kind of co-op . . . Let’s switch to a feeder co-op or something. 

That individual who will come to them will come armed with 

all the statistics, all the research that the Small Business 

department has. Now I think that has to be a benefit to any type 

of commercial co-ops. 

 

So I believe, and I understand your concern and your questions, 

but I again say to you as I said to the CEOs (chief executive 

officers) . . . and I’ll be interested in meeting with them next 

month to see just what they feel about this too, that I believe we 

can strengthen the movement and the development and 

reinforce it at that grass roots level. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Minister, we talked about the number of 

positions, the co-operative development officers, and I believe 

you said that went from eight to four. Correct? — the 

co-operative development officers. I’m not trying to hang you 

up. If that’s your recollection, that’s good enough. 

 

But I have another question and it’s related to, will the same 

number of co-op management advisers in the field, will you 

have the same number as before? And my information is that 

there was 18 district representatives out in the field; you’re 

saying you’ve got the same number of people out in the field. 

By my count, you’ve got half the number of co-operative 

development officers, half. And instead of 18 district 

representatives out in the field, you’ve got 14 people who are 

also charged with talking about small business and tourism with 

co-operatives tagged on. Please correct me if I am somehow 

misled in my information, but it’s a concern. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Each district will be dealt with as it was 

previously. I think you may be a wee bit confused. Let  

me take my Yorkton example again. There I have now a 

business resource consultant. And that person is versed in small 

business . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, this is a different 

guy; this is my small-business guy. Okay? So then I’m going to 

take one of those 14 guys and put him in there, and that guy is 

the co-op expert within that resource centre. 

 

But what I’m saying to you, Mr. Member, is that it seems to me, 

with the co-op expert there and the business expert there, that 

no matter who comes in, if it is a person wanting to start a 

co-op, he’s got that expertise there, plus they can draw on all of 

these things from the business resource centre that probably 

wasn’t there previously. 

 

Secondly, if it’s someone coming in to talk straight business 

and he wants to start something, then one aspect that could be 

described to him and discussed is a co-operative. And that 

co-operative, the person with the expertise is there also. 

 

So I can’t see where that isn’t a better mix, where the clientele, 

whether they be people coming in saying, I know nothing about 

co-ops, and then deciding maybe I want to start a co-op, are not 

better serviced. Or if it is your fire hall co-op, and I’m using 

that as an example again, does not come in and have the same 

expertise, plus — plus this added amount of business expertise. 

I think that is a better mix. 

 

And secondly, it’s right there — right there in Yorkton, right 

there in Prince Albert, right at the grass roots. And furthermore, 

if the people can’t come in, as I said previously, with the 

resource vans, we will go out to them in their locales in small 

towns and hamlets. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Do you have 14 business resource centres, or 

how many business resource centres do you have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We have 12. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Twelve business resource centres. Okay. Do you 

have a person solely responsible for co-operatives at each 

business resource centre, and can you name those people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There are nine in the . . . We have 12 

business resource centres, as I said. There will be nine of them 

that will be staffed with people with co-op expertise; they’re in 

the structure now. Some of them haven’t been moved right into 

the building. We’re in the throes of doing that. They will be. 

 

But the added service that will be there is through the business 

resource centres as we move out. And I’ll indicate the North. 

I’ll indicate Craik and Buffalo Narrows and areas like that 

which didn’t have that expertise before, will be able to have that 

because of them coming out of the North Battleford business 

resource centre and La Ronge. So I think there’ll be an 

expansion of services. 

 

But to get back to your question, nine of the 12 will be staffed 

with people with co-op expertise, shall we say. 

 

Mr. Trew: — So nine are staffed with the 14 people that  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3058 

 

came from the Department of Co-ops. Correct? With 14 of the 

22, but the 14 you listed as providing regional services. 

 

Mr. Minister, are those 14 people, are they assigned roles that 

are something over 80 or 90 per cent directed at co-operatives, 

or are they in fact being paid out of the Co-operatives 

department budget and have something less than that — you 

know, maybe 50 per cent or 25 per cent of their duties directly 

related to co-operatives and co-operative development? Can 

you tell me what percentage of their duties, those 14 people, 

how much time do they spend on co-ops and how much do they 

spend on other things? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Getting back to the number of people, 

they indicate to me that in Saskatoon there are three people and 

in Prince Albert there are two. So in some areas there’s more 

than one person. 

 

Getting back to your question of how much time do they spend 

vis-à-vis small business, tourism, co-ops? One hundred per cent 

of their time on co-ops. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, will there be any cuts in the 

registry and inspection branch, particularly with regards to the 

inspection system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That question will have to be addressed to 

Consumer Affairs. The function is transferred to Consumer 

Affairs. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Trew: — With respect, Mr. Minister, to the business 

development grants in the economic diversification and 

investment fund, are there any grant programs for co-operatives, 

and how much money is involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m advised that there were no direct 

grant programs, that if there were grants they came out of the 

line departments. Go back again to our feeder co-ops: if there 

would be something of that nature, that would be accessed out 

of agriculture; our housing co-op, if there would be something 

of that nature, it would come through housing. We weren’t in 

the place of being a direct-granting agency. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, could you explain why the fee for 

registering co-ops has been increased so much more in 

percentage terms than fees for private small businesses? And I 

remind you that I’ve asked this in the House before in question 

period. But to refresh your memory, the increase in the fees for 

co-ops was 233 per cent all at one shot. Why did you allow that 

huge increase? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I guess I’d indicate this to you — and 

you’re correct, the fee did increase of 75 to $250 — I’d like to 

emphasize a couple of points though. Firstly, that the 

incorporation fee for a co-op, as you, I’m sure, are aware, is 

only paid once and at the time of incorporation. So it isn’t an 

ongoing fee; it’s a one-time charge. 

 

And then secondly, the $250 fee in Saskatchewan is comparable 

to the charge in other jurisdictions: for  

example, Alberta charges $250, and Manitoba charges $140, 

and Ontario charges $500, so I guess to keep it in line where the 

other fee increases are. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Given the fact that your government has 

withdrawn so much in the way of support for co-operatives 

already, how can you justify such a further discriminatory 

increase? And I remind you that, for instance, day care’s 

registration fee goes from $75 to $250 all at once — something 

that’s much needed — how do you justify that? And further, 

can you tell me just what the Conservative policy is with 

respect to co-ops? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think we’ve been doing that all morning 

if you had been paying attention. Certainly, our policy to co-ops 

. . . As I’ve said, co-ops are a historical part of the province of 

Saskatchewan. Co-ops are an organization of doing business 

that some people feel is the proper way they’d like to conduct 

their business. That will certainly continue. I think the statistics 

that I’ve indicated to you time and time again prove exactly 

what I have been saying. 

 

As far as the fees, I just answered to you that these are in line 

with fees in other sectors of the country, and to kind of 

insinuate or to indicate that perhaps there is some type of a lack 

of support for co-ops, I can’t quite understand this. Sure there’s 

been a realignment of the department into the Department of 

Tourism and Small Business. I believe we can deliver the 

programs more efficiently and to expand upon the delivery 

through that type of realignment. 

 

I think the number of co-ops that are starting in the province 

when you see the statistics continuing to increase, then I would 

say: how would one draw the long bow to say that there is 

something taking place that is not supportive to co-ops? We see 

the number increasing each year. We see people in the co-op 

movement saying that we’re very open to co-ops; that they can 

have good dialogue. We see co-ops that never existed before 

starting to be built and put in place. So I would say overall, Mr. 

Member, that the co-op spirit, as I said last night, is alive and 

well in this province and is developing as it has in the past, and 

in some cases faster. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, I want to turn your attention to the 

co-op youth program for a few moments. I have before me a 

memorandum dated May 4, 1987, to all field staff, and in part it 

says, the department will, for this year, take a leave of absence 

from any active participation. And it goes on — I’m sure you 

can appreciate I’m just reading part of the letter, more for time’s 

sake than anything, not . . . it goes on, it is hoped that the 

decision will not preclude our participation in future years. 

 

My question is: will your department ever again be actively 

participating in the co-operation youth seminars? And the 

reason I ask that is that young people are the future of the 

co-operative movement, as they are the future of our society in 

whole — and I don’t see how in the world you can claim that 

you are working to actively promote co-operatives when the 

very essence of the new co-op movement is being so totally 

ignored by your department by your actions. It is just the wrong 

way to go. 

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3059 

 

There is no way you can teach people about co-operatives if 

you don’t get out front, start with the young people, start with 

the very successful program, the co-operative youth program 

that’s been largely successful for a huge number of years. Are 

you going to ever again get involved with that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well we are inclined to work with the 

major co-ops to see if there’s an interest in them having and 

playing a significant role in the co-op youth seminars, 

development seminars. I think that’s only correct that if these 

are of value and they want to see them further developed, that 

the major co-ops in the province should be willing to play a 

very significant part in the development of these. 

 

Discussions, as I understand, have taken place. And certainly 

we will continue to discuss with them. But I believe that a lot of 

that type of function should be strongly supported by the major 

co-ops. So I’m quite willing to dialogue with them and see what 

they feel the need is, to see what there is in the request and in 

demand from young people, and then to try and see what role 

they will play in helping to put these together. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, I heard you saying that the major 

co-ops should be taking the initiative and coming to you and 

saying, please get active again in the co-op youth program. My 

next question is: did you consult with the major co-operatives 

before, at the late date of May 4, you cancelled your 

involvement in the summer co-operative youth programs? And 

I say, summer; I have before me a schedule of a number of 

things, through July and August, that were part of that program 

and yet May 4 you were pulling out. Did you, or did you not 

consult with the major co-operatives before pulling out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well at our meeting on May 7 we were 

discussing to a great extent the realignment of the department of 

co-op into Consumer Affairs and Tourism, Small Business and 

Co-operatives. This topic was not brought up for discussion. 

My officials indicate though that we did have people, that two 

staff people are actively involved this year in the co-op youth 

seminars. And as I said previously, if the major co-operatives 

are wanting to discuss this, I’m quite willing to do that. 

However, I would be very appointed in indicating that I would 

expect them to be playing a very significant role in the 

development of these. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Did you say that two members of your 

department are actively involved in the co-op youth program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We had two members this summer at the 

seminars. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Do your memos mean absolutely nothing? I have 

here a memo from Vern Kaisler to all field staff in which it 

indicates very clearly, “the department will for this year take a 

leave of absence from any active participation.” That’s a direct 

quote. 

 

Your mail doesn’t mean anything; your word apparently 

doesn’t mean a whole lot. Frankly, I’m shocked. What is  

going on in your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well as I indicated to you, we had two 

people attend two of the seminars, and the officials tell me one 

of them attended two of the seminars, so there was 

participation. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, I am, just to set the record straight, 

I am glad that you had two people there. I’m just shocked that 

your own memos from your department indicated very clearly 

that there would be nobody there. There seems to be no 

direction form your department whatsoever. You say one thing 

and do the other, and it leads me to wonder about all your 

grandiose statements about the co-operative movement in other 

areas of these estimates. I wonder what we can believe and what 

we can’t. 

 

I want to turn to the government reorganization and the great 

fiasco where you were renting out the fifth floor of Credit 

Union Central for quite a number of months after the 

department shuffle. I was in there a couple of times just to 

observe it, and it was appalling to me to see that really nice 

office space sitting totally, or virtually totally, idle. 

 

I shouldn’t say totally because there was a computer that takes 

certainly less space than our of our desks here in the legislature, 

and there was also three employees in a building that . . . or the 

fifth floor of which is many, many times the size that’s 

required. I estimated it’s something like 10,000 square feet, and 

I could have been out by virtually any amount, but it’s certainly 

a huge, huge area. 

 

Why couldn’t your department have planned the timing of the 

government reorganization and the cut-back of personnel sot 

hat you could have avoided that unnecessary space problem and 

saved the taxpayers of Saskatchewan more than $12,000 per 

month? Surely to goodness it’s not too much to ask that when 

you’re doing a reorganization, that take place. 

 

And I further submit to you, Mr. Minister, that if you had a 

long-term lease and knew you could not get out of it, surely to 

goodness there was some summer student employment 

programs that could have well utilized that space. Right on the 

edge of downtown Regina, it would have been just an ideal 

space for some summer employment. And again I draw it back 

to the student employment situation. They could have used that 

space, and it would have been, I’m sure, most welcome. 

 

But my question is: why couldn’t you figure out and handle a 

simple down-sizing or move of people so that you didn’t wind 

up wasting what appears to be well in excess of $50,000 of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money? 

 

(1145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I cited last night, 

this House is going on a long time because of the same 

questions being asked time and time again. This question and 

my answer was given in question period; however, the member 

opposite sees fit to use the time of these estimates to ask a 

question that would best be asked under the estimates of SPMC, 

of which I’m the  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3060 

 

minister, Saskatchewan Property Management Crown, and I 

will be more than willing to address the questions at that point 

in time. 

 

But I just want to state a couple of facts here that I think are 

interesting. If you analyse what the member opposite is saying, 

Mr. Chairman, you will see that his rationale, his rationale for 

amalgamation, for slimming and trimming the delivery of 

government service to make it more efficient, should be driven, 

should be driven by the leases on government buildings. 

 

Now I fail to see the rationale behind that. We have, and the 

Leader of the Opposition knows, and the members of the front 

bench know, government has a multiplicity of leases across this 

province — a large number in the city of Regina. So to say that 

you should not realign the Department of Tourism, Co-ops and 

Small Business until the lease is up on the Credit Union Central 

building, I cannot see the rationale for that at all, and I doubt if 

anyone else in Saskatchewan can. 

 

And then secondly, to come along and say, just as he did a 

couple of minutes ago, well, Mr. Minister, if you couldn’t bring 

the realignment when the lease come up, then surely if you 

wanted to realign, you should have filled the space up again. 

 

Now if you fill the space up with people, Mr. Chairman, it costs 

you money — it costs you money. So here is the member 

opposite saying on one hand . . . I hear him stand up and say to 

my colleague, the Minister of Finance, we want you to balance 

the budget. And in the next breath, he stands up to me and says, 

you’ve got a place in Regina that’s empty; fill it up this summer 

with more employees. How do you wash that? One hand, it’s 

here; the other hand, it’s here. 

 

I cannot understand the rationale of your statements. First of all, 

do not realign until the leases in the building run out. And then 

secondly, if the leases in the building continue, for God sakes, 

don’t leave it open, go out and hire a whole bunch more people 

to fill the building. 

 

Now I hope that you never ever get the opportunity to be in the 

financial decisions of a government in this province of 

Saskatchewan, because if that would ever be the kind of 

rationale you would use, it would be a disastrous situation. 

 

I would like to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member from 

Regina Centre should really well know and discipline his 

member in the back for such a ludicrous and ridiculous 

statement. On one hand, never down-size until the lease is gone 

— don’t down-size until the lease is gone. That’s the driving 

thing in the efficiency of government. Run government by 

leases on buildings. And secondly, if you can’t do that, then fill 

’em up, hire more people and fill ‘em up because, my God, 

you’ve got some empty space. But I can tell you we’re looking 

at trying to bring people into that space from other sectors, not 

that it will cost the government. If we can get out of the lease 

and have that good space used by something else that will 

develop and diversify this province, that’s what I think we 

should be doing. 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, you first of all rant and rave about 

the time it’s taking us in this legislature, then you proceed to 

rant and rave for Lord knows how long. I don’t think you need 

a clock, I think you need a calendar when you’re on your feet 

speaking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — We had the spectacle of yesterday, your minister 

from Weyburn boring us to tears for more than an hour with a 

speech we’ve heard him give many times in this very session — 

many times. And you have the gall to accuse us of holding up 

the session and taking up your time. Well I’d say you’ve got an 

awful lot of gall. 

 

You talk about a lease of the Credit Union Central building, and 

you talk about, gee, well what should we do? We’re just going 

to empty it. I said to you — and you know very well what I said 

— why didn’t you look for some summer employment jobs. 

There must have been some student job creation programs that 

by the very nature of them last only through the summer. For 

those job creation programs, those student job creation 

programs, there are offices needed. There’s administrative 

offices needed somewhere, and I am merely pointing out to you 

that the government had at its complete disposal some very 

first-rate, excellent offices that you could have played football 

in them and it wouldn’t have bothered a soul. 

 

And I’m certainly not saying empty offices and fill them up. 

I’m saying that when you’ve got some short-term jobs that you 

know are going to end at the end of the summer, and you know 

your lease is going to last at least that long, move those jobs 

into those vacant offices rather than going out somewhere else 

and buying or renting other office space for them. 

 

You talk about financial responsibility, and you say you’re glad 

that I and my party are not responsible for the budget of 

Saskatchewan. Well it’s obvious you are not responsible; you 

have accumulated a deficit well in excess of $3 billion in just 

over five years. 

 

I remind you that the New Democratic Party before that had 11, 

11 successive surplus budgets — 11 in a row, not a deficit to be 

found in the whole works of them. You have yet to deliver a 

single surplus budget, and I don’t think you ever will because 

you are the incompetent fiscal managers. 

 

You can’t count; you get the Minister of Finance on his feet 

talking about the Saskatoon telephone directory. I was in the 

Crown Corporations Committee when he gave us the definitive 

number of how many mistakes there were. Today in question 

period the member for Regina Centre pointed out he was out by 

more than 100 per cent, and yet not very long ago he was giving 

us “the” definitive amount. 

 

That’s your Minister of Finance and obviously he can’t count, 

and I don’t think you can count one bit better. So I don’t think 

you can talk to members on this side of the House about how to 

look after the province, how to manage money, how to keep 

people working, how to see that the Department of 

Co-operatives, co-operation and  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3061 

 

co-operative development expands and helps people make life 

better for themselves. I just don’t think you’ve got any 

credibility at all in that area. 

 

I asked you, Mr. Minister, a simple question about that office 

reorganization, and it was: why didn’t the department plan its 

timing so that that government reorganization would not result 

in many months of empty office space at a huge cost to 

Saskatchewan’s taxpayers? On one hand we get the Minister of 

Social Services talking about cutting back welfare and saving at 

times up to $200,000 a month. Wonderful? Save some money. 

 

But on the other hand we have a spectacle of your department, 

the department of co-ops just blowing into the wind in excess of 

$50,000 for phantom employees, for empty air space. I would 

like to know why you can’t manage the department and the 

department reorganization in a much more efficient manner 

than you did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well simply put, as I told you a whole 

ago, because there are ways that one looks at reorganization 

rather than when the leases on the buildings run out. If you 

can’t understand that, I’m not going to spend my time to tell 

you again. 

 

However I will say once more that, and anyone who is watching 

can check the Hansard — I’ll supply the Hansard — where 

you’ll see the same question raised in question period, the same 

answers given. But the member opposite and the party opposite 

feel it is in the best interests of Saskatchewan to waste the time 

of this House and ask repetitive questions. If you check through 

the Hansard, you will see that time after time after time. 

 

And I’m getting phone calls from people saying, what’s going 

on; how much is this costing per day? And certainly they are 

concerned. They are concerned with the repetitive questions. 

They certainly are very concerned with the actions of the 

opposition in this government, and they know that it is costing 

thousands of dollars a day to continue the operation of this 

Legislative Assembly which this session has been one of the 

longest that has taken place in recent years. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, this spring prior to the 

reorganization of the department of co-operation and 

co-operative development, did the North Battleford telestation 

co-op receive a $2 million loan guarantee from this department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m informed that just the former 

department of co-ops did give a loan guarantee to the company 

that you have indicated of approximately — and I say 

approximately; I’ll get you the exact figure — but 

approximately $1.3 million. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, who suggested that that loan . . . 

Who brought the thing forward? Who’s the principals involved 

in that loan? And who ultimately authorized that loan 

guarantee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m informed that the loan guarantee was 

for 1.2 million. I said 1.3 a minute ago. One million two, and it 

was for refinancing existing, and financing and  

an expansion for The Battlefords community cable co-op. And 

the guarantee was made to the co-op. 

 

I don’t know who all the principals were in there. This was 

made in 11 of August, ’86, prior to the amalgamation. But I will 

have my officials go back through the records of the previous 

department to get that for you if it’s your desire to have that. I 

can’t give you the names right here, but we will certainly 

research it for you if you want that information. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I most certainly do want that information, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

You said a moment ago you don’t know all of the principals. 

Do you know any of the principals? And to be a little more 

specific, can you give me the name of the president of that 

particular co-op? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’ll have to supply that. We will 

certainly supply it to you. We don’t have that information with 

us right now. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Were any of the officials involved then, the 

officials that you have now? Or why is it that the officials don’t 

seem to recall anything about that? 

 

(1200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The officials that were involved with that 

transaction have been moved to Consumer Affairs. They’re not 

officials that I have retained in my department. 

 

Mr. Trew: — So we have a reorganization designed partly so 

that we can’t get some answers. We will. 

 

Mr. Minister, to my knowledge the department of co-operation 

and co-operative development has never guaranteed a loan of 

that magnitude ever before. I might be wrong, but tell me, when 

is the last loan guarantee, and what amount? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My indications are or my information is 

that it was four or five years since there was a loan guarantee 

previously. I don’t know the magnitude of these, whether the 

department or not had guaranteed to Co-op Implements. We 

will look into that. It seems to my knowledge, when we first 

took over the government in ’82, that there was some loans to 

Co-op Implements in Winnipeg that came up for discussion, but 

that’s some years ago now. 

 

However, I will get you that information of what loan 

guarantees there have been. I think you realize that this is back 

in the co-op department before the amalgamation, so I think it’s 

understandable that it’ll take a little bit of time. I will get you 

the principal. So if you would just reiterate so we get it exactly 

correct what you want, we would be more than pleased to 

supply it. 

 

Mr. Trew: — So you’ve told me that it is clearly not a common 

practice for that department to have made loan guarantees. 

 

It made a loan guarantee quite a number of years ago  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3062 

 

when a machinery co-operative manufacturer, in other words 

Co-op Implements, was in some financial distress — a 

machinery manufacturing co-operative that provided equipment 

all across Saskatchewan, in Manitoba, and in Alberta. And 

indeed, the interests of many, many farmers were at stake there. 

Then we had a loan guarantee, but certainly a loan guarantee to 

a cable co-op is very, very unusual. It is not common practice, 

to put it mildly. 

 

The reorganization also adds a little bit of cover and smoke to 

what did go on there. I’d be most interested, Mr. Minister, to 

get to the bottom of that whole transaction because it is very 

unusual that just before you have a government reorganization, 

you suddenly have a loan guarantee in the magnitude of $1.2 

million. It’s just remarkable that you would wait until the 11th 

hour and then have that loan guarantee at that time. 

 

I’m going to take a short break from this right now, and the 

member for Regina Centre has a few questions he’d like to 

address to you. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I want to join my 

colleague from Regina north in decrying the incompetence and 

mismanagement which this department has exhibited. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is not acceptable practice to leave office space 

vacant for many months. It’s not acceptable for your 

government to do it. It’s not acceptable for other governments 

to do it. We don’t believe that, and I can assure you the public 

doesn’t believe that. 

 

Mr. Minister, in a day when you are cutting back on drugs, on 

drug care for people; in a day, Mr. Minister, when . . . Well if 

you want to . . . if the member form Souris-Cannington wants to 

attend any drugstore in this city and talk to the people who are 

paying for drugs, you’ll call it a cut-back. I’m not sure what you 

call it, but I know what the public call it. 

 

Mr. Minister, in a day when you haven’t got the money to feed 

people — and we witness the growth of food banks — at a time 

when you’re cutting back on health care, to be so sloppy and 

incompetent as to leave expensive office space vacant for 

months with nothing but a computer on it is not an acceptable 

way to run a government. And if that’s what you’re suggesting, 

Mr. Minister, then you’re going to get a rude awakening at the 

time of the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I can assure you it’s not acceptable to the 

public of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, you’re spending 40 per cent more now than you 

were the last year we were in office. Inflation has gone up by 30 

per cent. There’s a 10 per cent real growth in your expenditures, 

and yet you haven’t got the money to do any number of things 

which badly need to be done. And the reason for that, Mr. 

Minister, is because of the gross incompetence with which this 

government manages its affairs. 

No government leaves office space of this size vacant for as 

long as you did, and none try to justify it by saying it’s 

necessary. It isn’t necessary, and if you believe it is, Mr. 

Minister, then the public are going to elect a government which 

will say it isn’t necessary and we’re not going to do it any more. 

 

So I may say . . . I say, Mr. Minister, that . . . I say, Mr. 

Minister, that if that’s the best sort of forward planning you can 

do, you’re not fit to hold office, and you won’t hold office very 

much longer, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I ask you again, Mr. Minister, to stand up 

in this House and tell us that leaving office space vacant for 

many months is an acceptable way to run a government. I just 

want to hear that again from you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well the first thing I will admit to, that 

when you want to talk to an expert about losing office, he just 

spoke. You were the fellow, as my colleague said today, that 

was dumped from the cabinet of the government some time ago 

for complete incompetence. 

 

I remember the report. I’m thinking of the author that you 

authorized him to do the report. And if you can think of this, the 

most nonsensical kind of suggestion that I have ever heard in 

this legislature — within that report that that member paid for 

when he was a minister, that there should be televisions on the 

snowmobiles of the trappers in the North. 

 

I concur, I concur wholeheartedly with the Leader of the 

Opposition for dumping him. So when you want to talk about 

mismanagement and knowing how to run amok, I just can’t 

understand. 

 

I think the only mistake you made, you might as well have put 

all your eggs in one basket and put him in charge of DNS 

(Department of Northern Saskatchewan), because I can 

remember what George . . . Judge Hughes said about DNS: a 

department run amok. Well you might as well take the member 

from Regina Centre and put him in there and get a fine job of it 

rather than having one of your other ministers waste his time on 

that. 

 

However, getting back to the management of, getting back to 

the management of space, as you well know, as you well know 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — You’re not in the North. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well we may be out of the North, but 

you’re still in the woods, my friend. You’re in the woods, and 

have been for some time — two elections you were in the 

woods wondering which way the path out was, and 

unfortunately you never found it, thank God for Saskatchewan. 

 

But let me tell you, and you know real well, if we want to 

discuss space and leases and so on, when my estimates on 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3063 

 

Corporation) come up, we will do that. But at this point in time 

we’re talking about Tourism, Small Business and 

Co-operatives, and that is the matter under discussion, Mr. 

Chairman. I think in the expediency of doing good dialogue and 

debate in this House we should keep to the estimates that are 

under debate. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, that is typical of you and 

your colleagues that when you don’t have an answer you launch 

into some nonsensical personal attack. 

 

Mr. Minister, I may say I don’t recall the report which 

suggested we put televisions on ski-doos. I can imagine some 

interesting, not only financial problems but engineering 

problems with the suggestion as well. But, Mr. Minister, I 

wonder if you would like to deal with your estimates and not 

the estimates of some past minister who believed apparently 

that we ought to put television sets on snowmobiles. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you want to talk about this year? And 

I wonder if you want to just stand up again? I really want to 

hear you stand up again and tell this Assembly that it’s 

acceptable to cut the grants for co-operative development, 

which you’ve done, and instead spend it on empty office space. 

That’s what you’re doing. 

 

I have said, Mr. Minister, that the expenditures of this 

government are up by 40 per cent in the years you’ve been in 

office. Inflation has gone up by 30 per cent, so you had a 10 per 

cent real growth in expenditures, and yet you haven’t got the 

money for the drug plan, you haven’t got the money for day 

care, you haven’t got the money for the women’s transitional 

houses. What you apparently have is all kinds of money for 

vacant office space. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’re really 

prepared to justify leaving office space vacant and cutting the 

grants for co-operative development. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There is no cut of grants for co-operative 

development, first of all. And then secondly, as you . . . I doubt 

if you would understand this, but I will try very slowly to 

explain it to you. Well it would be wonderful. You mightn’t be 

bale to hear it because the chirping member form Moose Jaw is 

at it again. 

 

However, let me indicate to you that there are such things as 

leases, right? And if you have a lease on a building, you’ve got 

two options. You buy out, if you wish, or you go the extension 

of the lease. 

 

So certainly that is what . . . and let me go a little bit further in 

this little lesson to you. As you down-size, you’re going to need 

less space. Does that make sense, as you down-size? So 

therefore you’re going to have some surplus space which you 

have leases to hold you to or else buy out. So therefore you’ve 

looked at two options, either to buy out of those leases, or to try 

and find other groups that can come in. 

 

Now your colleague says, no, no. He said, you don’t do that; 

you wouldn’t go to the private sector to see if there’s someone 

who would want that space and try and negotiate and help both 

Credit Union and ourselves get out of a lease of space we don’t 

need. He said, no, you wouldn’t do that. He said, rush out, hire 

a bunch of  

people for the summer, and fill up the space. Well I don’t agree 

with that kind of action. 

 

But for you to stand in here and say grants were cut because of 

space, is simply not correct because there were no grants cut. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I’ll get to that in a moment, Mr. Minister. 

 

In the ’86-87 fiscal year there was 152,500 for grants for 

co-operative development. The figure is now vacant, with no 

explanatory note saying it’s been moved elsewhere. 

 

I really want to talk, Mr. Minister, about this system you have 

for forward planning. Mr. Minister, business people all the time 

deal with expansions or contractions of business, and I’ve done 

it in my own business. What you do when the lease is up, then 

you make a move, you make some changes. Until the lease is 

up you live with what you’ve got. 

 

But of course I and other business men . . . And we’re spending 

our own money. You’re spending the taxpayers’ money and it’s 

a bottomless pit to you, and who cares if the office space sits 

vacant. No private business man would do that with his own 

money, and you ought to have at least the same respect for the 

taxpayers’ money. But you don’t because it’s a bottomless pit 

and who cares. 

 

I’ll tell you who cares, Mr. Minister — the public care. The 

taxpayers are demanding of you a more business-like approach 

to government. If you’re not prepared to give it, then you will 

reach a day when you’ll have to stand aside for someone who 

will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well as I say I don’t want to get into a 

dialogue on space under these estimates. We’ll do it in the 

other. And when we get into those I will certainly be able to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Let’s go back to television sets on 

ski-doos. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, it would be interesting to look back 

and we will do our background on that. And I think we’ll look 

at Avord Towers in the ’70s and we’ll look at some of the 

buildings and some of the leases you had, but we’ll do that 

under the appropriate estimates. 

 

Regarding the grant as you see it, to the co-operative 

development, as is on page 92 in the Estimates, certainly that 

was the end of that agreement so there wasn’t a cut of a grant at 

all. The agreement came to an end and that’s why you see a 

figure there. Well you laugh. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well, indeed we do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Did you ever hear of an agreement . . . 

The Leader of the Opposition chortles. He doesn’t understand 

that sometimes some agreements come to an end. And if the 

agreement comes to an end, then it would seem folly for me to 

have to put money in for an  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3064 

 

agreement that was open. I don’t know where you see the 

difference. 

 

Let me go at it again for you. If an agreement has come to an 

end in a budgetary year, then why would you budget more 

money for an agreement that you wouldn’t have? 

 

(1215) 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well let me give you some assistance, Mr. 

Minister, with that. Mr. Minister, previous governments 

previous to this have seen a value in co-operative development. 

It has been seen as a Saskatchewan way of doing things. Rather 

than have others control our resources and control this province 

we’ve wanted to do it ourself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — And it’s been a pretty successful way of 

doing it, Mr. Minister. It’s been a very successful way of doing 

it. We’ve succeeded when we’ve done it ourselves, and we’ve 

failed miserably when we’ve called upon others to come and do 

it for us. Your approach may be open for business — a call for 

others to come and do the job for us. Our approach has been to 

do it ourselves. And that, Mr. Minister, in the history of this 

province has been the successful approach. That’s why there’ve 

been grants for co-operative development. 

 

Mr. Minister, for some decades there have been grants to 

co-operative development to assist co-operatives in starting, just 

as there are grants for private business. It’s not different. Mr. 

Minister, you have done away with that program. If you’re 

hiding your lamp under a bushel and it’s somewhere else, I 

wish you’d tell me. 

 

Mr. Minister, you’ve done away with the program for grants for 

co-operative development. There are grants for business 

development, but there are none for co-operative development. 

Mr. Minister, your government simply doesn’t believe that 

there’s any worthwhile reason to promote co-operatives. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Business grants are good enough. Why 

no co-ops too? 

 

Mr. Shillington: — My colleague says, quite rightly, business 

grants are fine and dandy but apparently not co-operative 

grants. 

 

What it tells me is you don’t believe in the Saskatchewan way 

of doing things, because while we have given support and 

encouragement to Saskatchewan businesses, we’ve also done 

that with respect to co-operatives, and both kinds of economic 

development have benefited the people of this province. You 

have a narrow approach, Mr. Minister. You don’t believe in 

co-operative development and thus you’ve cut the program for 

grants for co-operative development which we have had for 

decades and which heretofore have not depended on any sort of 

agreement, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I listened with interest to the  

member form Regina Centre talking about — we did it our way, 

and how good that was the way that you did it. And I just want 

to cite one of the examples of the way you did it, doing it your 

way, the socialist way, and I want to talk about the . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No, not the Saskatchewan way — 

there’s a big difference there — the socialist way. And that is 

the Prince Albert . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Allow the member to make 

his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I will tell you about doing it their way. 

And I want to cite, for example, the Prince Albert Pulp 

Company, the Prince Albert Pulp Company that was losing 

approximately 90,000 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, you 

asked about doing it your way, and this was one of your babies, 

$90,000 a day. It was losing about $90,000 a day, Mr. Speaker, 

approximately the same amount of money that it may be costing 

to run this institution day after day. Ninety thousand dollars a 

day is a lot of money in most people’s minds. So this was one 

of their ways of doing it. 

 

And then we brought in our way. And they say, don’t ever let 

an outsider come in. They’re evil, they’re bad, they won’t help 

you develop. Well I can tell you, because of the initiatives that 

we’ve taken, the Prince Albert Pulp Company is not losing 

$91,000 a day. We have the Weyerhaeuser plant in there that is 

functioning well, is making money, paying taxes to this 

province, and more than that, building a paper mill that never 

would have been build under the government opposite. 

 

So don’t tell me about our way and your way. Certainly your 

way was to buy potash mines, to buy holes in the ground that 

were there, to not create one more job. The people of 

Saskatchewan know about your way. They spoke about your 

way in ’82, they spoke about your way in ’86, and they will 

speak about your way the next time the polls are called in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And they will give you the same 

resounding message of the old-fashioned methods of the social 

governments across this country do not meet the needs of today. 

 

I listened with interest the other day as I was driving home, on 

my car radio, to hear the complete change by the Labour 

government in Britain. The Labour government in Britain was 

saying the old methods, the old ways will not satisfy the needs 

of the next century and of Britain today. And I think Maggie 

Thatcher showed it to them three times in a row, and we’re 

going to show you the same thing here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Irregardless of which Boy Wonder 

happens to be the leader. We will show you the next thing. 

Screw up your courage, stick with your old mentality of 

socialism, stick with your centralization, stick with the idea of 

not letting anyone come in and help build this province, because 

that is exactly opposite to what the people in Saskatchewan 

want to see and want to  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3065 

 

hear delivered here. 

 

So I want to tell you, you can stand here, and the more you 

want to stand in this legislature and say, we want to do it our 

way, the old NDP way, the buy the control and not build and 

not develop, you stand up and you can talk here for four hours 

because you’re just helping re-elect me, the member from 

Souris-Cannington, and everyone else in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, in your view, is 

your government going to screw up enough courage to put it to 

the test and have a by-election in Eastview . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I have a lot of responsibility in this 

government, but I must be humble and tell you, when the 

election in Eastview is called is certainly not my prerogative. 

That is up to the Premier, and I am sure he will do it when he 

sees that it is the time to serve the needs of that constituency. 

And I would just say to you, keep talking, get up here, because 

it’ll do nothing but help us in Eastview. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well if the polls are to be believed, Mr. 

Minister, you need all the help you can get in Eastview. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, some of my colleagues want 

to get into these estimates. 

 

I have some questions that I would like some answers for. Mr. 

Minister, with respect to the guaranteed loans, I would 

appreciate a statement — it would be more useful in writing 

than it would be given orally — I would appreciate a statement 

of all of the outstanding loans, all of the arrears, and with a 

statement of all the loans and arrears . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Yes, that’s right, the ones that the Co-Op Guarantee Board 

has guaranteed. I’d appreciate a statement of all the loans, those 

in arrears. With respect to those arrears, when the last payment 

was received. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, we’ll provide that for you. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — When may I expect that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Just as soon as we have it ready. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have waited years for 

something that has been sitting on the minister’s desk. I 

wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could undertake to get it to me. I 

suspect your officials could get it ready in an hour or so. I 

wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’d undertake to get that to me 

within two weeks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — How about 8:30 Monday morning? 

 

Mr. Shillington: — That will do, Mr. Minister. Mr.  

Minister, some of my colleagues have questions and I’m going 

to yield the floor to them. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question is to the minister, and I’m wondering if he can give me 

an update on the future of Canapharm in this province. I know 

that he is familiar with Canapharm because it’s located in his 

constituency. 

 

I understand it has been sold. I’m wondering if the minister can 

give us some details on how the company is doing in light of 

the new sale. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well yes, on this side of the House we’re 

proud of being able to diversify the economy and move into the 

intravenous solution production here in Saskatchewan, and I 

would hope . . . It may be that you would be more inclined, and 

I’d like to hear your points on this, to buy from the 

multinational companies. That may be your viewpoint. 

Certainly it is not ours. 

 

We feel that we can produce that can be consumed here in 

Saskatchewan, especially in the field of health care, is very 

good diversification and development. Because as you well 

know, that if there’s an expanding field in Saskatchewan due to 

the ageing population, it will be in the consumption of health 

related supplies. 

 

One can look at intravenous solutions, and I think you’re 

somewhat knowledgeable in this, that through home care we 

can be doing more home feeding and things of this nature with 

solutions, that would prevent people from occupying hospital 

beds, because often the elderly become run-down, simply 

run-down, and with some addition of home-feeding they can be 

brought back very quickly. They do not become susceptible to 

any contagious disease that’s around, and therefore do not end 

up occupying a hospital bed where I don’t like to see them. 

Personally, if a person can be kept out of a hospital and living 

well — and I think that’s what you and I all want to see happen, 

and I hope you would endorse those. 

 

Now I don’t now if you are more interested in dealing with the 

multinationals in the drug company. I can say on this side we’re 

not. Because of that we encouraged the Canapharm to develop 

and certainly it’s something that I think many people in 

Saskatchewan are proud of. When they had their product tested 

at the food and drug, the Canadian regulations, it tested as 

above many of the products, one of the best in North America. 

 

And like many starting companies there is, I guess if one learns 

something from being on the economic development side, it’s 

that with new companies, I guess if there’s a problem that face 

many of them is number one, they have an idea and they know 

how to make a product, but it is that first year and a half of 

financing to get up and get your markets. And then secondly, I 

think, to have those sales and markets. And yes, I’m looking 

across the piece, and that I think is rather a general comment. 

 

However, how is it doing? You know that I cannot, and I would 

not be right, and I do not have, I’m not privy to any part of the 

deal, and I don’t think you’re asking me to outline that in a 

forum like this because that is not what the legislature is for, is 

to delve into private deals. But the  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3066 

 

Canapharm plant has been sold to . . . now I cannot give you the 

. . . I think they have a new name here, but it was called 

Magnetics. But I think it’s a new name in Saskatchewan which 

is a group, Montreal based if my memory serves me correctly, 

who are very interested in what I described to you at the 

beginning in developing products for the health market, because 

it looks like a growing and an expanding. market. And from all 

reports that I have heard, the sale went well. 

 

The new company brings some expertise, probably that was 

needed, to the company. And the report that I’ve had to date is 

that it is moving quite well. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think that you would 

acknowledge that a great deal of taxpayers’ money went into 

the creation of Canapharm in your constituency of Wolseley 

through venture capital corporation, as I understand it. 

 

We now have gotten word that this company has been basically 

sold to a company that for the most part exists outside of 

Canada; it’s not a Canadian company. And I’m just wondering 

if you could advise me, Mr. Minister, how many hospitals have 

purchased Canapharm intravenous solution instead of going 

with their former contracts? Can you give us that kind of 

information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That would be better asked to the Health 

minister, but I will give you an approximate, a ball park figure, 

because I’m just going from memory of what I have heard in 

the last while. The company, I think you are wrong in saying 

that the company is an international company. The company is 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it’s a Canadian company. So 

I think, you know, you should check our facts there, because it 

is a Canadian company. 

 

The employment, the number of people — in fact the 

opportunity for employment in Saskatchewan is apt to increase. 

The employment number of Saskatchewan people has not 

decreased. The product is being consumed and bought by more 

hospitals in Saskatchewan all the time. 

 

I understand, and as I said, I would give you a ball park figure, 

and I’m not wanting to say this is carved in stone, but it’s pretty 

close — and my figure that comes to mind is approximately 52. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you give us any 

information as to how hospitals have felt about being pushed 

into accepting Canapharm intravenous solutions? I’ve gotten a 

great deal of feedback from hospitals all over this province that 

they are being told to purchase Canapharm solutions, that they 

can no longer go where they think they can get the best deal and 

the best quality deal. 

 

(1230) 

 

We have a situation where there’s a minister responsible for 

“Buy Saskatchewan,” and I understand that he regularly, if a 

hospital is reluctant, calls up the chair of the board, or calls up 

the administrator, or has one of the hacks call up and say, 

you’re to buy Canapharm  

solutions. What sort of business process is that? Hospitals 

should be able to go where they think they can get the best buy 

and the best quality buy. 

 

I understand, Mr. Minister, that hospitals are concerned about 

the quality of the tubing. And I notice the members over there 

aren’t very happy about what I have to say. The truth hurts, 

doesn’t it? The truth hurts. And I’m simply reporting to this 

House what people all over this province are telling me. 

 

Now my question to you is: what sort of heavy-handed tactics 

are those when you have ministers and hacks phoning up 

hospital chairpeople and administrators and saying, you shall 

buy Canapharm if you want to continue to get your funding? 

What sort of a process is that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, when 

that member . . . And I want to go back, I want to go back a 

little bit. In the other day in the House I saw something 

interesting happen here. 

 

I know that the member opposite, who is the critic for Health in 

the opposition, has a . . . And I’ve watched this since her 

becoming a member in here, and it seems to me that she has a 

tendency to want to, shall I say, exaggerate what is the actual 

fact. And there was time and time, and I think she got her wings 

clipped pretty good by the druggists — the pharmaceutical 

association who took her to task for statements that she had 

made that were not exactly as the world was turning. 

 

And I want to point out something that was very interesting the 

other day. Day after day after day, the critic for Health asked 

questions in this legislature about health . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Absolutely. 

 

But a very strange thing happened the other day. The other day 

my colleague, the Health Minister, wasn’t here, so being the 

Acting Health Minister I was answering the question. The 

member, the Health critic, was sitting in her seat, but for some 

reason the member from Moose Jaw, who is the Culture critic, 

rose to ask a Health question, not related to Moose Jaw but 

related to Regina. 

 

So that makes we wonder what has happened. And I think the 

new and aspiring leader of the NDP is beginning to jerk a few 

chains on the other side and say, you’ve been drawing a wild 

bow, a long bow, and if you can’t ask the questions correctly, 

I’m going to give it to someone else. And I think that’s why he 

gave it to the fine little member from Moose Jaw to try and ask 

it in a most sincere manner, because he believed that he 

wouldn’t give in to gross exaggeration. 

 

So when the member, the Health critic who is just questioning, 

gets up and says, I have representation from all over 

Saskatchewan — I can’t put an awful lot of confidence in that 

kind of statement because of her past record. Obviously she is 

inclined to try and exaggerate and say a couple or three 

representations is a whole bunch from all over Saskatchewan. 

And I can tell you that that will only hurt your credibility, as a 

politician. But you make that choice yourself if you continue 

upon that tack. 

 

Now it becomes very obvious, very obvious from her  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3067 

 

statements in this House today — very, very obvious — that 

she is opposed to a Buy Saskatchewan program, that she does 

not believe that it is in the best interests of the province of 

Saskatchewan that where we can produce a product of 

acceptable and equal standard to anything else in the market, in 

fact better, where we can put jobs right here in the province of 

Saskatchewan, that that isn’t the right thing to do; that it’s better 

to go with some international companies. 

 

And I will tell you one thing, Madam Member, that you’re 

probably not aware of, that the year before Canapharm coming 

on stream, the cost of the intravenous solutions in this province 

— and I’d like you to listen to this — the cost of the 

intravenous solutions increased 30 per cent, because we’re 

basically under a monopolistic situation. 

 

So let me tell you, I can believe this cuts down costs. It also 

provides a product that is built here in Saskatchewan, and those 

are the things that we are going to have to do as a government 

and a province if we’re going to diversify the economy of this 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Lo and behold! we look out and the price of wheat today is 2.52 

or something of this nature. We have countervails and 

anti-dumping on our potash. We’re fighting today to get free 

trade with the United States that is eminently important to the 

future of the economy of this province, and there are those who 

will stand in the elected positions and say we shouldn’t build it 

at home; we shouldn’t try and develop it at home; and we 

should be dealing with multinational companies and 

international companies. I don’t believe that. 

 

I believe that what we can do in Saskatchewan here, to use 

Saskatchewan resources to give employment for Saskatchewan 

people, to supply Saskatchewan needs, is exactly what the 

Government of Saskatchewan should be doing, and we will 

continue to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well I really did appreciate the lecture from 

the minister. Mr. Minister, for your information, and you should 

be aware of this, Mr. Minister, I am not the critic for continuing 

care or home care. The member from Moose Jaw South is the 

critic. I have never handled any of the details when it comes to 

home care or nursing home care in this House. You are sadly 

misinformed, Mr. Minister — you’re sadly misinformed. The 

obvious thing here is that you don’t pay attention to detail, Mr. 

Minister, and that’s quite evident, by virtue of the fact that you 

have given us this long harangue and there’s been very little 

details contained in your long harangue. You didn’t bother to 

answer the question, and you wasted the time of this legislature. 

 

Now if we want to talk about credibility, Mr. Minister, I’d like 

to talk about your credibility and your government’s credibility. 

You’re the government that promised a 10 per cent reduction in 

personal income tax. And lo and behold! we’re here in the fall 

of 1987, and we’ve received a one and one-half per cent flat tax. 

That’s the work of your government. You’re the government 

that promised to do away with the E&H tax or the sales tax. Lo 

and behold! it’s risen to 7 per cent and we’re debating a Bill.  

No credibility, Mr. Minister, no credibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You’re the government that in 1982 

promised to do away, eliminate the gas tax, and lo and behold! 

in 1987, the fall of 1987, we have a gas tax of 7 per cent. No 

credibility, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You’re the government that in 1978 and in 

1982 and again in 1986 promised the people of this province 

that their health care system was a sacred trust and you would 

never do anything to dismantle it. And lo and behold! in 1987, 

fall of 1987, we’ve had the drug plan virtually eliminated and 

people have to pay for up-front drug costs. We’ve had the 

dental plan virtually eliminated. Children over the age of 14 no 

longer have the plan, and children under the age of 14, their 

parents have to take them to the plan. And you have had 

criticism from people around this province about what you’re 

doing to the health care system. 

 

You’re the government that underfunds hospitals in Saskatoon 

to such an extent that cancer patients are waiting six weeks to 

get into hospital, and that’s not an exaggeration. And you 

accuse us of having no credibility. What a joke. You’re the 

government with no credibility; you’re the government. And if 

you think that the polls show you people having any credibility, 

you are sadly mistaken. You are reading the figures upside 

down, Mr. Minister. You have no credibility. Ask people 

around this province what they think of you. They hold you in 

disdain because of what you’ve done to the people of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now I simply have a question, Mr. Minister. 

It’s short and snappy. We don’t want a long speech, just answer 

it. 

 

I want to know whether or not you have had any kind of 

complaints or concerns from hospitals about the tubing 

associated with the Canapharm intravenous solution. Have you 

had any concerns expressed, and have there been any hospitals 

that have done quality controlled studies that will not take the 

product because of their concern over the tubing . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. The estimates before 

the committee is Tourism, Small Business and Co-operatives. 

Order. I find that the questioning is getting quite far-ranging 

and I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the questions seem to 

be getting into the Health field in a technical sense. Order. In a 

technical sense the questions are getting into a Health field, and 

I would ask members to stick to Tourism and Small Business 

estimates. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — This is the Minister of Tourism, Small 

Business and Co-ops. Canapharm is a business located here in 

Saskatchewan that sells intravenous solutions. It’s a health 

solution, associated with the health care field, but it is a 

business. This is the minister responsible, and I’m asking him 

some very specific questions about  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3068 

 

Canapharm, a business located here in Saskatchewan and 

therefore under his ministership. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s obvious that the 

member opposite does not accept your ruling, so I will answer 

as best I can the question that she has asked. I want to pre-empt 

them though by saying, once again we see this minister using 

inflammatory and misleading words, saying that there’s 

virtually no drug plan and virtually no dental plan and that is 

simply not correct. 

 

We still have one of the best drug plans and dental plans in the 

Dominion of Canada. For her to stand up and try and mislead 

like that, I cannot allow that type of thing to be said in here 

because it is simply misleading and not a correct reflection of 

what is the situation in Saskatchewan. 

 

She asked about the tubing in Canapharm. I said in my 

introductory remarks that certainly the solution was the best in 

the testing of the federal government, the best that there was in 

Canada — exceeded the requirements. And certainly there were 

some concerns expressed about the tubing. If the tubing is . . . 

once you get the good solution from the bag into the body of the 

person. And there were some concerns about that. 

 

Some hospitals ran tests, and I would cite as an example the 

Regina General Hospital who have used the Canapharm 

solution for quite some time. Most of the major hospitals are 

using it now, and I, having dealt for five years with the 

executive director of the Regina General Hospital and the board 

of the Regina General Hospital, people whom I know well and 

have a great deal of respect for . . . the chairman is a very 

understanding and outstanding man as well as the executive 

director and the staff there. 

 

And I guess to indicate or insinuate that some of these hospitals 

were questioning it and were wondering if this was safe would 

be kind of casting a slur upon what I think is an outstanding 

hospital which over the years that I was Health minister had a 

fantastic record for patient care. Certainly other hospitals will 

be testing the product . . . (inaudible) . . . That’s only correct. 

They should. 

 

And secondly, that they should compare price. We have no 

problem with that from the Buy Saskatchewan agency. We 

have, as I said previously in my remarks, where we can produce 

product of quality, where we can produce . . . (inaudible) . . . 

products of comparable price, where those products can use 

Saskatchewan resources and Saskatchewan people in creating 

jobs in Saskatchewan and paying tax in Saskatchewan, then I 

believe that’s the direction we should be going as we diversify 

this province, not only in small business but in all other aspects. 

 

And I could talk for a day and a half on that if you so wish me 

to, but that is the direction and that is the big difference between 

what we’re doing and what the government that was in here 

many years ago now — about seven years ago — was not. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I think it would be a fair 

assumption from people on this side of the House that  

we’re not opposed to a Buy Saskatchewan campaign. In fact we 

think it’s important that the people do support Saskatchewan 

businesses and Saskatchewan workers. 

 

I think the concern here, Mr. Minister, is that there are some 

hospitals who have brought to the government’s attention, I 

know, and to our attention, their concern over the quality of the 

tubing. The solution is not an issue. You wouldn’t be able to 

produce a solution if it hadn’t been passed by Health and 

Welfare Canada. 

 

So I just want to make that very clear to you, Mr. Minister, we 

have no problem with Buy Saskatchewan. We just want to 

ensure that people aren’t being forced to buy a product if they 

have some concerns about the quality of the tubing. 

 

(1245) 

 

And I think that’s a legitimate issue to raise with you, Mr. 

Minister. And I think you have a responsibility as minister 

responsible for Small Business, not to have your government 

pressure hospitals into accepting this product if they have some 

concern about the quality of the tubing associated with the 

intravenous solution. Would you not agree, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well as I said there has been no question 

about the quality of the solution. I think we agree on that. There 

was some concern about the tubing. They undergo tests which 

all of them do, which I agree with. But certainly, as minister in 

charge of Buy Saskatchewan, if those . . . And my people have 

worked many hours with them and have set up meetings, have 

looked at bringing in experts to look at this dealing with the 

new company that has taken over. I believe any of these 

concerns have been set aside. And as the minister in charge of 

Buy Saskatchewan, I go back to the premises upon which we 

operate, given comparable quality, given comparable price — 

providing jobs, using resources — then we are for that kind of 

development. 

 

And as the minister in charge of that which is under another set 

of estimates, but seeing we’re doing half the government today, 

I’ll talk about this, Mr. Chairman. We’re into Health, we’re into 

Buy Saskatchewan, we’re into property management, we’re 

doing a whole bundle today. So maybe this will help us and we 

won’t have to spend so many days of the taxpayers’ money, at 

$90,000, if we get a lot of them wrapped up today. So maybe a 

lot of the questions have been dealt with. 

 

You can see they’re very itchy. Every time you mention the 

amount of money that this legislature is costing the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, the magpies in the back row start to chirp and 

crow every time, the whole row of them. 

 

So I think we’ve touched a nerve, because I’ve been getting 

phone calls from very responsible people and they have been 

saying to me, what on earth are they doing asking repetitive 

questions, asking the same questions? Why would you, in all 

due respect, go on for 35 days in the Department of 

Environment estimates? People are beginning to wonder what’s 

taking place in here, and in times of restraint, and it is the 

opposition that shuts down any legislature, because when they 

quit asking questions,  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3069 

 

that’s when this place closes. 

 

And I can tell you that this figure is starting to gnaw at the 

hearts of the people of Saskatchewan. It’s a very similar, it’s 

very similar and let me make this connection again for you. 

And, Mr. Chairman, you’ll understand this because it comes up 

from near your seat where there was $90,000 a day in PAPCO 

(Prince Albert Pulp Company), and now it’s $90,000 a day, 

approximately, I guess, to operate this House. People are 

beginning to ask a few questions. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s interesting to 

have the minister’s comments about how badly beaten up the 

government members opposite are getting. They’re certainly 

feeling the heat from their constituents for your inaction and 

lack of action, your dismantling of the department of 

co-operation and co-operative development, for your 

mismanagement, for your incompetence. Obviously people are 

talking to you and they’re giving you the message and it’s 

finally starting to sink in, at least with that minister, that there’s 

real problems. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like a list from you of the salaries and 

expenses of your officials for this year and, included, any pay 

increases that they may have received. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Are you asking about my departmental 

officials? Is this who you want? The people around me here? 

 

Mr. Trew: — Yes, I’m asking departmental, ministerial, 

executive assistants. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — So we have it correct. You’re asking for 

the salaries of the people who work for me, and you mean the 

senior people and my staff, I assume. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And expenses. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And expenses, and if there were any 

raises. Yes, I’ll provide that. I’ll send it. It would have to come 

across later, I believe, but you have that commitment that I’ll 

give it to you. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Okay, thank you for that undertaking, Mr. 

Minister, and I will look forward to receiving that from you in 

due course — soon, I hope, and I think that’s the undertaking 

that we have. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government’s economic development 

strategy has shown your misunderstanding of the particular 

economic circumstances and the traditions of Saskatchewan. 

We have here a unique mix of private enterprise, of public 

enterprise, and of a co-operative sector of the economy. 

 

Your actions and the actions of your government are just 

showing that you really fundamentally don’t understand the 

backbone of Saskatchewan and the things that have helped 

make our province a unique and indeed a wonderful place to 

live over a great many years. We have helped each other 

through co-operation since well before I was born. And it is my 

sincerest hope that that spirit of co-operation and co-operative 

development will continue long after I’m no longer alive on 

earth. 

But that whole spirit is in some considerable difficulty right 

now under you. You’ve chosen to ignore and downgrade the 

importance of the co-operative sector. The economic 

development strategy places a great deal of emphasis on 

incentives for capital investment, trying to attract large-scale 

entrepreneurs. And what you want to do is to reduce — or at 

least I think it’s what you want to do — is to reduce the 

unemployment just overnight. But it’s never, ever worked that 

way. 

 

Megaprojects are welcome. They help some. But the real 

backbone of trying to tackle the unemployment problems or the 

job creation problems that exist and are very real, that backbone 

has always been the small business sector for which you’re 

responsible, and the co-operative sector of our economy, for 

which also you are responsible for. And it’s a shame that we 

spent so much time on Peter Pocklington and on Weyerhaeuser 

and others, when we should be focusing on small business and 

co-operatives. 

 

You’ve paid little or no attention to community-based 

opportunities and the development of human resources, Mr. 

Minister. It’s a far more stable, successful, and long-term 

strategy for economic development than the one that you are 

operating under. 

 

My point, Mr. Minister, is that there is a great deal of difference 

between measures which help to strengthen the economy and 

those which only temporarily reduce the rate of unemployment. 

And the qualities that are required for a successful long-term 

economic transformation are very similar to those of a strong 

co-operative society. 

 

Co-ops enable local people to be part of the development 

process, to understand and agree upon what needs to be done, 

and to work together to achieve that change. People become 

directly and deliberately responsible for the development and 

the outcomes of those developments. 

 

Successful long-term economic change calls for intelligence, 

calls for a high level of community organization, and the ability 

to compromise when one’s self-interest is at stake. And that 

self-interest is something that your government just cannot get 

beyond. That has become patently apparent to us during these 

estimates, and indeed during the course of this legislative 

session. You haven’t been able to get past your own personal 

self-interest, your own personal greed, and you haven’t, just 

have not been able to get past that. 

 

Mr. Minister, the co-operative ideal requires a firm confidence 

by our own people in their own abilities, it requires an 

investment of our own money, and it requires . . . has a 

requirement to work things out amongst ourselves. If you like, 

what it takes is that, we can do it ourselves, we can help 

ourselves attitude. We need to provide the motivation and the 

organization, and it is patently obvious, Mr. Minister, that you 

have been unable to do that. 

 

I want to mention a quote from Woodrow Lloyd, and he says: 

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3070 

 

People are still the greatest power. The purpose and extent 

to which their power is made use of depends on their 

motivation and their organization. We can’t complain if 

things don’t go right if we fail to provide the motivation 

and the organization. We can’t complain if we lose the 

game by default. 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is what is happening in the department of 

co-operation and co-operative development. We are losing the 

game by default. We are losing the game simply because you’re 

not providing the opportunities for the development of that very 

important sector of our economy. 

 

I point out to you, Mr. Minister, that co-operatives have for 

many, many years — as long as I can remember, co-operatives 

have been calling on the provincial and the federal governments 

to recognize the co-operative sector of our economy as a 

distinct and unique sector, so that we could have the private 

businesses as one sector. We could have the public enterprises 

such as Saskatchewan Government Insurance, Saskatchewan 

telephones, Saskatchewan Power as a second portion of our 

economy. And the third distinct portion, the co-operatives, have 

been lobbying governments for, as I say, for at least as long as I 

have been alive and can remember, they want co-operatives to 

be that third distinct sector of our economy. 

 

And what we have is a spectre where it’s taken your 

government more than four years to try and figure out just 

where it is going with regards to co-operatives. And that’s not a 

good thing. 

 

Mr. Minister, if the economic power and the potential of the 

co-op movement for job creation and regional development was 

really seen as a priority by your government, would the issue of 

the co-ops’ policy continue to be shunted aside while you deal 

with more pressing issues in your mind? 

 

Minister, co-operatives are a particular and a unique sector of 

our economy. It has its own distinctive excellence and its own 

distinctive reason for existence. I wish that the members 

opposite would pay a little more attention to co-operatives and 

what they are all about rather than being so cursedly anxious to 

get away from this legislature. I wish you would pay just a tiny 

fraction of those efforts. If you could funnel them into the 

co-operative development areas, Saskatchewan would indeed be 

a much better place to live. 

 

I think I’ve pretty much covered the area of co-operative 

development, Mr. Minister. I am appalled to note that the 

number of employees has gone from 59 to 22. I’m appalled by 

virtually everything I see happening in the department. It is a 

great concern. There’s a huge number of co-op people all across 

our great province that are deeply concerned with your obvious 

lack of commitment to the co-operative sector of our economy. 

It’s a concern. 

 

It’s a concern that I am sure is going to be raised loud and clear 

with every ballot that’s dropped in the ballot box at the next 

election. The things you have done, you have done so at your 

political peril, and I look forward to being  

part of a New Democratic Party government that can help the 

co-operative sector, can help turn things around, and help get 

things going. 

 

Just in conclusion, Mr. Minister, I would like to take this 

opportunity to thank you and your officials for the answers. I 

have certainly let it be known to you on several occasions that I 

don’t like the answers, but at this moment I’m not shooting the 

messenger. 

 

I thank you for your information that you provided during those 

estimates, and I thank your officials for their time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for your 

comments. I won’t take too long in just wrapping up what I 

wanted to say, but I just want to indicate to you that the 

amalgamation that we have brought about of the northern 

affairs secretariat, Tourism, Small Business and Co-ops into 

one ministry, I think is the right move to make. I think you will 

see, as time goes on, that services to the co-op sector and so on 

will be even enhanced. I was pleased to hear that some of the 

members opposite did support strongly the small business 

resource centres. I think they’re a very positive achievement 

and the right move in developing an entrepreneurial and 

business climate in our province. 

 

I cannot end without highlighting, once again — and I want to 

do this for two or three reasons, because I think it was a 

milestone and a real move forward in this province — and that 

was the Business Opportunities Saskatchewan show that took 

place in Saskatoon about two weeks ago. I want to do it for two 

reasons: I want my colleagues to hear again the accolades that 

have come in on this. I want the opposition to realize the 

importance of this show, and I also want my staff members who 

are probably watching this in Saskatoon to hear firsthand some 

of the strong support that has come in from across this nation 

because they were very instrumental in putting it on. 

 

So with you indulgence it will take me about a minute or two to 

read through what I think pretty well sums it all up. And this is 

a letter that I received the other day, September 29, and it is 

from a firm in Winnipeg. It’s called U and R Tax Services, who 

were present at the Business Opportunities show, and it’s 

addressed to myself, and it says: 

 

Dear Sir: The show which your department put on in 

Saskatoon, September 11, 12 and 13 was truly 

outstanding. From the moment we arrived on Thursday, 

May 10, until our departure Monday, May 14, we were 

treated “first-class.” 

 

The whole affair was well advertised in advance, the 

set-up well supervised, and the staff could not have been 

more congenial and co-operative. We have attended and 

participated in similar shows from Montreal to Vancouver 

and sincerely, yours stands out head and shoulders above 

the others. Without exception, from the time we first 

received notice of your show in late January or early 

February, every bit of correspondence, literature, and 

guidance was given with great consideration. The 

representatives of your Department were  

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3071 

 

most co-operative, particularly the ladies and those . . . 

located in out-lying areas of the province. 

 

While I am praising your Department some plaudits must 

also go the province in general. Free enterprise appears to 

be alive and thriving. Saskatoon, as you mentioned in your 

remarks (and) appears to be rapidly expanding and upon 

our return through Regina we were pleasantly surprised to 

see the same hustle and bustle. 

 

I don’t know if it is my personal opinion or if it is 

generally shared by others, but I was under the impression 

that Saskatchewan was dragging a foot because of the 

potash problems, agriculture dilemmas and low oil prices. 

It could be the propaganda we are being fed locally. My 

two colleagues join me in wishing our provincial 

department for small business could be as concerned about 

the well being of small business as your department is in 

Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is well. 

 

Once again, congratulations and thank you for an 

exceptional show. Invite us back next year. We’ll be 

(there) front and centre. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think that illustrates the attitude that was 

there towards the development of small business and in that 

fantastic show that we held in Saskatoon. Once again I would 

like to thank my department for putting that show on. I’m proud 

of it; this government is proud of it; this province is proud of it. 

 

I want to thank the people opposite for their questions. As it 

takes place in here, sure we get into the thrust of debate from 

time to time, but in the main, the questions were well phrased. 

You will not always be satisfied with the answers, as I’m not 

always satisfied with the questions, but in the spirit of 

developing this province and moving it ahead I want to thank 

you for your indulgence in these estimates. And to the people 

who are my support, to the people who I said the other night, 

follow the directions, make the wheels turn, make the business 

show a . . . (inaudible) . . . a hearty congratulations for your 

support. Thank you all very much. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 12 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a brief 

question of the minister. In item 12, in the last number of years 

there’s been a payment under grants to local authorities and 

other third parties of $152,500. I noticed that has appeared on 

the 1986-87, ’85-86, and ’84-85 Estimates in that same number, 

and yet it does not show up in the projected budget for this 

coming year. 

 

Can you tell me what’s happened with that grant to local 

authorities and other third parties? 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s a five-year agreement that was the 

grant money formally paid to the centre for co-op studies. The 

five-year agreement was terminated or came to its end in this 

budget year. That’s why you do not see it as a budgetary figure 

in the present year. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Just a supplementary, Mr. Minister. Can you tell 

me how the co-op studies is funded? I gather it is continuing on 

now. Is the department involved in funding it in an ongoing 

manner? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It has been funded in a joint funding 

between ourselves and the major co-ops. My understanding is 

that they have enough money at this time to continue on the 

studies. There has been no approach for further funding from 

us. We will be discussing and dialoguing in that. 

 

Item 12 agreed to. 

 

Vote 45 agreed to. 

 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Tourism, Small Business and Co-operatives 

Vote 167 

 

Vote 167 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Tourism, Small Business and Co-operatives 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 45 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Tourism, Small Business and Co-operatives 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 45 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Would you give us a list of those grants 

under the venture capital tax credit program, Mr. Minister? 

 

An Hon. Member: — He did already. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No he didn’t. If he did, he lied about it. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’d ask the member to apologize to 

the House for that comment. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — That was meant purely in humour, Mr. 

Chairman. It was not in any sense meant to be a serious 

comment. I was just kibitzing with the Deputy Chairman. It was 

not meant as a serious comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, we’ll give that to you. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 45 agreed to. 

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3072 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Northern Affairs Secretariat 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 48 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 48 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the officials. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:13 p.m. 

 

  



 

October 2, 1987 

3073 

 

Corrigendum 

 

The title at the top of page 2995 of the Hansard 88A, Thursday, 

October 1, 1987 should read: Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[NOTE: The online version has been corrected.] 

 


