













































August 17, 1987 Hansard


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

August 17, 1987 

 

1823 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me to 

introduce to you, and through you to members of the Assembly, a 

couple of visitors who are spending a month in Saskatchewan. 

They're from Scotland. They're seated in your gallery in the front 

row, sir. 

 

One is Tom Harvey, my father-in-law, and the other is Bud 

Maxwell, my father. I'd ask all members to welcome them to the 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Protection Offered by Drug Plan 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. My question's to the Premier, 

and it deals with the announcement last Friday by the Minister of 

Health. His so-called special plan to deal with catastrophic drug 

bills for Saskatchewan people turns out to be a plan with no rules 

or guide-lines, which even the minister admits will help a few 

dozen people. 

 

In other words, 99.9 per cent of Saskatchewan people have been 

left out in the cold by this change, and will continue to pay 100 per 

cent of their prescription drug costs up front. 

 

Mr. Premier, can you tell thousands of Saskatchewan people, 

struggling to make ends meet, why you don't feel they should get 

any help with their huge drug bills? When you could afford $21 

million for Peter Pocklington, why can't you afford to reintroduce 

the old drug plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I think indeed it's unfortunate 

that the opposition would want to frighten people, particularly 

senior citizens, about their drug costs when they know very well 

that they're extremely well covered in the best drug care program 

they'll find any place in Canada. 

 

And the opposition members will stand in their place and say that 

99 per cent of the people will not have any assistance at all, and 

that's just not true, and she knows that. It's not the facts. The facts 

are that senior citizens are well covered. Those on low income, 

Mr. Speaker, are extremely well covered, better than anybody 

anywhere in the country. 

 

And we're looking at a safety net for individuals that might be 

caught in unique circumstances, Mr. Speaker. And she knows that, 

and that's the case. So it's a little bit unfair. And then, as the former 

minister of Health says, she get into other personalities, which 

means she's grandstanding. She doesn't care at all. She just wants 

to  

play politics. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, another question to the Premier of 

our province. Can the Premier explain or table today written 

guide-lines for this new program? Can you tell the people where 

they can get application forms for your new program, and how are 

people to know whether or not they qualify, when you can't even 

give us basic information? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, clearly the opposition wants 

rigidity in the program so that they can say that there's a line — 

there's a line between this and a line between that. And no matter 

where you put a particular line, they'd say, well the line was two 

low, or the line was too high. And they'd just want to play with it. 

 

They did the same thing when we had, for example, Mr. Speaker, 

a drought line in Agriculture. And they'd say, well the line was in 

the wrong municipality on the wrong road. Well they're doing the 

very same thing now. They really don't care, Mr. Speaker. They 

just want to cause a little bit of confusion for people who, in many 

cases, might be concerned. 

 

And we have laid out, it covers every single solitary person. And 

the Minister of Health stood in his place on Friday and said, 

professional people, those from the medical profession, and from 

the pharmaceutical profession, and other people will be able to 

deal with unique cases. And as the Leader of the Opposition has 

admitted, unique is unique. Unique is exactly that. 

 

And when we have a situation, whether you have a peculiar drug 

or a high cost drug or something else . . . And obviously you're not 

in a low-income category because it's $50 deductible — 25 year. 

Or obviously it isn't somebody's in an institution; it's covered. So it 

is unique, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that's why we've provided this professional group to make 

sure that we can handle all circumstances, and not put people into 

pigeon-holes as the opposition would like us to do. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. I want to bring the 

Premier back to reality, the reality of what thousand of families in 

this province are facing. And I want to ask the Premier about the 

impact of this new plan, even on the very few you've decided will 

qualify. 

 

I remind you of the family from Esterhazy who have a young 

asthmatic son. His medications will cots the family more than 

$6,000 each year. Now you've informed that they will have to pay 

20 per cent of that up front. That means that this family still pays 

$1,200 each year to buy medication for their asthmatic son. Can 

you tell this family why they should feel thankful to be paying that 

kind of bill for life-saving medications? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1824 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the circumstances . . . though 

I don't know, you know, the exact circumstance of this particular 

family because I'm not sure of which one that she's talking about. 

There were two in the community of Esterhazy, as I recall from 

the top of my head now. 

 

I believe at least one of these has been contacted, because they did 

fall into the circumstances that I laid out here last Friday, the kind 

of circumstances where it would be seen by the people in the drug 

plan and in the review panel that that circumstance could be 

looked at it in a different way than some other might be. So as I 

stand here now, I'm not sure if they've been contacted, but I 

believe they have, and I believe they will have been told that they 

would pay 20 per cent up front but not have the problem of having 

to pay the other 80 per cent and waiting for the rebate. 

 

So each circumstance, as I said on Friday and as the Premier has 

reiterated here today, is looked at in a separate way. And that's 

what the people of Saskatchewan do expect, and that is the way in 

which this government has responded, Mr. Premier. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. Is it fair and is it reasonable 

that a family should now have to pay $1,200 per year to pay for 

prescription drugs for their son? I ask the minister a very simple 

question: is that a fair and reasonable payment for medications for 

their asthmatic son? Is that fair and reasonable? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I don't have before me, nor 

do I believe that the member opposite has the absolute 

circumstance of this family before them. What I will say, that each 

of them have been looked at and all of the various things which 

must come into play here. And when it was looked at, as I 

understand it, when the case — if it's the same case that I believe 

that the member's talking about — when it's looked at, if they pay 

their 20 per cent up front, we believe that that's a fair and 

reasonable solution to that circumstance that was laid out by that 

family. And I believe the people of Esterhazy would believe that 

as well. 

 

Waiting Lists in Saskatoon Hospitals 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I have a question for the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

Last Friday my colleague from Saskatoon South raised with you a 

case of a Saskatoon man who was having to wait a period of six 

weeks for urgent surgery for cancer to his jaw. And at the time, sir, 

you didn't appear to be familiar with the case. And I want to ask 

you now whether you’re familiar with it, and how do you explain 

and justify the fact that people in the position of this man, in 

urgent, life-threatening situations, are having to wait as long as six 

weeks for their surgery to take place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I said to the hon. member last 

week that the medical professions is treating cancer as a priority, 

and we are encouraging them to do that, to make sure that they 

treat these patients with the utmost care and as quickly as possible. 

And the hon. member can get that kind of information from the 

medical profession, and they are responding as quickly as they 

can. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, with 

respect, that is simply not an adequate response. What we have 

here are urgent, life-threatening situations. The doctors can give it 

all the priority they like, but with a waiting list of 10 or 11,000 

people they simply can't do better than six weeks. And it's up to 

you, sir, your government, to do something about it. 

 

Now may I ask you whether you can't rearrange your priorities, 

when you're spending lots of money on lots of things, can't you 

rearrange your priorities in such a way that urgent, life-threatening 

surgery can take place within a reasonable time? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make something 

very, very clear to the House and to the hon. member who raised 

the question, and to the member who was here last week raising 

the same question. As the Premier has said, and as is the fact, 

cancer surgery, surgical procedures related to cancer are given 

priority. 

 

The member uses the kind of terminology that's been used by the 

Health critic and a couple others in the past, and they say 

life-threatening and so on. Life-threatening surgery, Mr. Speaker, 

that are life-threatening are given priority to the point that they're 

in within hours, not six weeks. That's not the circumstance as the 

member has raised it by using terms like life-threatening. 

 

That's not to say that people don't have waiting time. I agree that 

people do have waiting time for some circumstances, but when the 

member uses terms like life-threatening, because those are not the 

terms that are used by the physicians in these cases. Because if the 

physician uses the term it's life-threatening, the person is in the 

hospital within hours, not six weeks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the minister. In 

this Saskatoon case we've got a case of a man with cancer of the 

jaw judged by the doctor to be urgent. The cancer is growing. The 

man and his family are sitting there waiting for a hospital date to 

come up. Now Minister, I ask you again: in these situations, can't 

the government's priorities be reordered so these urgent and, in 

many cases, life-threatening surgeries take place within a 

reasonable time? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, that's true. Now this question 

is more along the line of reasonable. That member now has 

changed his terminology from life-threatening to urgent — 

life-threatening to urgent — and if it's true, they have urgent 

surgery. And they come on to very different sort of levels, and 

they're dealt with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the case that the member raised, the member raised 

with the Premier last week, and that I will look into very carefully 

as of this day — but I'm glad that it's noted here, Mr. Speaker, and 

it must be, because it's important that when we speak of something 

in this  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1825 

 

House, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, regardless of 

what political party we're from, or whatever, when we speak of 

those kinds of things here, Mr. Speaker, any of us, when we speak 

of it here, we must know what we're talking about when we use 

terms like life-threatening, and terms like urgent, and terms like 

emergency, and whatever. Those are the terms that the medical 

profession must deal with as they slot the people into the 

scheduling for surgery, whether it be in Saskatoon, or in Regina, 

or any other location in this province. 

 

Dental Records of Children's Dental Plan 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 

for the Premier. Mr. Premier, we used to have the best children's 

dental plan in North America until it was crippled beyond 

recognition by changes in policy of your government in June. The 

records of the children's dental plan have now been removed from 

all of the schools in Saskatchewan, or are about to be removed 

from all of the schools in Saskatchewan. 

 

Can you explain, sir, why, rather than being sent to parents, those 

records are being stored by the government? And why haven't 

those records been made available to parents so that they can pass 

the information on to the private dentists which they are going to 

have to use as of September 1? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the records will 

certainly be made available to parents. It's a reasonable suggestion 

and question. there's no question that the records of individual 

children will be made available to parents. 

 

I guess the question though, Mr. Speaker, if you take that question 

to its logical solution, under the plan which was brought into force 

by the folks opposite when they were in government, why didn't 

the parents have the plans in the first place? Why didn't they have 

— not the plans, but the records of their own children in the first 

place? That's something that, you know, and now that he raises the 

question, it raises that in my own mind as well. There's no 

question in my mind — and I'll say so here on behalf of this 

government — parents should have, and will have, the records of 

their own children. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — In a supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I remind 

the minister that because the dental plan was operated through the 

schools, the parents did have access to those files at any time that 

they wished. They don't have access to them now because you 

have not made clear to them or to the dental profession how they 

will be able to get access to them. Will you explain to them, Mr. 

Minister, and to this House, how the parents will be able to get 

access to their files when they need them. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — All parents in this province will have 

access to the records of their own children. There's no question 

about that. They'll have access to those records, and I won't say 

within one-half an hour from now or whatever, but I'll tell the 

member opposite because it's a reasonable question which he 

raised. And  

all parents in the province will have access to the records as they 

relate to their own children. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

coverage for young children under this reduced plan begins at 

September 1. It ended in June. Throughout this summer, parents 

who had children who needed immediate care have taken their 

children to dentists and have had to pay for that care. I ask you, 

Mr. Minister: why have you not made provision to cover those 

children during these summer months while you are waiting to 

implement your new, reduced plan in September? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that it was a very 

limited circumstance where the children under the former dental 

plan had the coverage from the dental therapist during the summer 

months — under very limited circumstances under the former 

plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what I'll say to the member is that in this transitional period you 

must pick a date. The date we picked was the date going into a 

new school year; September 1 is a reasonable time. That's the 

transitional period you must pick a date. The date we picked was 

the date going into a new school year; September 1 is a reasonable 

time. That's the transitional period that was chosen. That's the date 

that we go with. And I guess the question then in return is: what 

happened in the summer months of 1985 and of 1984 and of 1977, 

for that matter, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, and I ask this 

because it's really up to the minister to tell the public and the 

parents what is happening. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question to you is: will you assure the parents of 

Saskatchewan who have had to get care for their children from a 

dentist during the summer months that they will be covered at 

least to the same extent that they were before you crippled this 

program and basically destroyed it from what it used to be? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as of September 1 of 1987, 

children will be covered by visits to the private dentists' offices of 

Saskatchewan, and they'll be covered on a 12-month basis 

beginning on September 1, year around . . . on a year-round basis 

as they have not been, frankly, under the former plan. They were 

not covered during the summer months. They were not covered 

under the same circumstances in July and August under the former 

plan as they were before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I've said, September 1 became the initiation point 

for this plan. There was a necessity to set a date of a new plan. The 

date was set for September 1. It was the reasonable date to set and 

we . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I ask the members to 

please allow the ministers and those individuals asking the 

question to do their part. 

 

Effects of Down-sizing Chartered Banks in Saskatchewan 

 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1826 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

Premier. The Premier must view with some considerable alarm the 

news disclosed on Friday that three of the five chartered banks in 

Saskatchewan are in the process of down-sizing their 

Saskatchewan operations, removing certain key personnel from 

this province, and withdrawing a critical element of local decision 

making from the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

And I wonder if the Premier would indicate what specific steps he 

would be taking to reverse those bank actions so Saskatchewan 

will not be subjected to absentee decision making by some banks 

at a time when local sensitivity is critically important, especially in 

such areas as agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the hon. 

member has put his finger on it. Because of the downturn in 

agriculture, and the province of Saskatchewan having something 

like 43 or 44 per cent of the farm land, and certainly the largest 

province with respect to wheat production and the difficulties 

there, the financial pressures in the community and the financial 

pressures on the institutions and, I believe, if I can quote from the 

Leader-Post, it’s because of the economy and particularly in rural 

Saskatchewan that the banks are trimming some of their staff 

because of the general costs and the fact that they face a great deal 

of difficulty, along with the farmers. 

 

So it’s generally as a result of the economy. And as you know, this 

last couple of three months we’ve been able to put something like 

$675 million into the Saskatchewan economy, and we are 

lobbying for more and obviously lobbying internationally to get 

the price of wheat up and the subsidies back. I mean, it’s nothing 

that I suppose $2 a bushel extra on the price of wheat wouldn’t 

correct. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, the very problem that the Premier 

has described is exactly a very good reason for trying to reverse 

what the banks are in the process of doing. When the economy of 

Saskatchewan is under considerable duress, we need local 

decision making and not decisions made in Calgary or Toronto or 

somewhere a long way away from Saskatchewan. 

 

And I wonder if the Premier would give us his undertaking that he 

is in fact going to pursue the banking community to ensure that 

they reverse this decision and don’t subject Saskatchewan in 

future to absentee decisions made a long way away from here, 

when what we need is local sensitivity with the banking 

community and financial institutions that have some 

Saskatchewan roots and connections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I think the hon. member knows that the 

financial institutions will still have their offices here. There will be 

vice-presidents from each of the corporations, as I understand it, 

will stay in the province of Saskatchewan. They will have 

certainly the staff here that is familiar with Saskatchewan. If they 

have less staff here, that’s a corporate decision, and if they are 

consolidating their staff in the prairie region, and particularly 

because of the expense associated with having a large number of 

rural branches spread across the province, then that’s their 

corporate decision. 

 

If there was much more money in the rural economy, I’m sure that 

you would find an expansion in machinery dealers and an 

expansion in financial institutions and dealers and an expansion in 

financial institutions and other things. But the fact is, at 

$2-and-something a bushel for wheat, there isn’t a great deal of 

income, and the financial institutions, as well as anybody else, is 

quite familiar with that. 

 

Shand, Rafferty and Alameda Projects 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the 

Premier and it has to do with the Shand, Rafferty and Alameda 

projects. Mr. Speaker, we've been advised that this Shand, 

Rafferty project was the most expensive option for the expansion 

of Saskatchewan's power generation system, and I'm wondering if 

the Premier can confirm that this is the most expensive option. I'm 

wondering in the Premier can confirm that this is the most 

expensive option. I'm wondering also if he can confirm what we 

have been hearing, and we're not sure it's correct but I'd like to 

hear it from the Premier, whether this will mean an extra 15 per 

cent increase in our power bills over the next few years just to help 

build this political project in the Premier's riding and the Deputy 

Premier's riding. And if the Premier cannot confirm that, Mr. 

Speaker, then will he table all the internal studies that show the 

financial data with respect to the Rafferty, Shand and Alameda 

projects? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member obviously 

leaves me a lot of room with respect to answering a question 

because when she starts it saying that this is a political project, I 

could respond for some time. 

 

Let me just say a couple of things briefly and to be very clear. If 

you're going to have a project anywhere on the Souris River, it 

runs through Tory ridings. I mean, anything to do with the Souris 

River is in one of our ridings, and the hon. member should know 

that, and we can't change that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 

suppose we could move the river, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at a water project associated with a power project, 

we can say that on the Souris River it's going to be in a 

Conservative riding and we're going to have to deal with that. And 

she can say that it's because it's in a Tory riding, it's political. But 

the river happens to be there, and for years and years, Mr. Speaker, 

people from all political parties have been looking at the 

development of that project. 

 

Secondly, let me point out to the hon. member, when you look at 

the fact that if you put together a power project, we can build a 

power project at Coronach and there will be additional power 

projects there. We're building a power project in the Estevan area. 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you have a project like that, you have to 

cool the power project. And you can do it through air, or you can 

do it underground aquifer, or you can dam water and do it on the 

surface. We're finding that about $20 million will get the job done 

and Sask Power would have to do it one way or the other. 

 

Secondly, on this project, Mr. Speaker, the United States  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1827 

 

of America is going to spend about $50 million of their money. 

That d means the total project, Mr. Speaker, is about $45 million, 

which is a very, very good project for the province of 

Saskatchewan and it involves agriculture, tourism, economic 

development, and a wide range of recreational facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier, and it 

deals with his government's priorities and its list of priorities. 

We've seen today, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier can't provide 

adequate care when it comes to drugs, the cost of prescription 

drugs; he can't find adequate care when it comes to dealing with 

cancer patients, but he has found $136 million for Alameda and 

Rafferty in his own constituency and the constituency of the 

Deputy Premier. 

 

Even his environmental impact statement, which he put forward 

last week, which was written to try to save his political project, 

even his environmental impact statements say that the cost 

outweigh the benefits. My question is this, Mr. Speaker: how can 

the Premier justify a $136 million political boondoggle in his own 

constituency when every report, every independent report which 

was ever done on that project says that the costs outweigh the 

benefits and there's no benefits for Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, since the time that Tommy 

Douglas was premier and John Diefenbaker was prime minister 

and Jimmy Gardiner was the national minister of Agriculture, all 

three political parties have been trying to build a good water 

project in co-operation with the people of south-eastern 

Saskatchewan, as well as the United States. 

 

This is the first time any administration, in 50 years, has an 

agreement where the United States will spend something like $57 

million, Canadian funds, almost $50 million, U.S. funds — $47 

million, U.S. funds — as well, Mr. Speaker, as get an agreement 

from the U.S. Army Corps of engineers and the people of North 

Dakota, as well as the province of Saskatchewan and 

environmental folks, to put together one of the finest projects you 

will see in the history of southern Saskatchewan. 

 

We've got Diefenbaker Lake and Gardiner dam. That took a great 

deal of political work and courage, Mr. Speaker. Now we'll have a 

major similar project in south-eastern Saskatchewan and the NDP 

is against it. I can quote NDP cabinet ministers who said it was a 

fine idea, except they didn't have the co-operative attitude to deal 

with Americans and to deal with neighbours to make sure that we 

could build the project — and that's why you're sitting over there 

complaining about it and we're going to build it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I remind the Premier, who  

cannot again get even his facts right . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Would the 

hon. members please allow the member from Regina Rosemont to 

ask his question. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — I would remind the Premier, who can't get his facts 

straight from one moment to the next, that in fact there are no 

benefits, direct or indirect, which benefit Saskatchewan people 

from this project — and he knows very well. 

 

Even his studies, even his studies say, the environmental impact 

studies, which have done from 1978 on say that there will be no 

recreational benefit, and that even the livestock in the area, even 

the livestock — that the water will be unfit for human 

consumption. 

 

Given his own environmental impact report, I ask the Premier 

once again to try to justify to the province of Saskatchewan — 

how, sir, can you stand in this House and defend a $136 million 

boondoggle in your own constituency — $136 million — when 

we have people throughout Saskatchewan suffering through health 

at the hands of your government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can only say that the 

opposition members know a great deal philosophically about 

buying things from the people. They've bought mines, and they've 

bought packing plants, and they bought pulp companies, but they 

don 't build, Mr. Speaker. The problem is that the province of 

Saskatchewan are builders . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. Order, please. We are getting to the end of question period, 

and I'm sure if we all try hard, we'll get through it, so just allow the 

Premier to answer the question, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can only say that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. We 

could go on in this vein for quite some time; just allow the Premier 

to answer his question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The opposition 

member from Rosemont mentioned the work boondoggle. I could 

just say to the opposition member, for 30 years the biggest 

boondoggle was the fact that the NDP didn't build all they did was 

nationalize. 

 

The next biggest boondoggle, Mr. Speaker, was that they took 

over half the potash mines in the province of Saskatchewan — 

they don't like to hear this — and a billion dollars in the hole 

because that was a boondoggle. And the third biggest boondoggle 

was the fact that they took over the PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 

Company) company, lost $93,000 a day, and they didn't know 

how to fix it, and now they stand in opposition and say, well, well, 

well, Mr. Speaker, if only we had the chance. They'll have the 

chance when they earn it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1828 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 

 

Withdrawal of Senior Bank Personnel from Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise 

under rule 39 to seek leave of the Assembly to move a motion of 

urgent and pressing necessity. Just over this past weekend, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan received some very serious financial 

news. We learned that three of the five major chartered banks are 

in the process of sharply down-sizing their Saskatchewan 

operations. 

 

This has the potential to create a very severe problem for the 

Saskatchewan economy, and that is the loss of local decision 

making in some of our major financial institutions at a time when 

more, not less, local sensitivity is required in such sectors as 

agriculture and others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an issue which the legislature should address 

at the earliest possible moment. Its consequences could be very 

grave. And if leave of the Assembly is granted, I would propose to 

move the following motion: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan views with 

great alarm the recent actions of certain chartered banks to 

withdraw senior personnel and important financial decision 

making authority from bank offices in the province of 

Saskatchewan, which actions will leave Saskatchewan 

vulnerable to remote, absentee decision making by some banks 

at a critical time when sensitive local decision making is 

especially essential to deal with the crisis in farm financing, the 

bolstering of small businesses, and the creation of 

Saskatchewan jobs; and this Assembly calls upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to produce an aggressive and 

cogent economic strategy for Saskatchewan to create genuine 

public confidence in Saskatchewan's future, so that vital 

element of local decision making by financial institutions can be 

restored forthwith. 

 

And I ask for the leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to make 

that motion. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Clerk at the Table 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to draw 

your attention to the following. I would like to introduce to the 

Assembly, Ms. Sandra Clive, Clerk of committees to the 

Legislative Assembly of Manitoba. Ms. Clive will be a guest 

Clerk at the Table for a portion of the current legislative session. 

 

I ask all members to welcome Ms. Clive to our legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILL 

 

At 2:34 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to 

the following Bill: 

 

Bill No. 31 — An Act to amend The Local Government Election 

Act 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:36 p.m. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move second 

reading of The Land Titles Amendment Act, 1987. 

 

This amendment is required to ensure that financing proceed on 

the NewGrade upgrader project. Unlike the circumstances in the 

vast majority of financing arrangements, the owner of the real 

property is not intended to own the fixtures which are being placed 

on the land by NewGrade, at least at the initial instance. 

NewGrade’s interests will be by way of a licence to enter upon 

and use the land for its business purposes, and to remove its 

fixtures at the end of the licensed term. This legislation protects 

that interest. 

 

Essentially a provision is being added to The Land Titles Act 

stating that with regards only to the land involved in this 

transaction, a right to enter upon the land in order to sever and 

remove fixtures from the land, or use the fixtures attached to the 

land, are interests in land to which those fixtures are attached. This 

Act also ensures the creation of this interest in land in relation to 

this project; it does not displace the priority scheme established 

under The Personal Property Securities Act, as negotiations 

regarding the project are not complete. 

 

The legislation provides that additional land in the immediate 

vicinity of the land now involved can be added by regulation in 

the event that that is required. This legislation will allow the 

financing arrangements related to the upgrader to proceed, but will 

not change in any way the laws of general application as it relates 

to real property not involved in this transaction. And that's why it's 

specific to this particular project. 

 

As a result, Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to move second 

reading of an Act to amend The Land Titles Act. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I listened with interest 

to the explanation of the minister for the amendments that are 

contained in this Bill. He will appreciate that there was no way of 

telling from the content of the Bill just what the purpose was, 

although I had guessed that it was connected with the upgrader, 

having regard to the legal description and the reference to some of 

the Regina street addresses. I had also imagined that it was 

connected with the financing of the project.  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1829 

 

But in light of the fact that we weren't clear until today just what 

the purpose was, we would need an opportunity to consider the 

legislation in detail and to consult concerning it. And I therefore 

beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 

1983 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to move second reading to The Mineral Taxation 

Amendment Act. 

 

Under the terms of this Act, the mineral rights tax will change 

from its current level of 50 cents per acre to $1 per acre. 

 

The mineral rights Act was first passed in 1945 and was set at 3 

cents per acre. In the years following, Mr. Speaker, it has since 

increased on three different occasions. In 1969 it was set at 10 

cents per acre; in 1972 it doubled to 20 cents per acre; and two 

years later, in 1974, it was again increased from 20 cents per acre 

to its rate today of 50 cents per acre. 

 

As you can see, Mr. Speaker, the mineral rights tax was last 

changed in 1974. Between ’74 and today the prices for goods and 

services in our Canadian economy has risen 174 per cent. Put in 

this context, an alteration in the tax over that 13-year period does 

not appear to be unreasonable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, approximately $3.3 million is currently raised from 

the mineral rights tax. We now expect that this will rise to 5.5 

million. The majority of freehold mineral rights are owned 

primarily by large corporations, which means approximately 70 

per cent of the mineral rights taxes will be paid by those 

corporations. 

 

An additional amendment to the Bill comes in the form of an 

exemption from mineral rights taxes for incorporated farms. Mr. 

Speaker, up until now incorporated farms have not enjoyed the 

same 3,200-acre exemption that was given to individual farmers. 

For example, if they owned 1,000 acres of mineral rights, they had 

to pay the tax on the full 1,000 acres. Now only those who own 

more than 3,200 acres would pay, and they would pay only on the 

excess of the 3,200-acre requirement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that there has been an inequity for 

farmers, particularly a farmer who incorporates his family farm to 

be liable to the full mineral rights tax, when his neighbour, who 

has not chosen to incorporate, has the exemption of up to 3,200 

acres. We believe they should be treated the same. A choice to 

incorporate should not remove the 3,200-acre exemption. 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, the Bill before the Assembly will 

provide that the same 3,200-acre exemption will apply to 

incorporated farms as to individual farmers. 

 

Regulations will be developed under The Mineral Taxation Act to 

provide the details of the definition of agriculture corporation. The 

definitions included in the regulations under The Saskatchewan 

Farm Ownership  

Act will be used as a guide. The intention is to make sure that the 

exemption applies to legitimate and corporate farms where the 

shares are owned primarily by active farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of The 

Mineral Taxation Amendment Act, 1987. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member 

for Saskatoon South, will wish to make some comments on this 

Bill. I will therefore, in a moment, be moving adjournment. 

 

I want to raise a couple of points arising from the remarks of the 

minister. We can deal with them more fully in committee, but I 

want to in effect give notice of them now. 

 

(1445) 

 

One deals with the question of giving a definition for an 

agricultural corporation. We're dealing here with a tax Bill, and I 

think I would prefer to see, in the Bill itself, the definition of 

agricultural corporation. Because I think it is, at least in principle, 

undesirable to have people subject to tax or not subject to tax 

depending upon the terminology in an order in council rather than 

the legislation. I think all of us, at least in principle, agree with the 

proposition that when we're deciding that someone should pay 

taxes, the someone should be defined in the Bill. That may not be 

an important point, but I think it is one worthy of note. 

 

The second point I want to make has to do with the use of 

incorporating agricultural corporations. I would have no quarrel 

with the basic premise outlined by the minister that farmer A and 

farmer B, who are in all other respects similar in their 

circumstances, except that farmer A had decided to hold his land 

in his personal name or her personal name, and farmer B has 

decided to incorporate and hold the land in the name of an 

agricultural corporation owned by him or her, that there should be 

no difference in the tax. 

 

What I would not wish to see is someone with 10,000 acres decide 

that he is going to form agricultural corporation X and agricultural 

corporation 6 and then hold 3,000 acres in X and 3,000 acres in Y 

and 3,000 acres in Z and 1,000 acres in his own name, and pay no 

tax; whereas under other circumstances he would have paid, he or 

she would have paid, the tax on the amount over and above 3,200 

acres. 

 

This is a point which I think we should pursue because all of us 

know that corporations are used very frequently as a basis for tax 

management. And we ought not to lay ourselves open to allowing 

agricultural corporations to be incorporated seriatum in order to 

move a person from the category of paying tax on his surplus 

acreage over 3,200 to the position of not paying any because no 

single corporation owns more than 3,200 acres. 

 

As I indicated, Mr. Speaker, these are questions of a technical 

nature that we can pursue in committee. But I want also to give 

my colleague, the member for Saskatoon South, an opportunity to 

say a work on second reading. And accordingly I beg leave to 

adjourn the  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1830 

 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure Justice 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 3 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. The officials present 

with us today are Brian Barrington-Foote, sitting beside me, who 

is the deputy minister of Justice. Beside him is Terry Thompson, 

who is assistant deputy minister of Justice, specializing in the area 

of corrections and justice services; Kathy Langlois, behind me, 

and director of administrative services; and Ellen Gunn, director of 

public prosecutions. In the next row is Gary Brandt, executive 

director of court services, and Doug Moen, co-ordinator of 

legislative services, plus a variety of others in the back. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The basic thrust of 

the opening remarks that I'm going to make, as well as the 

questions that I'm going to be directing to the minister, are based 

on the accusation that the minister is not fulfilling the 

responsibilities that are placed upon him by the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There are certain parcel or package of responsibilities that fall to 

be discharged by the government, which have been delegated to 

the Department of Justice. These responsibilities have various 

roots, primarily their legislative responsibilities, but there are 

others that are not squarely founded upon a piece of legislation, 

but none the less are responsibilities which must be carried out. 

 

I'm not suggesting that the minister is deliberately choosing not to 

discharge responsibilities. What I'm saying is that the 

responsibilities are not being discharged properly. And when I say 

that, I know that I am attacking the government's restraint 

program, but frankly, we attack that program for a number of 

reasons. 

 

We attack it because of the unfair way in which it's impinged upon 

the poor people of this province. We attack it because it reflects 

misplaced priorities, and, in the case of the Department of Justice, 

we attack the restraint program because some things are simply 

too important to be restrained. There are some services in our 

society which a government must deliver. There are some 

responsibilities which a government must fulfil, and those 

responsibilities must be fulfilled regardless of the financial 

problems that the government, as a whole, encounters. 

 

The Department of Justice, the administration of justice, and the 

delivery of many of the services in this department are simply not 

areas where governments are free to economize. Governments 

must look elsewhere in  

order to effect their cut-backs, and save their money, and try and 

balance their budget. Now over the next few days, Mr. Minister, 

we'll be getting into some of those, but I want to touch on some of 

them in my opening remarks. 

 

We have again and again raised and seen raised by other groups 

within our society the situation in the provincial courts. In 

particular there is a long-standing concern about the backlog of 

cases that are before the courts. I recall having a press conference 

in the month of June of this year in which I brought to the 

attention of the public the fact that the courts, particularly in 

Saskatoon, are running six months behind. 

 

The specific example I gave was the case of an indictable offence, 

a major offence of some relatively complicated evidence — as 

those cases usually are — where the evidence would take two 

days to introduce before the courts on a preliminary inquiry. And 

the fact was that in June of this year in Saskatoon, a person 

pleading not guilty to such an indictable offence would be faced 

with a wait of six months before the preliminary inquiry could be 

heard in the provincial courts. 

 

Now then, if that person were committed for trial at the 

preliminary inquiry, which is quite a common result of 

preliminary inquiry, that person would then have to wait an 

additional period of time before the transcript of the preliminary 

was available. and as the minister knows, nothing can happen until 

that transcript is available. In other words, there won't be a trial. 

There won't even be a trial scheduled until that transcript is 

prepared. 

 

And what we were seeing is that, and what we’re still seeing is 

that accused people and their lawyers can wait for up to six 

months for those transcripts to be delivered. Then following the 

delivery of the transcript, that matter goes before the Court of 

Queen’s Bench and a trial date is set, and a trial takes place 

normally within two or three months after that. 

 

But where that becomes a real problem is for the people who are 

in custody during the proceedings that I’ve described. And that is 

not an unusual occurrence. People may be held in custody because 

they’re not able to get bail. Bail is either not accorded to them, or 

they’re not able to raise or satisfy the conditions of their bail. and 

we know of cases where people have sat in the remand centre of 

the correctional centres waiting for their preliminary hearing to 

come up, and then after their preliminary inquiry where they’ve 

been committed for trial, to then wait for the transcript. And you 

can actually have cases — cases are possible where people would 

spend over a year in jail waiting for their trial. 

 

Now everyone in our society is presumed innocent until they’re 

proven guilty, so these people who are sitting in remand in the 

circumstances I’ve described are innocent people sitting in jail 

without having been convicted of anything. And the only reason 

that they’re sitting there for that length of time is that the justice 

system of this province has not been working properly. 

 

Now something has to be done about it. now I’m certain that this 

minister would recognize that that is the case, and I have to 

acknowledge that he is taking steps to try  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1831 

 

and resolve the problem. But at least in my city of Saskatoon, the 

problem persists. The backlog is almost as long as it was when I 

raised the matter last June. It is as long as it was when the matter 

was raised a year ago. His predecessor, Mr. Dutchak, was acutely 

aware of the problem and, as a matter of fact, set up a committee 

in order to study that precise problem in March of 1986. 

 

Now in his tenure of office which was abruptly brought to an end 

last October, he wasn’t able to grapple with the problem of the 

backlog. And this minister, while he’s trying to cope with it in the 

city of Regina, still has not addressed or adequately addressed the 

problem in the city of Saskatoon. And I am going to be raising this 

matter a little later in estimates to try and impress on the minister 

that this is a situation that can be resolved, and that must be 

resolved, and that the government must commit the resources that 

are necessary to right this situation, and must commit them soon. 

 

A justice system, in order to have any impact on our society, must 

work properly; it must be credible. People looking at the justice 

system must feel a sense of comfort and a sense of adequacy — 

must feel a sense that it’s running the way it should. People are 

looking at the system now, and they’re seeing a system which they 

think just doesn’t work. 

 

Now the criminals are having a wonderful time with it, you know. 

The hard cases are, if they are detected for an offence, they know 

that by pleading not guilty they get another six months on the 

street before their preliminary inquiry comes up. And if they’re 

committed at the preliminary inquiry stage, it’s another six months 

before the transcript comes up; they’ve got another year on the 

street even if they are detected for a crime that they’ve committed 

now. It seems to me, on the basis of the information I have, that 

there are many of them who are playing the system. The public 

can'’ have any confidence in a system that allows this sort of thing 

to happen. 

 

So not only is it the person who’s been charged with the offence 

and has it hanging over his head, not only is he affected by the 

inadequacies of the system, but all of us are affected when we talk 

about the hard cases who are playing the system from their 

perspective and are staying on the street, as I say, staying free and 

continuing their life, even though they have been charged with a 

major crime. 

 

(1500) 

 

Now we also know, we also are aware of problems at other levels 

of the courts in Saskatchewan, and I think particularly of the Court 

of Appeal. The Court of Appeal has an enormous volume of cases 

that they are required to handle at the present time. My 

information is that the case-load of the Court of Appeal is between 

700 and 800 cases per year at the present time. Six years ago the 

case-load of the Court of Appeal was 450. So the court is facing a 

work-load that is 70, 75 per cent larger than it was a scant six 

years ago, and there is nothing around to indicate that that load is 

going to lighten. 

 

I think it’s a fair guess to say that that load will continue to get 

heavier. I say that because, for example, the number  

of Charter cases continues to increase, and the numbers of cases 

generally that are started in our courts has continued for some 

years to increase. For some reason our society seems to be coming 

more litigious, and the justice system has to accommodate to that 

public attitude and that reality. 

 

And in the case of the Court of Appeal I think that the backlog is 

of general concern throughout the legal system. We have seen 

newspaper reports in past months about cases that have been 

before the court — backlogged before the court for a long time. 

Now I think — I freely concede that the Chief Justice, the present 

Chief Justice, has made improvements to the way in which the 

Court of Appeal operates so that a large number of cases go 

through on an expedited basis and are decided in a very short time. 

I happen to practise in the field of labour law and administrative 

law, which involves quite a large number of Court of Appeal 

appearances, and the court now hears those cases, for example, on 

an expedited basis. And we’re getting those cases through the 

Court of Appeal faster than ever. 

 

But for the general run of litigation, the queue for having these 

cases heard gets longer and longer, and the time required by the 

court to consider these cases is considerable, so that what we have 

is justices running out of time. They don’t have time to do such a 

large volume of work. 

 

Now that problem was recognized, Mr. Chairman, back in the 

early 1980s, and the government of the day, the NDP government 

at the time, passed the necessary order in council to increase the 

number of Court of Appeal judges from five to seven. Those 

positions were not filled before the 1982 election, and following 

the election the then minister of Justice, who is now the Minister 

of Finance — he wasn’t any better as a Justice minister than he is 

as the Finance minister — got into a squabble with his counterpart 

in Ottawa and decided not to appoint those two justices. 

 

So the Court of Appeal, then faced with a work-load that they 

couldn’t handle, were forced to carry on with five judges for a 

period of, I think, two years before that dispute got squared away 

and the sixth and seventh members of the court were appointed. 

And there is no question, Mr. Chairman, that the Court of Appeal 

is understaffed again. Seven judges are just not sufficient to do the 

job. 

 

In addition, there are things that the government could do in order 

to make that court function more effectively by way of the 

appointment of support staff and other staff for the court, and I’ll 

be returning to that at a later point in the estimates. 

 

I’m also going to ask questions of the minister, Mr. Chairman, 

concerning the court reporting service that we have in the 

province, and try and reason with him on the subject to see if we 

can’t get back to a system of court reporting and producing 

transcripts that works. I mean, there’s nothing particularly wrong 

with the present system, except that it doesn’t work. Transcripts 

don’t get produced in a timely way. Transcripts don’t get produced 

in an accurate way, particularly so far as the criminal  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1832 

 

courts are concerned. And I’ll be addressing that with the minister 

in my questions. 

 

Two other subjects that I’ll be touching on is the native court 

worker program, where this government has by its own decision 

eliminated a very, very valuable and necessary program and laid 

off a large number of native court workers who were performing 

an excellent service. That service is no longer available, and our 

justice system is much the worse for it. 

 

And finally, I intend to ask him questions concerning question of 

legal representation for all people — the legal aid plan of this 

province. 

 

Now we move outside of that court system and we come to the 

corrections system. And I’m not going to go into that now, but I 

have questions for the minister concerning the functioning of the 

corrections system. And again, I will be arguing, trying to make 

him understand that he is not fulfilling his responsibilities so far as 

the operation of a corrections system is concerned. 

 

Now the other area that I want to talk to the minister about, Mr. 

Chairman, concerns the term “privatization”, which we’ve heard 

in this House and which is of a special concern to certain elements 

of the legal system. This whole business about court reporters, that 

I referred to earlier, first arose in the context of the privatization 

ideology of the then Minister of Justice, now the Minister of 

Finance. And I believe it is correct to say that that was the first, or 

one of the first efforts of this government in the direction of 

privatization, and it is a decision which, in my submission, has 

done more harm than good. 

 

We now hear talk of privatization with respect to other areas of the 

minister’s department. I hope they’re not true, but in due course in 

these estimates I’ll be wanting to ask him questions about rumours 

that we have about privatization of the land titles system and 

privatization of the personal property security system. Nothing 

would make me happier than to hear the minister stand on his feet 

and deny that there’s any substance to these rumours, but if there 

is, we certainly want to hear what the minister has in mind with 

respect to the ideology, the right-wing ideology of privatization 

and how it may affect some of these essential services. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, these questions that I’ve 

briefly referred to in my opening remarks are crucially important. 

They transcend any political considerations. They are 

responsibilities that fall upon any Department of Justice in any 

province. They are matters which the government has a solemn 

responsibility to undertake, and to undertake at the highest level, 

the highest level of quality available, because it is essential that the 

public have full confidence in the way in which the system works, 

because also it is necessary that the public is properly served with 

respect to this system. 

 

Now we have examined your estimates for this year with some 

care, and we have not seen in your estimates any of the items that 

we would have expected to see if these problems were to be 

sensibly addressed and resolved, and my fear is that you’ve no 

intention of addressing and  

resolving them. And that is a matter of grave concern because, 

frankly, all of the actors in the system, knowing that there are 

serious deficiencies with it, want it to work — judges want to be 

able to hear cases on a timely basis, and have the time and 

resources to produce a decision; litigants want their cases heard, 

and heard within a reasonable time, and decided within a 

reasonable time; lawyers depend upon the system to work, and to 

work properly, in order that they can give a proper service to their 

clients. And the ends of justice must be served. 

 

Now to repeat the important point that I tried to make at the 

beginning of my remarks, Mr. Chairman: some things must be 

exempted from a restraint program. and one of the things that must 

be exempted from any restraint program is the administration of 

justice in the province. It’s far too important to feel the lash of 

fiscal restraint. It provides services that simply must be provided, 

come rain or shine. And my fear is that this government is simply 

not intending to provide those services at that level. 

 

now I’d like to give the minister an opportunity to respond to those 

general remarks before we get into more detailed questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the hon. 

member could refer initially to the budget summary in the 

Estimates on page 13, and you will see that the spending estimates 

for this year are 3.7 billion compared to 3.6 billion. So you had 

about a $100 million increase in spending over the entire 

government which, by I think anybody’s standards, is a fairly 

modest growth of spending by government. 

 

If you then refer to your Department of Justice . . . And you make 

the observation that Department of Justice should somehow be 

exempted, it’s different, it should be excluded from that same 

fiscal restraint — that, we can argue whether we have to do or 

don’t have to do. but if you look at the overall growth of 

government, you’re looking in the area of maybe 1 per cent, or 

less than 1 per cent. 

 

If you go to the Department of Justice and the spending estimates 

for the Department of Justice this year, you see an increase in 

spending of 17 per cent, or just slightly below 17 per cent. And I 

would indicate to the hon. member that I think those numbers 

somehow speak to the same thing that he was talking about, in the 

sense that there are dimensions in the Department of Justice that, 

whether you want to practise fiscal restraint on, you are not 

capable of doing it, nor should you attempt to do it. 

 

If you look at the spending estimates of the Department of Justice, 

you are seeing a spending base this year in excess of $126 million. 

And I think the important part, if you break down those spending 

estimates into groupings, if you like, as to how the money is 

allocated, the money is allocated in the following way: by and 

away the largest part of the budget is to cover RCMP costs and 

policing costs. Now those increased this year $2.5 million. And I 

suppose one could argue that you can cut back policing costs, and 

that primarily cut-back will be involved in the rural part of the 

province, one- or two-man or three-man detachments. That’s a 

very difficult choice. That spending  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1833 

 

this year accounted for almost 32 per cent of the budget. 

 

You then moved to corrections, which you referred to, and that 

amounts to 26 per cent of the budget. so now you have those two 

things — corrections and RCMP costing picks up 58 per cent of 

the budget for the Department of Justice. 

 

(1515) 

 

You add to that the costs of the facilities used by Department of 

Justice or by the courts or by the corrections, and then the courts 

themselves and the various legal services provided by the 

Department of Justice, you have over 90 per cent of the budget 

right there in those particular items. And then if you throw into 

that the land titles system that you referred to, in effect what you 

have left is about 5 per cent of the budget is involved in what we 

might call discretionary spending. 

 

But I think your question was wider than that in the sense that 

even with a 17 per cent increase in spending we still need more 

courts, and we still need more jails; we still need more people 

working in the jails. And I’m sure you can add a series of others 

— native court worker program; and the list goes on. 

 

At some point in time you have to say, just a minute, is there a 

balance or is Department of Justice to carry on sort of unaffected 

by the fiscal realities in which we live? My suggestions is that I 

think for the most part the Department of Justice budget has fared 

fairly well this year, with a 17 per cent increase in spending. Now 

one might argue, and I’m sure one can, regardless of whether 

we’re on opposite sides of the house, I suspect that three lawyers 

in a room would all have a different way of solving the problem 

and allocating the money. My observation would be that the key 

and important areas are, in fact, being dealt with. 

 

But I think it begs an even larger question and that is: can we solve 

the problems that the hon. member refers to, the problems of does 

the public have confidence in our justice system, in our legal 

system, in our corrections system, and can we give them the 

security they need; or can we give them the confidence they need 

simply by appointing more judges, more prosecutors, more police 

officers, more correction workers? Can we solve the problem that 

way, or do we have to address the question and look at the 

question of the justice system perhaps in a different way and say 

maybe the answers will not come from adding more and more 

people to the delivery of the service? Is there other ways by which 

we can come to grips with that? 

 

In my initial response, I will avoid getting into some of the 

detailed questions that you referred to. I’m sure you’re going to 

come back on those. In any event, we’ll deal with those one at a 

time. 

 

But given that, I think that the approach that we have to take, the 

approach that I would favour that we take, is for the users of the 

system to quite frankly sit down and in a very honest way ask 

ourselves, does the system work properly, and what parts of the 

system do not work properly, and what would be a meaningful 

way of coming to grips with that particular problem? 

 

And very often that type of debate doesn’t take place in politics 

because it’s much easier to simply say, spend more money here; 

no I can’t; yes you can; no I can’t ; yes you can; and on goes the 

traditional political debate of this country. 

 

My view is that the confidence factor in our court system and legal 

system goes far beyond simply whether or not we need some more 

judges or some more police officers or some more prosecutors. I 

think people have lost confidence in a system, or are beginning to 

lose confidence in a system, or are beginning to lose confidence in 

a system, because somehow they don’t see that it deals fairly with 

what they see the problems of the law to be. 

 

Now I think, in fairness to your opening comments that somehow 

justice must stand aside from the normal fiscal realities of 

government; justice also must stand aside from the normal realities 

of political pressures — you guys should do this or you should do 

this or you should do this — perhaps no more obvious than the 

recent debate on capital punishment in parliament — did you vote 

on that question based on what the polls say, or do you vote on 

that question because of what you believe in or how the system 

must properly work? 

 

So I think you have those two thing. I suggest that too often 

government is left with the job of simply doling the money out, 

while it doesn’t have the ability to perhaps ask those questions. 

Does the Attorney General have, and should he have, the right to 

ask questions of the Chief Justice of the Court of Appeal as to how 

he is going to run his court? Should he have the right to ask 

questions of the provincial court as to how it is run, and should he 

be involved in doing that? 

 

I tend to take the view that you should not, and I would think the 

bulk of authority would tend to agree that a politician and 

Attorney General should probably stand back from that, to a 

degree, and I have pursued that particular approach. I happen to 

believe that, quite frankly, at the end that we have to look at new 

ways by which we deliver justice and new ways by which we 

deliver the process of justice to the people now and, more 

importantly, into the future. 

 

I’m often reminded of a . . . which I think is a significant statistic, 

that in Canada there are 1,500 times more lawyers per capita than 

there are in Japan. Reverse, there are 1,500 times more engineers 

in Japan than there are in Canada. Now I don’t think justice can be 

blind to that fact. By the same token, I don’t think you should be 

blind to somehow thinking that you can superimpose a Japanese 

model upon a Canadian economy, but I think there’s something 

that can be learned from both. 

 

My view, and the area that I would intend to pursue over the next 

year in this department, one of the main areas of concern is the 

whole area of arbitration and mediation. I think that’s an area that 

we should explore with some degree of aggressiveness. One might 

say some radical views, almost. But I think you want to live out on 

the edge on that particular issue if we’re going to come to grips 

with some of the main questions that you’ve referred to in your 

opening remarks. 

 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1834 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — It’s an intriguing prospect, Mr. Chairman, the 

minister makes with respect to bringing the users of the system 

together to assess the system and try and work out some 

improvements to it that would make it work better. I can’t purport 

to speak for all the elements in the system, but I do know some of 

the elements quite well, and they would welcome any initiative 

that would address that issue. They would welcome the 

opportunity to participate in a process whereby the existing system 

can be assessed and alternative remedies fully considered and 

solutions arrived at. 

 

I appreciate the minister’s remarks, because it was a serious 

response, and I appreciate it. That’s in distinction to some of the 

responses that we’ve had in this House in previous estimates, and I 

want the minister to know how much I appreciate his approach. I 

agree that the matters that I raised are not resolved simply by 

appointing more people. That’s not the whole answer. It is part of 

the answer, I think, to some of the matters that I raised. We’ll get 

into that shortly. 

 

But in general sense, we are talking about a system that, while it 

needs more money, while it needs more support and resources, has 

problems within it that require a good deal of discussion and 

debate and solutions that really have nothing to do with money at 

all. 

 

Now the minister has invited — I interpret his remarks as inviting 

me and my colleagues and others that I know, to participate in this 

process also. And I want to tell the minister, Mr. Chairman, that 

we have a lot of ideas about how various parts of the justice 

system can be improved. I think their progressive ideas . . . I’m not 

sure how the minister define radical, so I’m not able to say 

whether or not they meet his test of being radical, but I think they 

are progressive, helpful, and humanitarian ideas which can’t help 

but work improvements to the system, and work them at little or 

no cost. And so I offer all the resources that we have to whatever 

review the minister would like to initiate, or whatever process he 

would like to initiate to tackle some of these problems. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the minister expresses some reluctance to get 

involved in the administration of the courts, and I can appreciate 

his remarks from one perspective. 

 

The judiciary branch of government is separate from the executive 

branch, and of course it ought to continue to be separate. At the 

same time, the minister knows that some of these courts have 

encountered and are living with very large, significant problems. I 

speak particularly of the Court of Appeal. I speak also of the 

provincial court. And at the risk of leaving them out, I include 

Queen’s Bench also. And there must be a conduit of course, 

between those courts and the minister’s office so that the minister 

will have a full appreciation of what these problems are. 

 

Now I would think that the courts involved would appreciate a 

feedback from the minister, or the minister’s office, as to the 

problems that they’re having. What does the minister thing? How 

does the minister think these problems can be addressed? And 

while I would be the last person to recommend that you should be 

telling the courts what to do or how to do it, none the less, I’m  

certain that they would appreciate a level of dialogue that would 

show them that their problems are understood and are being 

appreciated, and hopefully attended to by the government. 

 

Now at a later point, I hope the minister will find an opportunity to 

develop the idea of arbitration and mediation which he’s 

mentioned, because if they are a part of the resolution of the 

problems of the justice system then we’re certainly interested in 

hearing about them and understanding them and contributing our 

thoughts to them. 

 

Now I want to go, Mr. Chairman, I want to go to the matter I 

raised about the operation of the provincial court system. And I 

want first of all to address the problem of the backlog. Now I 

know the minister is fully aware of this problem. He’s heard me 

on it in the budget debate; he heard me on it briefly in my opening 

remarks today; and he heard about it when I was raising the matter 

in public in the early part of last summer. 

 

It has to be described as a chronic problem. I’m not suggesting to 

the minister that he invented the problem, because I’m aware that 

it’s existed for some time. But in my city, Saskatoon, it is really a 

crisis. I mean, it is a matter of no small concern that a person 

charged with a criminal offence has to wait six months for a 

preliminary hearing. And that concern exists to everybody who’s 

charged, but it’s a particular concern to the people who are kept in 

the correctional centre on remand. And they’re being deprived of 

their freedom, their liberty for that period, through no fault of their 

own. The only reason why they’re there for such an extended 

period of time is that the court system can’t hear their case any 

earlier. 

 

Now I concede it to you, Minister, but I’d be interested in hearing 

the details that you’ve been trying to resolve that problem in the 

city of Regina. Now that may be on an experimental basis. But I 

would appreciate hearing the details of that. 

 

In a larger context, I would like to know what your plan is for the 

rest of the province, including the city of Saskatoon but not limited 

to that city. There ought to be some way that the ingenuity of 

human beings can attack the problem of having to wait such an 

extraordinary length of time before a preliminary inquiry can be 

run. 

 

(1530) 

 

Now I’ve noticed that this backlog has remained more or less at 

six months in Saskatoon for some time. And the court system can 

keep it at that level. So what occurs to me is that if you could bring 

the backlog down from six months to about two months or six 

weeks or one month — whatever’s feasible from the point of view 

of prosecuting the case — if you can get it down to that level then 

you should be able to keep it at that level, considering that the 

backlog has remained static at its present level for the length of 

time it has. 

 

So my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: what are your plans with 

respect to dealing with the problem of the backlog? 

 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1835 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member obviously raises a point 

that he has some knowledge of as it relates to Saskatoon. And 

Saskatoon is, my information now, from six months down to five 

months. So that there has been some progress over the last three or 

four months, of reducing that backlog down somewhat. 

 

The city of Regina, on the other hand, is something like 80 days, 

compared to 150 days in Saskatoon. I suppose the questions that 

we pose to the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan in the provincial 

court is: what is necessary to move Saskatoon into the similar 

situation as Regina? It almost sounds reminiscent of the hospital 

waiting lists, and I’m sure for totally different reasons. But why is 

it different in Saskatoon than it is in Regina with, I assume, a 

similar number of judges in both places? 

 

What we have to do, I think, is, as I understand the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Pump a little more money into the system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, it’s not just pumping more money into 

the system, as I understand that if we could get into having cases 

heard on Fridays, it would be a progress in the sense that you’d 

pick up an extra day. I think one trend that you’re seeing across 

the country is more sessions of the provincial court being held at 

night. Is that something that could be done to move it forward, and 

that type of thing? 

 

Saskatoon is further complicated now with the appointment of 

Judge Wedge, or elevation of Judge Wedge, to the superior court. 

We’re clearly looking at appointing another judge into Saskatoon. 

Is there a need for a further judge into Saskatoon? And that’s a 

legitimate question — something that we hope to deal with so that 

other ways in which we could manage that court that the process 

comes down? 

 

If you look then across the rest of the province so that we’re not 

sort of, of the view that Saskatoon is reflective of the rest of the 

province, and the rest of the province is in fact probably below the 

Canadian standard as to time in which to get into the court and 

into the court system. 

 

So I take your point that you raise in Saskatoon. Clearly it is 

something that we have raised and I have raised personally with 

the Chief Justice. It’s something that we would hope that he would 

be able to deal with. And I have been given some hope that in fact 

that there has been progress made over the last two to three 

months, and I would hope that when we stand here a year from 

now, significant more progress has been made. Just as to how you 

do that, I only simply want to again say that if we need further 

judges, then that’s something that we would certainly consider. 

But I would hope that the system considers more than simply 

trying to add more judges. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the minister about 

this committee that his predecessor, Mr. Dutchak, appointed in 

March of 1986. It was a committee whose terms of reference, 

according to the newspapers, was the very problem that we’re 

talking about. Can the minister indicate a number of things. First 

of all, who was on that  

committee? Did it make a report? And can we know what the 

recommendations of that committee was, if in fact it did produce a 

report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, I’m advised that the members — and 

I haven’t the names but I’ll give you the positions — the members 

of the provincial court utilization committee consisted of the chief 

judge of the provincial court, a member of the provincial court 

judges’ association, senior defence counsel, general counsel for 

legal aid, and senior Crown counsel. 

 

The report, I’m advised, has been completed and will be 

forwarded to me shortly. Recommendations, as I understand, are 

(1) the establishment of pre-plea conferences in Regina and 

Saskatoon, and these for the most part have been already 

introduced; a recommendation of trial co-ordinators in Regina and 

Saskatoon; and a recommendation in a number of changes in the 

rural circuit points for Saskatchewan, which means that you take a 

lot of the smaller towns that held court and either reduce their 

sittings from two to one, or four to two, or eliminate them 

altogether. 

 

And while the first two are easy enough, I would have to advise 

the hon. member, and I haven’t seen the final report as to what 

they’re recommending, but small town Saskatchewan — I know 

what they’re going to say because I happen to represent some of 

those small towns, if you say the court’s no longer going to sit in 

your town and you have to drive 30 or 40 miles to go to court, 

whether it’s to enter a plea of guilty to whatever. So that 

recommendation I have not seen. 

 

But I would I indicate to the hon. member that having lived in the 

rural part of this province for a long time and practised law in the 

rural part of the province, while I think there are changes that can 

be made there, I think care must be taken as to how you deliver 

that, how you make those changes, and is there something that can 

perhaps replace the provincial court sitting in that particular town. 

 

Can it be perhaps the justices of the peace would have more say 

and authority? Could they handle a wider range of hearings, 

perhaps? And I think those are questions I think deserve fair 

debate and fair discussion. But certainly the committee report, I 

will give serious consideration to it, and certainly make it public 

and prepare to act on what I see as would be appropriate for us to 

act on. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now with respect to the situation in Saskatoon, 

Mr. Minister, may I make a suggestion for your consideration. I 

think that a colleague was correct that that was a situation where 

you just have to provide some money. And I say that in this sense, 

that in order to rid the system of the backlog, at least on a 

temporary basis, you have to have more court rooms than you 

have now, and you have to have more judges, and you have to 

have more prosecutors. I’m not suggesting these people are 

permanent long-term employees, or that the court room is 

permanent long-term space, but we’re talking here about reducing 

the backlog from six months or five months, as you say, down to 

an acceptable level. 

 

You might tell me, Mr. Minister, what your view of  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1836 

 

an acceptable level is, but say it’s two months. It seems to me that 

with the injection of new . . . of temporary people into the system 

to hear cases, that you could easily bring the backlog up to date, 

and then those people could return to their other lives, and the 

present system may be able to more or less keep that on line. 

 

As I said earlier, the backlog in Saskatoon has remained more or 

less static for months now. In fact, the present system has even 

improved the situation a bit. So if you could get the number down, 

you would have perhaps resolved a good portion of our problem. 

 

What I'm asking for your reaction to, Mr. Minister, is the idea that 

you make a crash effort, a crash effort to bring the Saskatoon 

backlog into manageable proportions. I think you could find the 

judges. You know, there are retired judges around who could be 

brought back. There are experienced members of the bar who 

might be prepared to take appointments on an acting basis for a 

short period of time. There are prosecutors around. Some of them 

are former employees of your department, others are people in the 

private bar who would be prepared to prosecute cases on a 

fee-for-service basis which is something that your department is 

doing to some extent anyway, and in that way, just resolve this 

situation in Saskatoon, I know that you consider it to be 

unacceptable, Minister, and I propose that as one means of 

resolving it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that in Saskatoon today . . . 

you made reference to six months to get to a preliminary hearing. 

And I'm advised that that was in fact the case. Now I'm advised 

that if you're held in custody, you're into your preliminary hearing 

within two months, which is the same as we have presently in 

Regina. So I think that you must acknowledge that there has been 

some progress made with regards to that. 

 

I'm also advised that we hope to have a pilot trial co-ordinator in 

Saskatoon appointed this fall. The decision has been taken to go 

forward with that. It's just now a matter of staffing up and how we 

deal with that; also that we have moved, or the court has moved, 

Judge Seniuk from Meadow Lake down to Saskatoon and 

appointed him in Saskatoon. And perhaps that will assist in 

dealing with the backlog as well. 

 

I take the advice of the hon. member as a possible solution to that. 

I can undertake to discuss those particular suggestions with the 

chief judge and see whether we can more it in that direction. I can 

only undertake to do that. 

 

And I tend to agree with you. If the backlog is always this high in 

Saskatoon — six months — and out of step with the rest of the 

province, and it never gets any worse, although we're seeing some 

improvement now, one would hope that perhaps a little shot in the 

arm might get them down to the two-month average. 

 

And if you can do that and then it stays there, fine. If it goes up 

again, then I think we have to ask ourselves, maybe that wasn't the 

way to do it; maybe there's something else in Saskatoon; it's 

maybe the way the lawyers function, or whatever, that maybe 

caused that  

problem. 

 

So I mean, I think we would like to get down to the Regina 

standard. Following down to Regina standards, then we will see 

where it goes from there. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: I want to turn to the Court of Appeal, Minister. I 

made some brief efforts in my opening remarks to the Court of 

Appeal, and I told the minister that a number of cases are being 

heard in an exemplary way — in a way that is the envy to the rest 

of the court system. 

 

In the areas of administrative law, through its expedited 

procedures, the Court of Appeal are dealing with appeals to them 

in a matter, literally, of weeks. And it's an innovation introduced 

by Chief Justice Bayda and has worked in quite a satisfactory way. 

But in general, the Court of Appeal is behind and is having a very 

difficult time trying to keep from falling further behind, having a 

very difficult time coping with its backlog. And this has resulted in 

problems over the years that have gained some notoriety in the 

press, and it's a situation that is regrettable but understandable in 

light of the increasing work-load that the court has been facing 

over the years. 

 

(1545) 

 

There's another aspect to this problem, Mr. Chairman, that I know 

the minister is aware of. And it is that to an increasing degree the 

Courts of Appeal of the provinces are becoming the court of last 

resort in our judicial system. There was a time when important 

cases were appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada, most of 

them as of right. 

 

As I recall, the question of whether you could appeal to the 

Supreme Court of Canada as of right depended, in many cases, on 

the amount of money involved, so that the Court of Appeal in 

Saskatchewan was merely a step along the way in an important 

case, in the vast majority of cases. That's no longer the case. The 

reality now is that for the vast majority of cases, the Court of 

Appeal of Saskatchewan is the last resort in the judicial system so 

far as Saskatchewan residents are concerned. 

 

In order to appeal a case to the Supreme Court of Canada now, 

you require leave of the court to appeal to it. You have to make a 

special application for leave, and those applications are rarely 

granted. The Supreme Court of Canada will only entertain the 

appeal if it raises a question of national importance and they 

happen to feel that it's important that they decide that national 

question in the context of your particular fact situation in your 

particular case. And what it means is that, except for about 15 

cases a year or so, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal speaks 

finally on our civil actions and many of our criminal actions — 

most of our criminal actions. 

 

So at this time in our history, the work of the Saskatchewan Court 

of Appeal has become more important than it ever has been. It is 

the last word in justice here, and so a greater onus lies on that 

court than ever before to produce decisions that are sound and 

solid and just, and all of the other things that a judicial decision 

should be. Now I'm not suggesting that they're not; you must 

understand that. I'm only suggesting that the  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1837 

 

responsibility on them has become much, much greater than it was 

just a few years ago. 

 

The resources available to that court to handle the increased 

work-load and this increased responsibility haven't been keeping 

up with the times. The addition of two judges in the 1980s has 

been important, but it is, in my submission, not enough. And the 

workings of that court, I think, are being handicapped by the fact 

that these resources are not available. 

 

Now I want to point out to you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 

that as I said in my opening remarks, that six years ago the court 

was hearing 450 cases a year. It is not hearing between 700 and 

800 cases. And I want also to draw to your attention the fact that 

other provinces are handling this situation much differently. I draw 

a comparison with the British Columbia Court of Appeal, which 

hears a slightly lower average number of appeals a year — 

approximately 700 appeals — and yet has 15 judges in the Court 

of Appeal, more than twice as many as we have. 

 

And my question for you, minister, is whether you're giving any 

consideration to the problems being faced by the Court of Appeal 

and, specifically, whether you're giving any consideration to 

increasing the number of judges in that court? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can advise the hon. member that the 

lobby for more spaces on the Court of Appeal comes from more 

lawyers than yourself. The statistical case-load of our Court of 

Appeal of appeals filed: 1983 was 871; ’84, 774; ’85, 768. If you 

look at the number of appeals heard: 730 in 1983; 665 in ’84; 606 

in ’85. So you see the number of cases heard are, in fact, reducing. 

 

I'm further advised that the Court of Appeal, 80 per cent of the 

appeals — which I think is where you'll find a difference between 

our court and the court in B.C. — 80 per cent of the cases held, or 

the appeals held in our court, are criminal in nature. 

 

If you look at the present statistics of the Court of Appeal, length 

of time to hear an appeal once it is launched: on sentencing 

appeals is 15 to 30 days; on expedited criminal appeals is 30 to 45 

days; expedited civil appeals, 30 to 45 days; regular criminal 

appeals, 30 to 60 days; and regular civil appeals, eight months. So 

I think your point is perhaps the strongest as it relates to civil 

appeals. You also, I think . . . where a fair degree of the delay 

appears is in the writing of the judgements. And I take it that you 

are referring to that when you say that the need for two additional 

positions on the Court of Appeal. 

 

I would indicate to the hon. member that that's something that is 

being considered, something that I will consider over the next 

period of time, and move accordingly. You know, the cost of that 

is not a large factor for us because it's picked up by the federal 

government. So it's something that I would intend to discuss with 

the Minister of Justice in Ottawa at some future distance, not in the 

too distant future. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Another suggestion on that same point, Mr. 

Chairman, and Mr. Minister, is the employment of  

law clerks in the Court of Appeal. At the present time, the seven 

judges of the Court of Appeal have two law clerks to support their 

work. You will know that the law clerks do research and draft 

preliminary drafts of judgements for the judges of the Court of 

Appeal, and their work is invaluable to the judges to whom they're 

attached. There are other jurisdictions where each of the judges of 

a Court of Appeal have a law clerk attached to them, and in some 

courts in this country more than one law clerk is attached to a 

judge. 

 

Now the minister is also probably aware of the situation in, say, 

the United States Supreme Court where a judge will have three or 

four law clerks attached to him or her. And if you read a book like 

The Brethren, you will see the role that a law clerk can play in 

helping a justice to do the work which he or she has to do in 

considering an appeal. And it's quite a dramatic story and quite a 

dramatic improvement to the quality of product or quality of a 

judgement that a judge is able to put forward. 

 

Now the interesting thing is that these law clerks can be hired in 

Saskatchewan for something like $1,500 to $2,000 a month. Their 

salaries are compared to the salaries of articled students at the 

private bar, and the cost is not excessive. And a real improvement 

could be effected by hiring five more law clerks, and arrangements 

exist through the law society to allow them to have that time count 

towards the articles. And it's an invaluable experience for the 

student as well. The graduate law student gets an inside look at 

how the courts work, how judgements are arrived at. And for a 

very small expenditure the government would be supporting the 

work of the Court of Appeal to a very large extent. These students 

can save a judge hours and days of research by reading and 

briefing cases, by drafting memoranda on points of law that arise 

on a case, and enable a judge to do his work quickly and more 

effectively. 

 

So I would sincerely propose that you consider that extra expense 

which, as I said, is not large and which would dramatically 

improve the way in which the Court of Appeal could operate. 

 

While I’m on my feet on this point, I might draw to the minister’s 

attention that the Court of Queen’s Bench could use a similar kind 

of support service. They now share, I think, in Regina, one law 

clerk. And how you divide the services of one law clerk among so 

many judges is a little hard to understand. But obviously it would 

be a good expenditure of departmental funds, and a small 

expenditure of funds, to work quite a substantial improvement in 

the operation of the system. And I’d like your reaction to that, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that there are two law clerks at 

the Court of Appeal presently. This matter was brought to my 

attention some time early in the budget process, and people from 

Justice in fact did explore this potential with the Court of Appeal. 

And I was advised that it was not seen as a high priority by the 

Court of Appeal and by the fudges at the Court of Appeal, and 

therefore was not further pursued as a potential option. 

 

Perhaps we might re-look that again in another cycle, but it 

certainly the last time was not seen as a key and  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1838 

 

important way by which to deal with the particular problem that 

we face in our Court of Appeal. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well that’s certainly news to me, Mr. Minister. I 

can tell you that it is the opinion of large segments of the private 

bar that this ought to be a priority of the Court of Appeal, but that 

of course is for the Court of Appeal to determine. And I am glad to 

hear you say that you’re prepared to look at it in the next cycle if 

the court does consider it to be a priority. 

 

I want to now turn to the court reporters. Now there was a time in 

this province when trials were conducted in the presence of a court 

reporter. The court reporter would take down in shorthand, either 

with pen and ink or on a shorthand machine, the evidence which 

was given in the court, and would then transcribe that evidence 

and produce a transcript. 

 

Now those transcripts are the basis for a great deal of what 

happens in the legal system, in the judicial system. A transcript has 

to be produced in respect of every preliminary hearing. A 

transcript is produced in every trial where the matter is being taken 

to an appellate court. The transcripts have to be timely and, above 

everything else, they have to be accurate. 

 

Now we saw in Saskatchewan, on the election of your government 

in 1982, some changes to the court system as it affects court 

reporting services. We saw the then minister making a decision to 

introduce, to privatize the service. Now I think it'’ fair to say that 

no one knew exactly what would be involved in the privatizing of 

the service, including perhaps officials in the department. But in 

any event, the service was said to be privatized. A number of court 

reporting services were established, and they’re doing a number of 

things. They take examinations for discovery and produce 

transcripts, and I can say, minister, that that part of the system 

seems to be working very, very well. And I don’t think anybody’s 

complaining about that. 

 

Where the problem comes is in the provincial court system, again. 

 

(1600) 

 

Now I don’t know what words you’d use to describe the reporting 

situation in your provincial courts, but I would call it chaotic. I 

would call it totally inadequate and a failure, and I would suggest 

that it’s a situation that you ought not to live with. You ought not 

to tolerate the perpetuation of such a system. It is the cause of 

about half of the problem that I outlined earlier. The waiting for a 

transcript has kept young men and women — some not so young 

— in our correctional centre on remand for unacceptable lengths 

of time in quite a number of cases. In addition to that, the system 

that has been put in place just simply doesn’t work. 

 

Now I hope, minister, that you don’t stand on your feet and tell me 

that the system does work, because if you say that, then you’re 

about the only one who would think that. Everybody else seems to 

accept that it doesn’t work. The transcripts not only are late, but 

they’re of abysmal quality. What’s happening now is that the 

evidence given  

in the provincial courts is being transcribed on a tape machine 

onto a tape, and that tape is then shipped to a typing service and 

the typing is done. So that the tape is converted into a transcript, 

and the quality is simply not acceptable. Your prosecutors don’t 

find it acceptable. Defence counsel certainly don’t find it 

acceptable. The Court of Appeal has in a number of cases found it 

not to be acceptable. And it will never be acceptable, Minister. It is 

just simply not going to work. Now not only does it not work in 

Saskatoon and Regina where you have judges sitting in the same 

courtroom day after day with a piece of equipment that doesn’t get 

moved around — it stays there — but you’re using the same 

system all over the province. 

 

Now I know in many places in the province that’s been the way it 

is, because you can’t have a court reporter travelling around to 

hear all of the trials that occur. but what’s coming out of the end of 

the pipe are transcripts that are useless in many circumstances. 

 

Let me given you an example. It’s hypothetical, but it’s real in the 

sense that it’s happened in a number of cases. A preliminary 

hearing will be heard in a provincial court, say in Regina. The 

witnesses of the Crown are all called, and they all give their 

evidence, and they are all cross-examined. And the object of the 

preliminary inquiry from the court’s point of view is to determine 

whether there is enough evidence to justify a trial. 

 

From the defendant’s point of view, one of the prime objectives of 

the preliminary inquiry is to hear the Crown evidence and to test it 

through cross-examination. Many of the questions and answers 

that are asked and answered on that inquiry are extremely crucial 

to the defence of the accused when the trial comes. Now if those 

questions and answers, particularly the answers, don’t come 

through on the transcript, then they’re gone — they’re gone for 

ever; they’re of no possible use to the defence counsel. 

 

And, minister, I can give you a list of names of defence counsels 

in this province who have run into that problem again and again 

and again. They’ll go to a preliminary inquiry; they’ll 

cross-examine a key witness for the Crown; they’ll get an answer 

that is absolutely vital to some element of their defence, and when 

they get the transcript, the answer’s not there. It’s inaudible, or it’s 

just blank. You know, the words “inaudible” appear in the 

transcript, or else just little dots indicating that the typist couldn’t 

hear what the answer was. And that just . . . the system just can’t 

work that way. The system has to work better than that. 

 

Now we’ve had this problem in some of the places where only 

tape recorders have been used, you know, if you have a 

preliminary hearing out in a small centre where there’s no reporter 

present. But in the larger centres — and there are quite a number 

of them in Saskatchewan — where there have been court 

reporters, there have been adequate transcripts. A live reporter, 

sitting in a court room, will pick up answers that the tape recorder 

just mumbled yes, whereas a person working from the tape just 

doesn’t pick up the nod. They’re not video tapes, they’re audio 

tapes, Minister, and I’m sure you know that.  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1839 

 

So, what you’ve done by this decision to get the live reporters out 

of the court room is to really harm the administration of justice. 

What I’m talking about is a very important part of the fair conduct 

of a criminal trial, and the absence of those court reporters has 

damaged the system in that way. 

 

And I suggest, minister, that you haven’t saved very much money 

by doing this. I suggest that if you balanced up all of the costs 

involved, including the costs of new trials and including the 

money thrown away in prosecutions that go afoul because there’s 

no transcripts produced, or appeals that go afoul — if you totalled 

everything up, you really haven’t saved very much money. You 

managed to get rid of a bunch of court reporters, fire them, but 

when you look at the bottom line in the balance sheet — and I 

think the Deputy Premier is nodding agreement with me — the 

cost saving is just not there. The budget is pretty much the same. 

 

And when we’re out consulting, as you suggested in your response 

to my opening remarks about how the system can work better, and 

when we sit down and talk to some of the actors in the system, 

including the defence counsels of this province and your own 

prosecutors, I think we’ll find very high on their agenda the 

reintroduction of live reporters into the court room. And so there 

should be. 

 

Now I would invite you to respond to that, Mr. Minister. And I do 

hope that you’ve got good news for the legal community when 

you’re framing your response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would make two observations. The first 

question you raised was the concern about the time. I’m advised 

that, from a time point of view, the time between a preliminary 

hearing and readiness from a transcript is now down to one month 

in Saskatoon for people in custody. 

 

Now if that’s in fact the case, there’s been some progress made 

there in the area of backlogs of transcripts. And that backlog has 

been dealt with in the sense of farming it out to cottage industry 

people to do the typing, not unlike your proposal to farm out the 

provincial court judge positions in Saskatoon, to get that backlog 

work down. 

 

With regard to the concept, I suppose we can disagree on whether 

or not we should have a court reporter sitting in the court or 

whether or not we should have the machine followed by 

somebody typing it out. 

 

My view is that while some of the machines may have been less 

than perfect, and certainly I have experienced that practising law 

in small town Saskatchewan, where the recorder gets bumped 

around in the trunk of the judge’s car over some rough roads — 

and I understand that — but I would think that if we look at the 

progress that we’ve made in science and the progress that we’ve 

made in recording and electronics equipment, surely we can find 

recording devises that will pick everything up that’s said in the 

court. And having done that, it’s a matter of then putting it to 

people capable of transposing that. And if there’s a problem, you 

fall back on your tape. I’m advised that there has been a couple of 

situations, one a trial and one a preliminary hearing, that had to be 

redone  

because of inadequate recording equipment and inadequate 

transcript of that. 

 

I would simply say that I think we must push forward though, and 

if there’s shortcomings in it — and I don’t know that there are; I 

have not heard that particular point driven home as you have 

today, something I will look into — but my inclination would be 

that I would tend to want to first deal with the recording 

equipment. And if it’s inadequate, we can deal with that, at not a 

great cost. And then you deal with the second question, and that is: 

can some people sit down with a proper piece of recorded 

equipment and not transcribe that into a document? My guess is 

that should be able to be done. But I take your criticism of it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — But will you act on the criticism? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that the time lines are 

becoming far less than they were before, and I suspect that give 

the system a little time and it should work. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we have 

very interesting consultations in store as the elements of the legal 

system get an opportunity to speak to you about how these things 

are or are not working. My information, quite recent, is that tape 

recorded preliminary hearings are taking an average of 5.6 months 

to be produced, and they’re getting longer. 

 

Now I know you said for people in custody, and I appreciate that. I 

take it that your information is correct, and I think that that is a 

substantial improvement. That certainly wasn’t the case last spring 

where we did have people in remand waiting extraordinary lengths 

of time for their transcripts to be available. There are cases of 

preliminary hearings that we have learned about where the 

transcript has been outstanding for seven months. 

 

Now, Minister, the technology is there. It’s going to be very 

interesting as you get into the subject because the technology is 

exciting, and it’s available and it’s state of the art, and it’s not 

expensive. I mean it’s not expensive considering the way in which 

the whole system is expensive, in any event. 

 

And a computer-assisted court reporting can produce, for example, 

a transcript immediately available — immediately available. And 

consider the way in which that would improve trials if a witness’s 

evidence were available moments after they’ve given it. Think of 

its importance in cross-examination and in the conduct of a fair 

trial. And consider the significance that would have for a judge 

who’s trying to sift through the evidence to determine questions of 

credibility in the context of deciding a particular decision. 

 

So this technology is available. And I shouldn’t give you a false 

impression, Minister; it is initially more expensive than what 

we’re doing, of course. You’re going to go out and buy the 

equipment; there’ll be a capital cost involved. But amortizing that 

capital cost over any significant period of time and balancing that 

against the cost of the system that you have in place now would, I 

think, encourage you to go with the technology. 

 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1840 

 

We’ve got to prepare the legal system for the year 2000 and 

beyond and we should be looking forward. And frankly, your tape 

recorders are a big step in the wrong direction. They’re a big step 

backwards. They’re not working. And you may buy different 

recorders, and they may do a somewhat better job, but the major 

weaknesses in that system are going to persist. 

 

And one of the actors in the legal system that you’ll be talking to 

as you pursue your plans is the court reporters’ association, who 

have a great deal of information about available technology and a 

good deal to tell you about how you can go about fixing up some 

of these weaknesses. 

 

Now I should just, before going on, give you an opportunity to 

comment on that, Minister. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that . . . You indicated that 

five and a half months for a transcript on a preliminary hearing. 

I’m advised that that was in fact the case to the end of June of this 

year; that we are now . . . our present turn-around time is at two 

months. 

 

And I suspect that we could talk a fair degree on technology, and 

I’m not going to get into that because it’ll take me a long time. It’s 

an area of significant interest to me. Although I would say that if 

you are looking at the voice translator into a document, that’s till 

very expensive equipment, and I think a ways down the road 

before it is really into a practical sense of being able to be used. 

 

Certainly it’s something that I would consider. And with the way 

technology changes, certainly it’s something, I think, that we 

could look forward to in the future. But I would suggest that it’s 

probably not here at this point in time. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — The technology that I was specifically thinking 

about at the time involved a live court reporter typing, or whatever 

the appropriate word is, onto a machine that was hooked to a 

computer which produced the transcripts. So the live court reporter 

is part of the system, but gives you an overall system that is cost 

effective and also cost comparable, if I can use that term — not 

out of line with what the system is now bearing. 

 

I want to now turn to the John Howard Society, minister. You’ve 

heard me before express my outrage at the way in which the 

society was treated by the government in this budget, and I’m 

going to repeat the essential elements of it. The provincial 

government did not renew its grant to the John Howard Society 

this year. That grant was $193,000. The John Howard Society had 

been receiving provincial funding on the basis of which a good 

part of its program proceeded since the year 1958, as I recall, and 

had received that funding year over year up until this year. 

 

The John Howard Society administers, delivers some of the most 

important programming that is available in the justice system. 

Now I use the term “most importantly” and that’s not quite what I 

mean. They’re providing the  

most important services for convicted criminals, and their work is 

extremely important. And the importance of their work has been 

acknowledged nationally, internationally, and at every level. The 

importance of their work has been understood and appreciated. 

And you, yourself, your department was making use of the 

services of the John Howard Society in connection with the way in 

which you were discharging your responsibilities imposed upon 

you and the department. 

 

The first question I have to you is why, why you would turn to the 

John Howard Society and decide that the service that they were 

offering was not of sufficient importance to justify maintaining 

that grant, and why it was justified, in your mind, to terminate that 

grant and thereby terminate many of the very important programs 

being delivered by the John Howard Society? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well a couple of observations. First of all, 

I think the observation by you, and the statements by you, would 

indicate that funding of the John Howard Society has been 

discontinued. As the hon. members knows, that funding to the 

John Howard Society has been reduced, not discontinued, and the 

grants from Saskatchewan Justice, corrections division, 

represented 15 per cent of John Howard Society’s total funding — 

15 per cent was, in fact, what was reduced. They’re still funded by 

the Department of Social Services, and we still continue to 

contract the John Howard Society for administration and 

community services. 

 

Now your next question is going to be, or the follow-up question 

is going to be, that’s fine, but you still cut back on John Howard 

Society, and justify that for me. I suppose in a world where we did 

not have revenue restraints, and therefore expenditure restraints, 

one would have probably continued to fund this. I was left with 

looking at the budget where you took the funding, as I said, for the 

courts and for the police and for the corrections and for the Land 

Titles Office — all things that are pretty fundamental that you 

couldn’t very well cut — and you’re left with about 5 per cent 

discretionary. And that 5 per cent discretionary, I guess we came 

down to contribute some money to holding our budget intact as 

much as we could. 

 

We had to take those choices, and the two choices came down to 

the John Howard Society, cutting back some of the funding to 

them, and eliminating the native court worker program. Those 

decisions were taken. They’re the type of decision that I can assure 

you that a minister does not take easily and take lightly. They’re 

the type of a decision that you would just as soon, as a politician, 

not have to make because, obviously, you don’t receive many 

accolades for doing that. 

 

It’s simply a case of having to take some difficult decisions, and 

one took those difficult decisions. Now you can, I’m sure, say well 

you should have cut some place else, and I guess we can debate 

that for some time. That’s the decision that we took, because in 

looking at the package that I was responsible for looking at, 

specifically, was the Department of Justice. And perhaps you can 

argue that we should have had a 20 per cent increase in 

Department of Justice and a lower increase some place else. That 

is what came down. That was the decision that  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1841 

 

was taken. 

 

As I indicated to you, that that's not to suggest that either one of 

those services did not provide a service; they clearly did. It's, I 

guess, a question of making decisions and choices. You have to do 

that when you're in government. Those decisions were taken, and I 

guess one would have to live with them. Should the revenues of 

the province, primarily from resources and farming, improve, as 

we all hope they will, then certainly they would be given every 

consideration to reinstate in those programs. But other than that, I 

guess we can simply argue that: yes, we should; no, we shouldn't. 

But I think it's based upon that narrow view that we both look at. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Minister, you're perfectly right that we can argue 

about whether or not you should have cut this grant, and I'm going 

to make the case that you shouldn't have cut it. And I want to 

debate it, I mean, I think you were wrong. For $193,000 you lost a 

lot. You were getting a big bang for your buck from that $193,000, 

and by wiping it you wiped out very, very significant services that 

have been provided in this province for years and years to people 

who are among the least fortunate, suffering from all sorts of 

problems, coming out of prison, or not going to prison, or being 

convicted. The significance of not going to prison becomes 

obvious when you see what you've cut. 

 

But what the $193,000 was doing was funding the core program 

— the core program of the John Howard Society — and provided 

rehabilitative services, counselling, public education, victim 

assistance, and citizen involvement in justice programs. 

 

Now you yourself recognized the importance of these services in 

February of this year by declaring the week of February 14 as 

John Howard Society week. And two months later you withdraw 

this grant funding. Now we became . . . Saskatchewan became the 

first province to lose these services that I'm referring to — became 

the first province to lose these services offered by the John 

Howard Society. The society will no longer be involved in 

assisting with pre-release plans for inmates leaving provincial 

correctional centres. These people are just going to be released out 

on the streets all on their own to cope. 

 

Secondly, the fine option program, which allows first time 

offenders to avoid a jail sentence or a fine by doing community 

work, may be in jeopardy as a result of the cutting of the grant. 

And inmate programming, programming for the inmates and their 

families which was previously available — including parents of 

young offenders — is in jeopardy also. The society has had to 

reduce its staff by one-third, and this has seriously affected their 

ability to function and their morale, and they've lost the skills and 

experience of people who've worked in this area for many, many 

years. 

 

Now I want to quote for your information and for the record, from 

the executive director of the society, Bob Ruttenberg. And I quote: 

 

The John Howard Society acts as a vehicle for public 

participation in our criminal justice system.  

Our service, citizen involvement, is a core component of any 

successful and thoughtful justice system. In every province 

across Canada, these services exist, supported by provincial, 

federal, local and charitable funding. Ours is the first 

government in Canada to discontinue financing for community 

participation in justice. 

 

Now, Minister, I think this is a matter that should be reconsidered, 

to say the least. I've said it on previous occasions, and I say it 

again, this is a service that was being provided for the benefit of 

some of the least fortunate people in our society. It's more than just 

a matter of throwing money at the people, it's a question of 

providing the service that would help them in the problem that 

they were having, whether it was coming out of jail or whether it 

was working off the penalty for having committed the crime, 

without having to go to jail or without having to pay a fine with 

money that they don't have. Very progressive ideas that have been 

in effect in our society for some time, and the cutting of your grant 

has placed these programs in very serious jeopardy. 

 

Now I respectfully submit, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that it's a 

decision that you ought never to have taken. I think it fair to say 

that you . . . maybe I'm being too generous here but it's a decision 

the implications of which you didn't realize at the time you were 

making the decision. 

 

But in light of all the criticism that's come to you from the society 

and from us and from other people interested in penal issues in 

Saskatchewan, surely it's time to review that idea and to go to the 

former minister who himself is a strong supporter of the John 

Howard Society — now the Minister of Finance — and discuss 

the possibility of reintroducing this grant. I mean, the shape that 

you guys have got this province in, $193,000 just isn't going to be 

noticed. But the service here is so vital, so important, that it 

deserves being right up near the top of the list of things that you 

ought to change your mind about and reintroduce. Will you do 

that, Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member makes two observations. 

Number one, he makes the observation that the fine option 

program is in jeopardy because of this cut to the John Howard 

Society. I can assure the hon. member that the fine option program 

is not in jeopardy. The John Howard Society is but one of 280 

community-based agencies the Department of Justice has contact 

with to act as fine option agents in the province of Saskatchewan. 

John Howard Society acts in the city of Saskatoon and the city of 

Regina and that service is still being provided, still being 

contracted to the John Howard Society. So his observation he 

made just a minute earlier is in fact not true. 

 

With regards to the other services provided by the John Howard 

Society, I'm advised by the officials that in fact the correction 

workers can do some of the work within the correctional 

institutions to prepare the particular inmate for his time when he is 

to leave that institution, and that work can properly be done by 

corrections workers. 

 

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1842 

 

(1630) 

 

But with regard to the fine option program, I can advise the hon. 

member that his allegation that that will be in jeopardy and that 

will be discontinued is not, in fact, true. 

 

Ms. Simard: — I just want to ask a question on this point because 

we're dealing with it, Mr. Chairman, of the minister. There's a 

program whereby individuals may be charged with an offence but 

the charges are stayed in the event that the accused, and the person 

who's pressing the charges, or the person who is alleging they 

have been offended by the accused, come to some sort of an 

agreement — it's not the fine option program, but the other one. 

 

Now it's my understanding, Mr. Minister, that that program is not 

available in northern Saskatchewan — to Northerners . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — What's it called? 

 

Ms. Simard: — The name of it just escapes me right now. I'm not 

sure of the name of it, but a program whereby charges are not 

proceeded with but are stayed as a result of discussions between 

the accused and the person . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — The mediation diversion. 

 

Ms. Simard: — The mediation diversion, that's the name of it. 

Now that program's not available in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Minister, and I would suggest that that leaves a very wide gap in 

the administration of justice in the province in as much as it 

discriminates against Northerners. It discriminates against them 

because it leaves them unequal in the eyes of the law. And I would 

just like to know whether there is any movement on the part of the 

Department of Justice to ensure that that program be implemented 

completely throughout northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised, if you're talking about the 

diversion program, that for adults it's only available now in 

Saskatoon, and no other place in the province. It has been for some 

time. If you're relating it to the young offenders, as it relates to 

young offenders, I'm advised that it's in place across the entire 

province. 

 

Ms. Simard: — It used to be available in Regina. Has it been 

pulled out of Regina? 

 

An Hon. Member: — For young offenders? 

 

Ms. Simard: — For adults. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that it used to be provided by 

John Howard Society in Regina, and their funding was cut in 1973 

and not provided thereafter. 

 

Ms. Simard: — It was provided thereafter because I used it after 

’82-83. Okay. That may be the case. Well I would strongly urge 

. . . I thought that was an excellent program, and when I was in the 

private practice of law I had opportunity to use it on behalf of 

clients and I thought it was excellent. And I think that that 

program should be  

made available right across the province for adults and young 

offenders. But you are telling me that it is available for young 

offenders in northern Saskatchewan as well. Could you then 

advise me what agency is acting as mediator? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can advise you, as you indicate, that this 

should be in Regina. It is in Saskatoon. It's an area under the 

arbitration and mediation thrust that we are pursuing, that we 

would hope to have a white paper or a similar type document by 

which we can then consult as to where we're going, some time this 

fall. That's one of the thrusts that we're looking at to explore with 

mediation across the province, and that's one area that we can deal 

with it on the criminal side. The bulk of it will be dealt with on the 

civil side, but that would be one area that we would intend to 

explore with a variety of service organizations that could become 

involved — self-help organizations that could become involved in 

this. 

 

While I don't have an exact answer for you today as to what we 

are going to do, it's certainly one thing that we will put out, or we 

anticipate we would put out in this document, is something that 

would be explored and consulted with over the next year. 

 

Ms. Simard: — That certainly might be one way in which justice, 

the costs of administering justice, would be alleviated inasmuch as 

the individual doesn't necessarily go into court, and it certainly is, 

from my understanding, a very effective way to bring home to the 

individual who allegedly committed the act that he or she is 

hurting real people. So it probably in the end is far more effective 

than putting that individual through a court system, in bringing 

home the point and in saving costs. 

 

But I had asked you the name of the agency in northern 

Saskatchewan, or agencies, that are administering the mediation 

diversion for youth offenders, and I don't believe you gave me that 

name. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that that's a Social Services 

program and does not fall under Justice, and therefore you'd more 

appropriately ask that question of the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Okay then, I'm going to move on to another area, 

Mr. Minister, and that is the Pine Grove Correctional Centre. And 

I just want to bring to your attention, which I'm sure has been 

brought to your attention on many occasions, and that is the 

serious discrimination against women in the correctional system. 

 

In making these comments I want to make it perfectly clear that 

I'm not in any way criticizing the staff associated with the 

correctional institute. I believe they are doing a very good job. But 

I am going to make some comments with respect to the lack of 

training programs and the lack of community training houses in 

Saskatchewan for women, which I understand is primarily a 

question of lack of funding. 

 

Services in the correctional institute are provided to men, that are 

not being provided to women. For example, there are five 

community training residences or half-way houses for men, Mr. 

Minister, in the province, and there's  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1843 

 

not even one for women. But the existence of these community 

training houses allows for alternatives in sentencing and 

intermittent sentencing and it allows for the gradual reintegration 

of women into the community. 

 

With respect to the educational program in Pine Grove 

Correctional Centre, to be more specific, Pine Grove has only, I 

am informed, one part-time teacher and no vocational courses or 

shops, and there are no opportunities for educational upgrading or 

vocational training. The majority of women in there have not 

completed high school and have to pay for correspondence 

courses if they want to upgrade themselves, Mr. Minister. And I'd 

like to compare that to educational programs at men's correctional 

centres — or when we compare that, it is highly inadequate. 

 

So the end result, Mr. Minister, is that when women leave Pine 

Grove they are no better trained to reintegrate into the community 

than when they went into the institute inasmuch as there are no 

educational upgrading training programs or skills courses being 

provided, according to our information. 

 

Another point that I wish to bring to the minister's attention is that 

there's no medical until available at Pine Grove, so women who 

become ill are placed in segregation. And this creates a particular 

problem for women with drug and alcohol abuse addiction 

problems because they do not receive the special medical attention 

or counselling that is necessary. And in fact a 1986 survey of Pine 

Grove inmates shows that 79.3 per cent admitted to having 

addiction problems; 79.3 per cent of the women in Pine Grove 

admitted to having addiction problems. And yet, Mr. Minister, 

there is no special medical unit at Pine Grove to deal with these 

problems. And this, in some cases, poses life-threatening 

situations or could create a life-threatening situation when one is 

going through withdrawal symptoms. 

 

The other point I wish to raise on the Pine Grove institute, Mr. 

Minister, is the fact that there's no private family visiting area, and 

when 83 per cent of the inmates are mothers, this presents a very 

serious problem. As you know, it is extremely important for 

parents and mothers, in this case, because I'm referring to Pine 

Grove, to have contact with their children. And if society is going 

to remove them from the general mill of society and put them in 

an institution, surely it is necessary for us also to provide proper 

and adequate facilities for these mothers to visit with their 

children, not just from the mothers' point of view but mostly from 

the children's point of view, because they do need this contact and 

this continuity with their mother. 

 

The other point I wish to bring to your attention is a point 

respecting confidentiality. I have been informed that counselling 

that takes place in the institute does not necessarily remain 

confidential and that guards don't have any particular training with 

respect to counselling. And I would like the minister to comment, 

as well, on that in his general remarks. 

 

I want to refer you back now to community training centres and 

ask whether or not this government will make a commitment to 

provide community training centres  

throughout the province, and in particular, to make one available 

some place in southern Saskatchewan forthwith so that women do 

not have to be sent to Pine Grove, so that there is some alternate 

location to put them, and so that it also allows for alternate 

sentencing, because right now they have to be located at Pine 

Grove. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'll make a couple of observations. I'll 

begin with some statistics. Proportionately, females represent 5.2 

per cent of all incarcerated individuals, and expenditure for 

females represent 5.1 per cent of all dollars spent on incarceration. 

 

So the first point is that those are fairly equal, but they are very 

low, and I acknowledge that. The budget growth at Pine Grove 

since 1982-83 has been 31.3 per cent; in the min (minimum) 

centre, it has been 19.1 per cent. So while it's not being solved, or 

some of the problems you referred to are not being solved 

overnight, the trend lines are such that they're moving in the 

correct and proper direction. 

 

I'm also advised, as it relates to family visiting, Pine Grove offers 

a very liberal access for children and other family members to visit 

women in the centre. In recognition of the fact that most of the 

women in Pine Grove are single parents, the facilities ensure that 

children can visit frequently and for long periods of time, as 

opposed to the case of the male institutions. Women in Pine Grove 

also have full access to the family visiting unit located in the min's 

facility. In 1986, 19 women used this facility to visit with family 

members for several days at a time. A number of women used it 

more than once, and no women are denied access because the 

facility is unavailable. 

 

The other question that you raised with regards to the question of 

education. And I thought that the first part of your question — 

correct me if you're wrong — was that they go in there with not a 

great deal more education than they had before. I think we have to 

also understand that problem is that the average stay in Pine Grove 

— and this is a rough estimate, so take it as that estimate — is 

approximately 50 days. And I think, as you know, that given that 

type of a short period of stay, it is somewhat difficult to get into a 

great deal of training of any degree of sophistication. Now 

certainly that can be started. It's an area that we are beginning to 

address, where the plans are to allow women from Pine Grove to 

participate in some of the class-room activities within the Prince 

Albert institution. So we're trying to address that in that particular 

way. 

 

The other question that you talked about is the whole question of 

chemical dependency, of many of the people that are in there are 

chemically-dependent people. And I think that is an area that we 

have tried to make a start at beginning to deal with, with the new 

facility in Yorkton. 

 

While perhaps not directly related to these type of people, very 

often the chemically dependent can be young people. And that's 

perhaps the most tragic of all types of situations, whether they're 

young women or young men. And so that's the type of situation 

that we would hope to begin to deal with, with the facility in 

Yorkton. 

 

And I acknowledge the question that you advance. It's an area that 

all society, whether it's here or in any other parts  

  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1844 

 

of North America, are having a difficult time to grapple with. And 

I take your concern on those particular areas. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Just one brief comment about the statement you 

made about the funding being 5.1 per cent, and 5.2 per cent of the 

inmates being women; in other words, you're spending a 

proportionate number of dollars. The problem, of course, is that 

we're going to need to put in extra money with respect to Pine 

Grove because the programs have to be established, even if it is to 

a smaller population. 

 

(1645) 

 

So what I'm urging the minister to do is to priorize . . . reassess his 

priorities with respect to spending in correctional institutes so that 

these training programs and the community training residences or 

at least — I'm not suggesting five — at least one in southern 

Saskatchewan, so that women do not have to be sent to Pine 

Grove, be implemented as soon as possible, because I regard that 

as a discriminatory practice. 

 

So I just want to ask the minister once again whether his 

government is committed to establishing a community training 

residence in southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that there are not present plans 

. . . if you mean to build a facility in Regina, if that's what your 

question was specifically referring to — although what I'm 

advised is a lot of the effort is put in assisting people that are, 

maybe, out in the community with the type of work that you're 

referring to, that are in the community and not in a particular 

facility themselves. 

 

But if the question is: am I planning or proposing to build a facility 

like Pine Grove in Regina, which I took the basis of your question 

to be, that is not presently the plans of the department. 

 

Ms. Simard: — I was not lobbying for Regina, Mr. Minister. I 

was lobbying for southern Saskatchewan. I used the word southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And I'm not doing this out of a case of 

self-interest. I'm doing this because mothers are going to Pine 

Grove now, far away from their homes. They're being denied 

accessibility to their children because they are so far because this 

government has not seen fit to build a facility in southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that one of the problems is that 

the total number of women in the system for the entire province is 

approximately 50. And of that 50, about 15 are maybe from the 

southern part of the province at any given time. And so I think you 

can appreciate that when you have such a low number of women 

that are in fact in these facilities, it's difficult to build a number of 

the facilities around the province and to be able to do it in a proper 

way. 

 

I'm advised that of those 15 that would come from the  

southern part of the province in any given year, about five would 

be able to get into the community training program, so we're really 

dealing with maybe 10 people. So I think you have to appreciate 

from the size of the problem that we're dealing with; you can 

appreciate that there is some problems there. And I take your 

concern to be very meaningful, but I hope you would also 

recognize that the numbers that we have to deal with here are 

meaningful as well. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Okay, I understand what the minister is saying, 

but I don't believe it's necessary to have an elaborate, first-class 

institution that, you know, could house 50 or 100 inmates. We 

could look at a community training residence that is smaller than 

that, that still operates efficiently, that would, say, house the 10 or 

15 that may have to be housed at a particular time. 

 

And I really urge the government to look at that because I concur 

with Judge Boyce's decision, ruling on June 29, that said it was 

sex discrimination to send a woman to Pine Grove to serve her 

intermittent sentencing. And I think the government should pay 

attention to that judge's ruling and pay attention to the opposition's 

concern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Now I have referred to educational and training 

programs at Pine Grove, and I would like to know from the 

minister: what programs are available at this time to develop 

employment skills and to obtain vocational training for inmates in 

Pine Grove? 

 

An Hon. Member: — What was that question, please? 

 

Ms. Simard: — The question is: what programs are available for 

vocational training and for upgrading and employment skills? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In regard to the judgement that you 

referred to, I think that I can say that we in fact met that particular 

requirement of that judgement for that particular individual. 

 

With regard to the programs: remand inmates are offered access to 

all programs and activities within the confines of the physical 

facilities; academic training is provided by a part-time teacher; a 

variety of extra-curricular short courses supplement the school 

program; basic training and work skills is provided in cooking, 

cleaning, laundry, sewing, and landscaping; special classes are 

provided in personal development, life skills, addiction education, 

parenting, family violence, sexual abuse. 

 

Pre-release programming is a significant part of the case work in 

programming. Major emphasis is placed on utilization of 

community resources for work, education, training, and recreation. 

Distance placement is a component of the community training 

program. Every woman in Pine Grove who has an interest and a 

need for educational upgrading has the opportunity to participate 

in this type of programming at Pine Grove, at the present time 

employing a teacher half-time. 

 

Some of the new areas that are being done where Pine Grove 

would be able to use the facilities of Prince Albert  



 

August 17, 1987 

 

1845 

 

Correctional Centre . . . And the specific question, I think, that you 

referred to, some of the classes now being taught for Pine Grove 

inmates is motor mechanics, carpentry shop. Both of those are 

being used in the Prince Albert Correctional Centre — carpentry 

and motor mechanics. That's the specific, I think, vocational 

training that you referred to, plus the other general one that I 

talked about. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Just a statement with respect to the type of 

training that's available. I'm wondering how much training of a 

non-traditional female nature, like you have referred to laundry 

and cleaning, and I'm not suggesting that that's not good; there's 

good to that too, but hose are traditional female jobs. And that 

particular type of training isn't necessarily going to help these 

women get out of the rut that they may be in and advance 

themselves in society and find high-paying jobs. 

 

So I want to know what training is available for these women in a 

so-called, non-traditional female area, or in an area that would 

provide them with skills that will make it possible for them to find 

employment that will pay them a decent wage when they get out 

of Pine Grove. That's the sort of training that I want to be informed 

about and I would like to see in Pine Grove. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well as I indicated, two of the courses that 

have just been introduced, one is motor mechanics, and I would 

think that's not a traditional type of education program you're 

talking about. And the other one is carpentry. 

 

Now again let's go back to the question. You say that what you 

want is these particular individuals having the ability to get into 

society, to get a proper education to get into society. 

 

Now if you're looking, number one, at the fact that the average 

stay is going to be 50 days, I think is somewhat optimistic for 

anybody to think somehow that we can take people that have, 

probably for the most part, have a poor education by our standards 

in the sense that most of them have probably not graduated from 

high school and many of them maybe have not even attended high 

school. In order to get them educated in a proper way, to get them 

meaningfully into the work-force, I think it's going to take sizeably 

longer than 50 days. And for them to get into that type of program, 

my guess was that we should be looking into the areas and dealing 

with that question more through the field of education and the 

field of social services — that type of thing — which I'm sure in 

fact is the case. 

 

I don't think it would be realistic to think that somehow a person 

going into Pine Grove for 50 days is going to come out better 

trained, able to go out into the work-force and find their place in 

the work-force. I think we would be hoping too much to think that 

we could do that. Perhaps we could get in, even to the position of 

encourage them to at least pursue some further education when 

they are out, to pursue it over a period of time. I think that would 

be the only hopeful way that we could in fact deal with what I 

think everybody would like to see. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Okay, Mr. Minister, there are women who stay 

there longer than 50 days, and for these women,  

these programs should be available. But even if they're only there 

for 50 days, Mr. Minister, or less, this is a unique opportunity for 

society to introduce them and to show them what they may be 

capable of, and to help to rehabilitate them and point them in the 

correct direction. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I'd now like to ask you about the infirmary at 

Pine Grove, or the infirmary that isn't at Pine Grove, I might say; 

and I want to know why there are not any trained, permanent, 

medical staff at Pine Grove. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I'm advised that there is a nurse on duty 

half-time. I'm advised that there's a doctor attends the facility twice 

a week. I'm advised that there is a contract with a dentist who will 

attend the facility as and when requested. The problem again gets 

back to the size of the inmate population. 

 

You have but 50 as an inmate, and the question becomes, there is 

not a first aid centre there, or a hospital facility if you like, because 

I suppose of the size of it. And traditionally what they have done is 

the nurses there, they're three miles away from a health care 

service, and in the past they have used transportation — instead of 

building a facility there, have opted to use transportation to take 

that particular individual to the health facility. 

 

Now you can maybe be critical of that, but coming from rural 

Saskatchewan, that is not unlike the way many people in rural 

Saskatchewan live, that there may be, instead of three miles away, 

they're 20 miles away or 40 miles away from that type of facility 

as well. 

 

So I think that given that — given that a nurse visits, given that a 

doctor visits, given that a dentist visits — that while perhaps it's 

not perfect, I think it as a service perhaps is good as one would be 

received by the people in many, many parts of rural Saskatchewan 

where they in fact live. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Being near 5 o'clock, this committee is 

recessed till 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


