













































October 14, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 14, 1987 

 

 

3313 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

my pleasure today to introduce to you, and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, a group of 11 grade 12 students 

from the Onion Lake School in my constituency in the far 

north-western part of the province. I want to congratulate those 

people who came and the chaperons for bringing this group of 

students. It’s not the first time that Onion Lake School has 

visited here; they have over a period of a number of years. And 

I want to congratulate them for coming that extended distance, 

which it is, to come down to the legislature and see how this 

institution operates. 

 

The students today are accompanied by David Herron, their 

teacher, and two chaperons, Sandra Carter and Ray Whitstone. I 

would ask all members to join with me in welcoming them here 

to the legislature and to Regina. I hope they find their tour 

enjoyable and educational, and certainly we all wish you a safe 

journey home. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I too, Mr. Speaker, would welcome the group 

from Onion Lake, and maybe refer to our language in Cree. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

introduce a group of students in an English as a second 

language course from the Regina Plains Community College. 

 

There are some 18 students here, Mr. Speaker, and I understand 

they’re accompanied by their teachers, Yvonne Lewchyshyn 

and Ingrid Alesich. And I would ask the members to join me in 

welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Waiting Lists for Saskatoon Hospitals 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. 

During your free-time TV show the other night, you tried to get 

the heat off your government for the scandalous size of hospital 

waiting lists in Saskatoon. There’s just one problem with your 

plan, Mr. Premier — you forgot to tell the doctors, the nurses, 

and the other operating staff about it. 

 

Today in Saskatoon, Mr. Premier, medical staff at all of the 

major hospitals are calling your plan a band-aid approach and 

saying it will not solve the waiting list  

problem at all. The president of the medical staff at City 

Hospital said today, and I quote: 

 

It is entirely unreasonable to close hospital beds in the 

summer and then ask surgical staff to work extra hours in 

a futile attempt to reduce waiting lists later. 

 

Can the Premier explain, why has his government failed to 

consult with the medical staff in Saskatoon as we asked you to 

do, and listen to their pleas to keep hospital beds open this past 

summer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member will 

suggest and we’ve heard her in the House . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I think the 

Minister of Health is attempting to answer the question, and 

hon. members should allow him to do that without interruption. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member on several occasions in the past 

has said, come with some strategy, develop some strategy as it 

relates to the waiting list problem and so on. And when we 

come forward with a policy, which I might add has been done 

in conjunction with the boards and the administration of all 

three hospitals . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I once more ask 

the hon. member to please allow the Minister of Health to 

answer the question without interruption. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You’re right, 

it is difficult to answer the question when you can’t hear 

yourself think from the members from the opposite side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member, as I’ve said, has asked for a strategy 

for some time as it relates to the waiting lists in Saskatoon. I 

have said on several occasions that there are two ways to 

approach it. One of them would be the long-range strategy 

which . . . a part of which — and only a part of which — is the 

reconstruction and the new beds that are being added to all three 

of those hospitals — that’s long-range; and in conjunction with 

that, a rationalization plan of those three hospitals in terms of 

which procedures are done at which hospital. Those are things 

which have been talked about for a good long time, but those 

are things which will be accomplished by this government. 

That’s the long-term side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On the short term, the Premier announced the other night — 

and I say that announcement was done in conjunction with the 

administration and with the boards of those hospitals — and my 

understanding is that the chiefs of medical staff in those 

hospitals were in discussion with the administration of those 

hospitals when they came forward and said, yes, we can do 

2,000 more surgical procedures in the city in the next six-month 

period. Mr. Speaker, those are concrete steps; those steps are 

reasonable steps. Obviously there will not be 100 per  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3314 

 

cent agreement, there will be people who disagree. That’s one 

of the problems over a period of time, that no one has been able 

to get 100 per cent agreement of all of the players. But the fact 

is somebody has to address it. This government is going to 

address it, and we are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — A new question to the Premier, and it’s to the 

Premier because he was the one that had the free time broadcast 

the other night on television. He made the big announcement, 

and I want him to justify it. 

 

The staff at Saskatoon’s hospitals are saying your 

announcement is a band-aid approach which doesn’t solve the 

long-term problems at all. Mr. Premier, this is a political 

announcement and not a health care announcement. 

 

As one anesthesist said, and I quote: 

 

. . . keeping operating (rooms) open (extra) hours will cost 

more and accomplish less than maintaining regular hours 

(during) the summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The hon. member is 

getting to have a long preamble and I would like to ask her to 

put the question. Order. Order. Order, please. Hon. members do 

not debate the Speaker’s ruling, and I have ruled that she is 

getting slightly long in her preamble. That is the ruling. I don’t 

want debates from the member for Saskatoon South, or Regina 

North East, or anybody else. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it was a new question and I’m 

just going to quote. One anesthetist told the Star-Phoenix this 

morning: 

 

. . . keeping operating (rooms) open (extra) hours will cost 

more and accomplish less than maintaining regular hours 

(during) the summer. 

 

“And if people are expected to work longer hours, fatigue 

is present. Fatigue is a very dangerous thing in the 

operating room.” 

 

What arrangements, Mr. Premier, have you made to hire 

additional staff to help with those extended hours in hospital 

operating rooms so that we don’t get to the fatigue point and 

that we don’t get to the danger point? What arrangements have 

you made? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member asked a 

specific question as it relates to arrangements. Mr. Speaker, the 

arrangements for additional staff which will accomplish what 

the Premier announced will be accomplished are under the 

purview of the administration of those hospitals. Let me just 

quote what the hospital administrators have said as it relates to 

this announcement. The administrator of the University 

Hospital, the president of the University Hospital says his 

institution: 

 

. . . expects to undertake an additional 800  

operations under the plan. 

 

That’s at the University Hospital. 

 

Larry Odegard, senior vice-president of operations at City 

Hospital . . . (they) expect his facility will do between 650 

and 700 (additional) surgical cases “over and above” the 

2,400 procedures the hospital would normally expect to do 

during the six-month period. 

 

Over at St. Paul’s Hospital: 

 

Richard Paterson, (executive director), said his institution 

expects to do an additional 450 operations over the 

six-month period, (that) he hopes will start Nov. 1. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the administrations of those hospitals will be, and 

obviously they know in terms of . . . the member quotes a 

physician who will say, oh this will cost more and so on. What I 

would say is that administration will deal with the staffing. 

When they say that there will be an additional 800 done, that 

additional 800 will be done on the basis of having the staff in 

place to do them, and it will be the same at all three institutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order! I think you’ve made your 

point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — A new question to the Premier who continues 

to duck. The president of the medical staff at University 

Hospital, Dr. Bill Bingham, told the media in Saskatoon this 

morning that long-term solutions are required to solve the 

problem of growing waiting lists. To quote him: 

 

We can cut the waiting list by 2,000 over the next year, 

but if the more chronic problems of bed closings and 

inadequate funding are not addressed, the waiting lists will 

continue to lengthen with passing years. 

 

Will the Premier now listen and will he instruct his Minister of 

Health to provide adequate funding to those hospitals so that we 

don’t have the situation again next summer where hospital beds 

are closed to the tune of 308 beds and waiting lists continue to 

grow? Will you ensure adequate funding, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member talks about 

adequate funding. Let me remind that member and all members 

— all of her colleagues, all members of the House, Mr. Speaker 

— the funding increase at the hospitals has been 63 per cent 

since this government assumed office. That was the legacy that 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — One thing, Mr. Speaker, one thing,  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3315 

 

just as one small example. One million dollars, when we first 

assumed office, $1 million in 1982 alone at St. Paul’s Hospital 

for obsolete equipment at St. Paul’s Hospital — $1 million my 

colleague, the former minister of Health, had to go in because 

of the legacy left by that group. This is what we’re trying to 

address; this is what we must address. 

 

And as I have said, long-term and short-term solutions. The 

member here quotes a doctor who says long-term solutions are 

necessary. I couldn’t agree more, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 

outline a couple of things, and they’re important, and they’re 

pertinent to this answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at University Hospital, University Hospital alone, 

a $27 million expansion. But the member says, will there be 

adequate funding; will you spend any money on hospitals? A 

$27 million expansion at University Hospital will add 80 

additional beds. That’s long term, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A $53 million expansion which is under way at St. Paul’s 

Hospital — never was under them, but is under us — 100 

additional beds at St. Paul’s Hospital. The government is also 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, this summer 

St. Paul’s Hospital closed 69 hospital beds. Their waiting list at 

the end of June was 10,729. Their waiting list at the end of 

August was 11.403. In the paper you report that you’re going to 

provide an additional $270,000. Mr. Minister, they closed those 

hospital beds to save five hundred . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

Order! The supplementary preamble, as all members know, is 

getting too long, and I ask the member, who is quite capable of 

asking quick questions, to get to her question. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I want to know: how much 

money are you putting into the system to start dealing with that 

hospital waiting list in Saskatoon? How much money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I just told the member, Mr. Speaker, 

there has been a 63 per cent increase over a period of time. Let 

me just give you some of the circumstances surrounding it. And 

I will give them, because they are very important and pertinent 

to this line of questioning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hip replacements, one of the things which causes 

the log-jam in terms of the orthopedics, are up 105 per cent in 

terms of the number of procedures performed over a period 

from 1980 to ‘86. A new technology — obviously a demand for 

those kinds of things with an ageing population. Cataracts or 

lens implants up, Mr. Speaker, 67 per cent, the number of 

procedures performed. These are the pressures which are on the 

system; these are the pressures that have been identified.  

These are the pressures which were identified when we said, we 

will build the extra beds on those hospitals and deal with the 

legacy or lack of legacy that was left to us by those people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with it in a long term and with an 

extra million dollars now directed and targeted right at those 

log-jam type of areas — ophthalmology . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

said in the newspaper this morning that we’re not talking about 

large amounts of dollars, we’re talking about targeted dollars. 

My question is simple: how much money, Mr. Minister? How 

much money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I just answered that 

question in my last answer. I just answered that question. I said, 

Mr. Speaker, there will be targeted dollars at the particular 

procedures which are causing the log-jam — $1 million at those 

particular procedures — ophthalmology, orthopedics, ear, nose 

and throat. Those are the main areas, and that’s where the 

dollars will be targeted. 

 

In previous days in this House and elsewhere the members have 

said, address . . . they have said, address . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. This past summer 308 

hospital beds were closed in the city of Saskatoon for a 10-week 

period, Mr. Minister. The hospital waiting lists have grown. 

They closed those hospital beds to save money. My question to 

you is this: will you ensure the people of Saskatchewan that we 

will not see any further bed closures in the city of Saskatoon or 

anywhere else in this province so that we can start dealing with 

the hospital waiting lists? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, just so the record is 

straight, the closing of hospital beds in the summer months in 

the province of Saskatchewan began in 1975. Mr. Speaker, 

most of the people here weren’t even here at the legislature 

then. Members there who sit and smile were the people who did 

it — member from Regina North East, member from Saskatoon 

South, former health ministers, they were the people 

responsible for putting that kind of thing in motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the numbers that I have outlined, the numbers that 

I have outlined here in terms of the amounts — massive 

amounts of money that are being spent, and that have been 

spend over a period of time, speak for themselves. The member 

says, are you spending any money on health care? Yes, we’re 

spending, Mr. Speaker. This government spent more money on 

health care, more money toward hospitals in the city of 

Saskatoon and in  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3316 

 

the city of Regina than that group over there ever did. The 

pressures are there, yes. This government is spending the 

money in more difficult times than what they ever faced, and 

we will continue to spend more money than they ever did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Highway Construction in Melfort Constituency 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker: My question is to the 

Minister of Highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. We’re 

having difficulty hearing the member from Humboldt. I would 

like to ask the co-operation of the House. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t hear you 

either because of the noise coming from the other side of the 

House. 

 

Mr. Minister of Highways, at a time when tax dollars are tight 

and highways all over this province are in terrible shape, you 

have decided to spend more than a million dollars to building 

two highways to the same place in your constituency. I’m 

talking about your announcement yesterday in Melfort, and 

rather than making a decision on where the new stretch of 

Highway 41 should go, you decided to build both routes. 

 

I ask you: how can you justify this lack of leadership at a time 

when tax dollars are so tight? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to 

the hon. member’s question, if you’ll just take my indulgence 

for a few moments, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to be a little more 

lengthy than I normally am. 

 

The issue of the Highway No. 41 in the Melfort area has been 

with us for a long, long time. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I 

went through two election campaigns and was elected both 

times fighting this issue. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, for 40 

years the people in north-east Saskatchewan have talked about 

Highway No. 41 linking Wakaw with Melfort. I can tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, for 11 long years, the last 11 years the NDP were 

in power, the highway . . . constituents of mine, people from 

throughout north-east Saskatchewan pleaded with the NDP 

government for a new highway. One was never built; one was 

never considered being built by the members of the opposition. 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I announced to the people in my 

constituency and to the people in north-east Saskatchewan a 

compromise that has settled this issue . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately 

the history lesson doesn’t answer the question. 

 

After studying the two views, Mr. Minister, you showed no 

leadership in making a decision, and not every MLA  

can solve a dispute by building two highways to the same place. 

This is at a time, Mr. Minister, when you have cut the 

Highways budget by $8 million. You have cut the dental 

program. You have cut the drug program. You have 10,000 or 

more people waiting in hospitals. You sat on the fence and built 

two routes. How can you justify this mismanagement at a time 

when you should be using the taxpayers’ dollars to their 

ultimate? How can you justify their mismanagement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying before, 

this has been a sensitive issue, it has been a difficult issue in my 

constituency and others for a long, long time. I will not hesitate, 

Mr. Speaker, in telling the people of north-east Saskatchewan 

that despite the fact that the people of north-east Saskatchewan 

and my home city of Melfort have come together, have 

accepted this compromise solution — I would say despite that, I 

will not hesitate in telling them, Mr. Speaker, that the members 

of the NDP want to continue the fighting and continue the 

bickering, and that’s not what my people want back home. 

What they want is a new highway, and I say it’s the same thing 

as the people who wanted the Meridian bridge who pleaded 

with the government, the NDP members opposite, and they 

were denied that like they were denied so many . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 

please. Order, please. Order, please. Please sit down. 

 

Before we go to the next question, I would like to draw the 

attention to members that question period today is rife with long 

answers and rife with long questions. We are getting into 

debate. We are not into a question period, and I would like to 

ask hon. members to please get back to the intent of question 

period — the short, factual, brief questions with the same type 

of response. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, as the Minister of Highways, are 

you going to apply this same criteria to other constituencies 

where there is a dispute over location of a new highway? Do 

you plan to build both routes, or is this privilege simply 

extended to the Minister of Highways? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you what I 

won’t do, and that won’t be a Reggie Gross compromise. I can 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, that what we proposed yesterday was a 

common-sense solution and, in fact, the member opposite is 

misleading the public again. 

 

I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, and we spent a good time briefing 

the media yesterday morning, and the media were fair with me 

yesterday morning. And the media were well aware, well aware 

that this, in fact, when you consider the initial costs of 

construction, when you consider the maintenance, and when 

you consider the road user costs, in fact, it was the second 

cheapest alternative, Mr. Speaker. 

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3317 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure the NDP 

would maybe want . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. We have 

discussed this before, and hon. members know that the private 

members from both sides have the right to ask a question. I ask 

the private member to ask the question without any political 

preamble. 

 

Movement of Grain 

 

Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 

a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Premier, in light 

of the strike on the seaway, I am wondering what aspects 

you’ve been taking in regards to that strike, basically because of 

the fact that there are grains now to be shipped and the 

movement is being held up by this strike. Could you elaborate 

to this Assembly what steps you might have been taking 

throughout the term? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the farmers across the 

province are extremely concerned about the marketing of grain, 

particularly farmers in the north-east part of the province 

because traditionally they have had good crops, high volume, 

and in some cases, not the quality that would reach many of the 

markets. 

 

Today I am informed that the UGG (United Grain Growers 

Limited) terminal is not loading as a result of people not being 

prepared to cross the picket lines. The wheat pool terminal is. In 

discussions with federal officials and ministers in Ottawa, they 

assure me that they will take every step necessary to make sure 

that the situation is resolved as quickly as we can so that, in 

fact, grain can be marketed. If that takes certain kinds of 

legislation or whatever else parliament has at its discretion, the 

cabinet ministers inform me they are prepared to do whatever is 

necessary to keep the grain moving. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Alberta Inquiry into Collapse of First Investors and 

Associated Investors 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Consumer Affairs. Today the Alberta inquiry into 

the collapse of First Investors and Associated Investors begins 

public hearings in Edmonton. 

 

My question to you is: has the Government of Saskatchewan 

finally received the complete list of all the Saskatchewan 

residents who lost money in the collapse of these two firms; and 

did your department use that list to notify all Saskatchewan 

investors about the details of the Alberta inquiry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the government received the 

list, I believe, in the last two days . . . 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Hon. 

members can’t answer the question if they’re immediately 

interrupted as soon as they get to their feet, so I would like to 

please ask the hon. members to allow them to answer the 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the list is not complete. We 

are advised of the list, and when it is complete the first step the 

government will be taking will be writing to each of the 

members, or the individuals on the list, asking if we have their 

permission — the New Democratic Party wants the names to be 

made public — if we have their permission to make the names 

public. You may recall when we complied with your request to 

table the names under Pioneer, many people were embarrassed 

by having their names made public and were quite upset about 

it. So we will be asking each of them for their permission — 

that the New Democratic Party wants their names made public 

— and if we have permission we will release it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — Supplementary. The New Democratic Party 

wants your government to take responsibility for the negligence 

in regard to the collapse of these companies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — You refused to call a public inquiry in 

Saskatchewan. You said the Alberta inquiry could get to the 

bottom of the matter. Therefore you have made a clear 

obligation to make sure that as many Saskatchewan investors as 

possible appear before that Alberta inquiry. So my question is: 

has the government offered Saskatchewan residents, many of 

whom have lost their life savings, have you offered them any 

assistance to appear before this public inquiry? Have you 

offered to pay their travel costs? Have you offered to pay their 

government lawyer at the inquiry? Have you offered to make 

them available to help these investors with the procedures? 

Have you taken any of these steps? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we should put the requests 

made by the hon. members in context in that five minutes ago 

they were complaining about spending money on highways, and 

now they want us to pay for a whole bunch of people to go to 

Edmonton. Mr. Speaker, I find it a rather strange position of the 

members opposite that when the government, believing it had 

some moral obligation to people involved in Pioneer, we made 

a payment because it was a Saskatchewan company, the New 

Democratic Party said no. 

 

Now that this is an Alberta company, they are arguing for a 

complete bail-out. The government has ruled out a bail-out, Mr. 

Speaker, and I believe that in terms of the ability of investors to 

appear before the inquiry, they have already retained a counsel, 

Mr. Speaker — I believe Mr. Kuski — and that the investors 

can take the appropriate action through Mr. Kuski. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3318 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Clean-up of Arsenic Waste from Abandoned Mine 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I’d like to ask both sides 

of the House to please allow the Minister of the Environment to 

make a statement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly to 

announce the completion of a clean-up program which resulted 

in the removal of arsenic waste from an abandoned mine site 

near Creighton, Saskatchewan. 

 

The arsenic was a waste product produced in the late 1940s and 

early 1950s during the operation of a gold mine. The gold mine 

and mill was owned by a company that has long since ceased to 

exist. The waste had been stored in drums inside a concrete 

vault. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must tell you that no administration prior to our 

government did anything substantial to rid the environment of 

this hazardous substance. It was our government that initiated 

the removal of this arsenic waste and provide a suitable 

disposable before the waste had a chance to affect the water 

quality of nearby Douglas Lake, which is the source of drinking 

water for the town of Creighton. 

 

Water quality monitoring conducted by my department has 

shown that the abandoned arsenic has not had a negative impact 

on the quality of the lake. However, we wanted to ensure that 

the people in that area were protected from the wastes of the 

abandoned mine site. A consulting firm was retained to remove 

the wastes from the abandoned site and ship them to 

Yellowknife. They were shipped for treatment and for 

recycling. 

 

Soils in the vault area were excavated and, together with the 

vault material, were buried in the Hudson Bay Mining and 

Smelting Company Limited’s tailings management facility near 

Creighton. 

 

Decommissioning is an important consideration over the life of 

any mining development. It is clear in this case that if the 

environmental regulatory program presently administered by 

our government had been in place when this site was 

abandoned, it would not have been an environmental problem 

today. 

 

This action shows the clear commitment that my government 

has toward the continuing protection of the people of 

Saskatchewan and of our environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to, 

first of all, congratulate the government for its initiative in 

undertaking the clean-up of arsenic. I do believe, however, that 

the Minister of the Environment is not correct when he says that 

no administration prior to our government did anything 

substantial to rid the environment of this hazardous substance. 

 

As all members of this Assembly know, and as the general  

population in Saskatchewan knows, the New Democratic Party 

government between 1971 and 1982 led this nation in 

environmental protection and has a record second to none — 

has a record, Mr. Speaker, second to none in this area. In fact 

it’s interesting that the . . . it was interesting that we referred to 

during the ’50s when this mine was in operation that there was 

in fact no arsenic introduced into the environment since the late 

1950s, which shows the kind of environmental consciousness 

that the previous NDP government had. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got several suggestions to make to 

the minister opposite, since he’s into beginning to clean up 

hazardous substances in the environment. May I suggest, first of 

all, that the minister now direct his department to put its 

attention to cleaning up the piles and piles of uranium tailings 

— tailings from the uranium mines in northern Saskatchewan 

— by hiring Northerners to in fact decommissioning the mines 

and decommissioning the tailing sites which scatter throughout 

the North. 

 

And may I also suggest that he in fact undertake that kind of 

clean-up campaign throughout the province. 

 

And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I should also like to suggest to the 

minister that he reinstitute a program which his government 

scrapped, a program which collected up used vehicles which 

were abandoned in the fields and farm lands throughout 

Saskatchewan, that he reintroduce that program here in the 

province to provide jobs and to provide in fact a clean-up of the 

environment which the minister so proudly talks about. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Vital Statistics Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. 

Minister, over the past several months your government has 

developed a very bad reputation with respect to medicare. 

Unfortunately your government’s bad reputation is fully 

deserved. Your attacks on the drug plan, your destruction of the 

school-based children’s  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3319 

 

dental plan, your betrayal of your election promises, your 

betrayal of medicare. Nowhere, Mr. Minister, has your betrayal, 

your incompetence, and your arrogance been more apparent 

than in your failure to deal with the hospitalization needs of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Minister, people don’t like having to go to hospital — it’s 

traumatic, it’s alienating, it’s stressful — but there are times 

when people must go into hospital. And doctors don’t like to 

send their patients to hospital for no reason. Physicians will 

generally only send patients to a hospital if it’s necessary, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

And I’m sure, Mr. Minister, that you would agree with me that 

the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association is a pretty 

responsible group who are committed to improving medicare in 

our province. You may not always like what they have to say, 

Mr. Minister, but I trust you have the good sense to respect their 

views, and the nurses of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, a 

profession whose members throughout this province are 

dedicated, committed to a first-class professional medicare 

system in our province and for their patients. 

 

It’s pretty obvious, Mr. Minister, that you don’t like what 

Saskatchewan nurses have to say about your cuts to medicare. 

But I hope, and I say hope, that at least you recognize that they 

are speaking from their professional background, they’re 

speaking from their heart, and they’re speaking on behalf of 

their patients. 

 

Mr. Minister, our hospitals are in a crisis. Surely even you must 

acknowledge that. They’re short-staffed, they’re underfunded, 

they’re forced to go begging for voluntary contributions from 

patients. Waiting lists are unacceptably long and high. Surely 

by now, Mr. Minister, those waiting lists must be unacceptably 

long, even by your standards. They’re certainly unacceptable to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I know you like to brag and boast about your increased 

fundings to hospitals. Let’s just put some of those figures into 

their proper context. Since your PC government took office, 

you’ve increased the total overall budget in this province by 55 

per cent. You, Mr. Minister, are spending 55 per cent more this 

year than you were six years ago, but have you increased the 

operating budgets of hospitals to that extent? And the answer, 

Mr. Minister, is no. 

 

And within your Department of Health you’ve increased your 

own general administration costs by some 57 per cent. Those 

are expenses for your personal staff, Mr. Minister, your political 

staff, and your own personal political expenses. But have you 

increased hospital funding by 57 per cent? And the answer 

again, Mr. Minister, is no. 

 

And let’s look at the Premier’s department of government, the 

Executive Council. Mr. Minister, since your government took 

office your government has increased the budget for the 

Premier’s political office, the personal staff and political 

expenditures in the Premier’s department which is the 

Executive Council, not by 55 per cent, not by 65 per cent, not 

by 75 per cent, but 85 per cent, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 

that’s unacceptable. 

And so we can see, Mr. Chairman, where this PC government’s 

priorities really are — an 85 per cent increase in spending for 

the Premier’s political staff in Executive Council, but cuts to 

medicare and underfunding of our Saskatchewan hospitals. 

Those, Mr. Chairman, are obviously the PC priorities, but the 

wrong priorities. 

 

Mr. Minister, if we look at your hospital funding in just this 

year, and in your budget you’re estimating approximately 523.7 

million — but if you look at your original budget for the year 

’86-87, you estimated 513.3 million. With the supplementary 

estimates of 7.7 million, your total budget for 1986-87 was 521 

million. 

 

Mr. Minister, 521 million last year, 523.7 million this year — 

that’s an increase of one-half of 1 per cent, one-half of 1 per 

cent. At a time in Saskatchewan’s history when we have the 

highest inflation rate in Canada; at a time when we have a crisis 

in our hospitals; at a time when waiting lists are unacceptably 

high — we have over 11,000 people in Saskatoon waiting to get 

into hospital beds — an increase of one-half of 1 per cent, Mr. 

Minister, is irresponsible and it’s unacceptable. 

 

And my question to you is simply this: why only, why only 

one-half of 1 per cent this year when we have a desperate 

situation in this province when it comes to getting into hospital? 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member raises, you 

know, the question of the funding of hospitals and the level of 

that funding, and whether or not it’s appropriate. I say to her 

that, given the kinds of pressures that are there in terms of the 

various procedures as it relates now to surgery and so on, I 

suppose we could always discuss, you know, the 

appropriateness of funding and say, well it could be more and it 

could be more. 

 

What I will say to the member and to all members of the 

committee is that it’s a major accomplishment to be able to 

maintain and, in fact, increase the funding to individual 

hospitals in the circumstances that we find ourselves in. 

Hospital funding has increased and increased over what, I ask, 

Mr. Chairman? The increase is over last year, albeit a small 

increase, but over last year’s funding, which was an increase 

over the year before that, which was an increase over the year 

before that. Those are the kinds of . . . that’s the sort of scenario 

that I want to outline here. Over a period of four or five years 

and since our government came into office, there is no five-year 

period, no five-year period in the history of this province that 

has seen the kind of hospital construction, the kind of dollars 

directed toward hospital construction and regeneration that has 

happened in this period of time. 

 

Now we talked a bit about this earlier in question period in 

terms of the numbers that are there. Mr. Chairman, it’s 

important to note this. In terms of looking at the long-term 

strategy of the hospitals and the service that they will provide 

and the various categories of hospitals, we dealt with the major 

base hospitals in a major way. And let me just outline some of 

them, and I have done it before, and  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3320 

 

the member will know that. But the expansion that’s going on at 

the University Hospital now, which will bring 80 additional 

beds on in the spring of ’88 — next spring, 80 new beds — 

that’s not an accident. That’s as a result of hospital planning for 

that city and for the needs into the future. And it takes a good 

deal of time, as you know, for the planning and so on, and that 

construction is under way — very, very well along in its way. 

 

The St. Paul’s Hospital regeneration and the construction that’s 

going on there — major expansion, $53 million expansion — 

almost twice as large or more than twice as large. A hundred 

additional beds will come on stream in 1989. That’s planning 

on into the future, and that’s what I have said on many 

occasions is that we must address this in both a short-term and a 

long-term system, and these are the long-term ones that I’m 

talking about now. 

 

The new City Hospital which is in the planning stages, very 

well along in the planning stages now, will be a reality, and that 

will bring about an additional, and it will add an additional 112 

beds to the existing numbers. 

 

The new cancer clinic in Saskatoon wasn’t built in those heady 

and halcyon days when prices of every commodity that this 

province depends on were up. It was built under this 

government in some more difficult days but with a commitment 

to the kinds of things that should have happened and that are 

now happening. And that was a cost of $16 million. Those are 

the kind of numbers. 

 

And I don’t want anyone to think that it’s only city hospitals in 

Saskatoon and in Regina, Wascana Rehab being another one in 

Regina where there’s major new construction taking place, and 

of course the General Hospital has reconstruction and so on, 

regeneration. But we have a new hospital at Nipawin and one at 

Melfort and one at Maidstone and one at Gainsborough and one 

at Watrous and one at Watson, and that’s an incomplete list, and 

there are others that I can’t think of just now. But those are 

hospitals of the various categories that have been build and that 

are under construction now in some cases. 

 

So I just want to put that into context so that we can say, you 

know, the sort of scenario that’s there, and the context within 

which this discussion takes place. Now I will say to the hon. 

member and to all the members of the committee that I wish 

there was more money to put into some of these facilities and to 

put into the operating of these facilities. What minister of 

Health would not wish that there could be more money for this 

sort of thing when the pressures are as they’ve been outlined so 

many times here, Mr. Chairman? But I also say, there is not that 

kind of money. 

 

And I also say, the commitment to health care and the 

commitment to the hospital sector and the commitment to 

spending, as it relates to the extent that spending is always, you 

know, in the minds of some is the only yardstick to use; but to 

the extent that that’s the case, I’m very, very pleased that we 

were able to maintain the funding and in fact increase the 

funding to hospitals in these kinds of times. 

 

There have been some excellent signals that have come  

from hospital administrators who have said things like, because 

they have been forced — for lack of a better term — because 

they’ve been forced to deal with their efficiencies and with their 

management practices and with many of the long-standing 

practices that have been around — and that’s the case whether 

it’s in the hospital system or the school system or the business 

sector — it does not hurt anyone to deal with that. 

 

Obviously within the government sector we’ve had to do that. 

It’s not pleasant. In fact, indeed, it can be very painful. It can 

bring about change which is not comfortable. All of those 

things take place and we recognize that. 

 

But I would say to the member, all of that change is not for the 

worse. That change is for the better and for the strengthening of 

the system in the long term. I don’t know what I can add except 

to say that I’m pleased that we were able to at least maintain 

and in fact increase, by whatever minuscule amount, the 

funding to hospitals in this circumstance we find ourselves in. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you talk about a new 

extension to University Hospital, you talk about a new 

extension to St. Paul’s Hospital, and you talk about a new City 

Hospital. Mr. Minister, I want you to know this, that there are 

some people in this province that are very concerned about the 

likelihood of some of those hospital beds opening because of 

the present crisis in hospital financing. 

 

You know, Mr. Minister, it’s easy in many ways to build a big 

building as an edifice to the Progressive Conservative Party. 

And you can stand here in this legislature and point to that 

addition and that addition, and you can put up your big blue 

signs, Saskatchewan Builds, all over this province, but if there 

isn’t the staff to look after the hospitals and nursing homes that 

we already have, those buildings mean absolutely nothing. 

Those buildings mean nothing because the question here, Mr. 

Minister, is quality care — quality care. 

 

And I want to remind the minister of the following. Current 

data from Statistics Canada show that among the 10 provinces, 

operating expenses per patient-day in Saskatchewan’s general 

hospitals are the second lowest in Canada — $50 per 

patient-day below the national average. Our hospitals, Mr. 

Minister, also ranked ninth or second lowest in terms of paid 

hours per patient-day — two full hours per patient-day below 

the national average. That’s not fat in the system, Mr. Minister, 

that’s not fat. 

 

You set up this little patient care fund. And that patient care 

fund was to ensure that more and more staff went into our 

hospitals; staff the hospitals that we already have and the 

nursing homes that we already have. Well, Mr. Minister, no one 

can find those new nurses and new health care positions. No 

one can find them, and the reason is this: you may allocate 

positions to hospitals; you may fund positions in hospitals, but 

if you don’t take into consideration inflation rates for medical 

supplies, new technology, and all of the other things that are 

necessary in order to run that hospital, where do the hospitals 

get the money? Seventy-five per cent of a  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3321 

 

hospital’s operating budget comes from staffing. The only place 

that they have any flexibility is staffing, Mr. Minister, and you 

can talk about building a new hospital here and there, and 

building a new nursing home here and there, but if you don’t 

have the money to staff them, the hospital building doesn’t 

mean a thing. 

 

And I ask you this, Mr. Minister, I ask you again: how in your 

conscience, how in the name of quality care in our province can 

you justify a one-half of 1 per cent increase to hospitals when 

we have huge waiting lists, when we have nurses and hospital 

staff that are saying they’re burning out? 

 

We have nurses coming into work when they’re sick because 

there’s no money to replace them and they don’t want to annoy 

their colleagues. How can you justify that, Mr. Minister? 

You’ve got money for Peter Pocklington and George Hill and 

all your other hacks. We’ve had an 85 per cent increase in 

funding to the executive arm of council which is the political 

arm of government, but we haven’t had the corresponding 

increase to support people who require health care. How do you 

justify that? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member refers 

to quality of care and talks . . . and I have used this number 

before, and I want her to be very clear about this, you know, 

because the suggestion is made, whether intentionally or not, 

the suggestion is made that there have not been increases in the 

staff to deal with the quality of care issue. I don’t . . . let me just 

put it this way, I don’t disagree that there are some pressures. 

There’s no question that there are pressures in this sector, as 

there are pressures in almost every sector in this society, given 

the times that we are now living in. 

 

(1500) 

 

There are pressures in every sector that you can name, and let’s 

go around the sectors that there are in this province, and yes, 

there are some pressures placed through administration, on the 

administration by the government, certainly, and in turn by the 

administration of the various large and small hospitals on the 

staff that they have in place. I don’t disagree with that; that’s 

the nature of the world within which we live. I don’t say I like 

it. I don’t say that I appreciate it, but I certainly appreciate it in 

the sense that I understand that those pressures are there. And I 

don’t want you to think for a moment that I don’t understand 

those pressures are there as it relates to, well, various things 

including nursing staff positions and nursing staff being under 

significant pressure, especially in the large hospitals where the 

action is intense. So don’t misconstrue what my thoughts are on 

that because they certainly are with those people. 

 

But in terms of quality of care and the kinds of things we’ve 

tried to do, which you will always say is not enough, and that’s 

fair because that’s the role here, and you’ll say it’s not enough 

and I’ll say I hope it’s at least adequate and we’re going to try 

to put more, and so on. And that will be the continuing debate 

we’ll always have. 

 

We have in this province, in terms of the diagnostic care which 

contributes directly to . . or diagnostic services which contribute 

directly to quality of care, six new CT  

scanners. Now the member will sigh and say, oh, I don’t want 

to hear about CT scanners, but I’m telling you that that is a very 

important issue. It’s extremely important as it relates to just the 

kind of pressures that you mention because it eliminates a good 

number of what were formerly exploratory surgical procedures 

and all those kinds of things, which in turn puts pressure on 

staff and operating room staff and all the rest of it. 

 

So those are the kinds of things which we’ve done and which 

we will continue to try to do to stay out there on the leading 

edge of things even though we are this jurisdiction of one 

million people. 

 

You mention, what is it that we recognize when it comes to the 

funding of the individual hospitals or of the wider hospital 

sector collectively. For example, the biggest number — and you 

and I agree on this, I think — is that the biggest number is the 

staffing of hospitals, paying for the staff; in other words, wages 

and benefits of the people who work here — and obviously 

health care by its very nature. Sure we can talk technology, 

which I will do and which I believe is a very important part, but 

we must also talk about the folks who are there and hands on 

and are there in which . . . who are a very important part of the 

physical well-being and the spiritual well-being, and so on, of 

people who find themselves involved with illness. 

 

But we do fund staffing and we pay 100 per cent of that. We 

recognize 100 per cent of the staffing costs, and this year you 

will know, even in the kind of times we were in, there was an 

agreement prior to this year of — what was it, 3.5 per cent? — 

of 3.5 per cent, and we allowed for that and provided the 

funding for all of it. 

 

So I don’t know what the member . . . And we do recognize 

increases in costs of equipment, all of the kinds of things which 

you say we don’t. The fact is all of those kinds of things are 

included in the formula. Now there are years, and this is one of 

them, when we try to effect greater efficiencies and so on, 

which goes back to the argument I used a few minutes ago. 

When you apply significant pressure to, in fact, come with 

every bit of efficiency that you can come out of the system 

with, that’s . . . I don’t apologize for, because it’s an important 

in this sector as it is in the education sector, where I once was, 

as it is in the government sector, where we now both find 

ourselves. 

 

So we don’t disagree. And I would like it if there would be 

more money. I recognize the pressures, especially nursing staff 

— and I say especially — especially nursing staff are under, 

and in that case, especially in the larger hospitals. We recognize 

that. 

 

We’ve put 653 new staff positions into hospitals. That’s 

through the funding formula that we have, and I’m sure that that 

will increase over a time. And we’ve talked about that when we 

talked about the patient care fund and the way in which that 

would be dealt out over a period of some time. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, that’s really all I could add on that basis. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you talk about 653 new  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3322 

 

staff positions. You’re funding 653 staff positions. Can you tell 

me whether those staff positions actually have people in them, 

in hospitals and nursing homes? Can you tell us, can you be 

unequivocal and say that there are an additional 653 real people 

in those hospitals and nursing homes, or have you just funded 

the positions and hospitals because of all of the other stresses 

that you’ve put on them? They’ve had to use the funding for 

those positions to pay for other things. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What I will say is that when we funded 

the hospitals and we said, these will be the funds for the 

hospitals — and you know, we’ve been through this many 

times. And it’s the way it must be, because if we say to the 

hospital administrators, we will fund these positions — now it’s 

up to the administration of the hospital, and it should continue 

to be up to the administration of the hospital how they spend the 

individual dollars that come to them. 

 

Now if they decide, or if there’s a decision of the board and the 

hospital and the chief of medical staff and the head of nursing at 

these various hospitals, if that’s in agreement, this is what we 

can do, this is what we can do with the staff we have available. 

These are the new positions we need. That’s a decision that’s 

theirs, and it should remain their decision. That’s the way it 

stands; that’s the way it will continue to stand. 

 

What I’m telling you and telling the committee is the number of 

staffing positions which have been funded on an incremental 

basis by this government. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, with your changes to the 

prescription drug plan — you’ve added a number of new drugs 

to the prescription drug plan that now hospitals have to supply 

to their patients, but you haven’t increased the funding for that. 

 

You know, Mr. Minister, that there’s an inflation rate in this 

province of over 6 per cent. Hospitals have to have medical 

supplies; they have to have those kinds of things that assist 

them in providing patient care to their patients, Mr. Minister. 

 

And you can talk about funding 653 staff positions. I note that 

when you wrote the nurses you said it was 655 since 1982. You 

can talk about those staff positions, Mr. Minister, but I defy you 

to go out around this province and point to an individual and 

say, that person and that person and that person have come 

about as a result of our increase in funding to Saskatchewan 

hospitals because, Mr. Minister, they just aren’t there. They are 

not there because hospitals are having to make decisions. 

Seventy-five per cent of the budget in terms of labour costs — 

minimum — 75 to 80 per cent. And they’re taking the money 

out of staffing, Mr. Minister, and they’re taking the money and 

paying for other things that have come about as a result of 

inflation. 

 

Mr. Minister, they are not there, and I want you to acknowledge 

to the people of this province that because of your cuts in 

funding to hospitals, hospitals are having to make the decision 

to delete staff positions and use the money to pay for other 

things. Will you admit that? 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say — as I 

have acknowledged and I say to you, that I know the pressures 

that folks, especially in the large base hospitals are under. But I 

will say as well in an unequivocal way, quality of care — as the 

member will talk about — quality of care has not suffered at 

any location in this province. And I challenge you to tell me 

where it has suffered, because it has not suffered, and we are 

told this by the best professional advice that we have. We 

would like to see the kinds of pressures that you and I both talk 

about, relieved. And that’s the kind of commitment we have in 

trying to deal with that on an ongoing basis. The quality of care 

has not suffered, and you should not get away with saying that 

it has. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to just take you back a little bit and I’ll 

take the member back to a . . . In 1976, Mr. Chairman, 1976, the 

member from Regina North East who sits in this House now 

was the minister of Health at that time. They imposed . . . 

 

Let’s just go back to what happened at the various hospitals. 

Hospital administrators are very quick to tell me about this, and 

they will at all times. And there are people in the Department of 

Health now who had to take this message from that former 

minister. He imposed a fifth . . . or, I’m sorry, a 5 per cent 

reduction in occupancy upon the hospitals of the province. They 

just went out and arbitrarily said, you will reduce the occupancy 

of your hospitals by 5 per cent. And they sent staff from the 

Department of Health out to the various administrations in the 

hospitals in an arbitrary manner and said, and the way you will 

accomplish it is by reducing staff. 

 

This happened in 1976 in this province, and let’s just think 

about 1976 in terms of what the prices of our commodities 

were, the kinds of times that we were in, compared to now. 

 

Mr. Chairman, even in these kind of circumstances, the 

circumstances we find ourselves in in dealing with this budget 

in the widest sense, all of the departments, we never 

contemplated, would never contemplate such a Draconian 

action as was taken by that former government in those days. 

We would not contemplate that. That is what was done. 

 

The record shows that clearly. I just want to point it out so that 

the member does not carry on or does not think that she can 

carry on with saying, oh, under our administration we really 

looked after hospitals. We did not reduce funding. We did not 

close hospitals in the summer. Remember that? You said, oh, 

we don’t close hospitals in the summer. Hospitals began closing 

in the summer in Saskatchewan in 1975. 

 

In 1976 your group over there said, here you go, reduce your 

staff to accomplish a 5 per cent reduction in the occupancy of 

patients. When we talk about occupancy reduction in hospitals, 

you know what you’re talking about? Occupancy reduction is 

patients not being in the hospital. 

 

Now that is not the way to deal with it. That is not the way we 

have dealt with it. And as I’ve said to you, to the member, we 

will agree to disagree. I hope we’ll agree to  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3323 

 

disagree. But there will be no question about it, we will disagree 

and continue to disagree as it relates to how any Department of 

Health under anybody’s administration should deal with the 

administrators of the hospitals and the boards of those 

operations which operate independently and should continue to 

operate independently. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, my actions aren’t at 

stake. I was still at university the year you’re referring to. Your 

actions are at issue here. We’re talking about your actions, your 

policy, your government, and your underfunding of hospitals. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you deny that of among the 10 provinces in 

our country, operating expenses per patient-day in 

Saskatchewan’s general hospitals are the second lowest in 

Canada? Do you deny that? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member has raised 

where this province ranks in terms of other jurisdictions in the 

country and various areas, and she talks about operating 

expenses. And I just want to read into the record some very 

interesting statistics. These are for comparative provincial 

hospital statistics across the country. 

 

As it relates to the number of people in hospital in 

Saskatchewan per 1,000 population, in other words, the number 

of people in our province who are in the hospital, we rank first 

in the country in terms of the people who receive hospital care. 

We rank eighth in the country in terms of the average length of 

stay, which is an excellent number because it talks about the 

efficiency of our hospital operations, which is an aspect of it. 

The home care and various other things that we have, add to 

that. 

 

And the average length of stay is 8.7 days in Saskatchewan, just 

so those numbers are on the record. But we rank first in terms 

of the number of people in hospital per capita. And that’s 

extremely important because it speaks directly, it speaks 

directly to the kind of pressures that I had talked to you about 

earlier today and on other days. And it speaks directly to the 

situation that we have with an ageing population, where the 

highest percentage of citizens in our province are over 75 — not 

over 65, but over 75 — which obviously has ramifications for 

this hospital system. 

 

Public general hospitals, beds per 1,000 population, number of 

beds in this province per 1,000 population as it compares to the 

rest of the country, where does Saskatchewan rank there, Mr. 

Chairman? First. Once again, we’re first. We have 6.7 hospital 

beds per 1,000 population in Saskatchewan. The national 

average is 5.1, and this province ranks right up there at the top 

in terms of being first. Public hospitals, beds per 1,000 

population, our rank is . . . where are we here? Our rank is third, 

and beds 7.2. 

 

Now operating expenditures per capita, we rank fifth in Canada 

— fifth. And the national average of the amount per capita 

means the number of people who go to hospital. The national 

average is $493.8 and the  

Saskatchewan number is 501.4. So we’re above the national 

average, and we rank fifth in the country in terms of operating 

expenditures per capita, which is excellent, frankly, and I don’t 

think anyone would dispute that it’s excellent. 

 

So our system is operating efficiently, there’s no question about 

that. I don’t dispute that. I’m sure you won’t dispute that. We 

have excellent people running the hospitals. 

 

And it’s just back to the disagreement that we will continue to 

have, I’m sure, in terms of how we can fund more, if there is 

money to fund more, and to what level can we increase the 

funding to hospitals. That’s the question that will have to go on 

between us. 

 

I believe, yes, there will be increases on an ongoing basis to 

hospital funding, because it goes back to the other point. And I 

want to make this point very clear. You intimated, at least to 

use the best word I can, that when the new hospitals and the 

new beds come on stream, those that I mentioned — University 

Hospital, St. Paul’s, for example — when those new beds come 

on stream, you say there are people in Saskatchewan who . . . 

you being one of them, frankly, who say, oh, those will be nice 

new hospitals and so on, but there won’t be any funding for 

staff and so on. Or I shouldn’t say that you are one of those, I 

guess, but you may well be inclined to encourage those who 

think that way. 

 

So all I will say is, when the new hospital beds are open and 

when they do open, there will be staff and there will be 

equipment. But I will not apologize for bringing as much 

efficiency to the system as is possible, and that’s what we’ve 

attempted to do. And I will not back away from the suggestion 

that I made earlier, and that is that I do understand that there are 

significant pressures, especially on nursing staff. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, there’s a couple of things 

that you said that are true. It’s true that we have the largest 

number of beds per capita in our province, that we lead the 

nation, and it’s true that we have the largest utilization rate. And 

I’m pleased to see that you acknowledge that part of the reason 

is because we have the ageing population in Saskatchewan, we 

have the largest ageing population per capita. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wasn’t talking about dollars spent per capita. I 

was talking about Saskatchewan being the second lowest in 

Canada in terms of operating expenses per patient. That’s what 

I’m talking about. What we don’t want here, Mr. Minister, is to 

sacrifice quality for big buildings. 

 

You know, you talk about a new hospital here and a new 

hospital there, and funding going to St. Paul’s and City Hospital 

and University Hospital to build new buildings, but we have a 

situation in Parkridge, as far as I know up until a few days ago, 

where we had 38 beds that hadn’t yet opened. This was your 

big, big facility to increase the number of nursing home beds in 

Saskatoon. You closed down two old facilities, opened up this 

brand-spanking-new facility, and you haven’t opened up 38 

beds. We’re still waiting for that. That’s what people are 

concerned about. 

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3324 

 

You can put money into all of these new buildings through your 

property management corporation. It’s easy to borrow money 

and build buildings. It’s a lot more difficult to make a 

commitment to put money into ensuring that those buildings are 

run, that there is staff there for patients, that patients can 

actually occupy those beds. 

 

And I just want you to agree with me, Mr. Minister, that we 

rank ninth in this country when it comes to money for patients. 

Mr. Minister, in terms of putting money into patient care in 

hospitals, we rank ninth, and I want you to admit that. And that, 

Mr. Minister, is part of the problem. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the numbers that I had 

. . . the numbers that you have are from StatsCanada, I believe 

you said? Okay. I would appreciate if you’d send me a copy of 

that over and I don’t mind, you know, having a look at it. But in 

terms of the ranking and so on that I quoted to you, are a case of 

comparing apples with apples. 

 

There are several things as it relates to those numbers. We don’t 

deny, frankly, that it’s lower and that we have in terms of the 

number of paid hours per patient-day are low. And frankly, 

that’s fair, in terms of how we operate the system and how the 

hospitals out there will operate the system. 

 

But there are several things that . . . All the provinces in the 

country don’t compile their stats in the same way. That’s 

number one and that’s true. They don’t compile them the same. 

And you alluded to this as well, and this is one of the reasons. 

The number of long-term care patients in the hospitals will 

certainly contribute to this. And we have that and that’s the kind 

of fact that we identified when we put in the system as it relates 

to this now, more into the rural part of our province where we 

said integrated facilities are the way to go. And we’re building 

these integrated facilities where you can move long-term care 

patients from the acute care centres and put them into more 

appropriate facilities. That’s the sort of thrust of that program. It 

doesn’t happen overnight, but it certainly is happening at a 

rapid rate. 

 

And you know, without getting into the comparisons again 

about who’s building long-term care beds and who didn’t build 

long-term care beds, you know, we could get on to that if you 

like, but I don’t think that’s what you want to do either. And 

you know there are various factors here, but we don’t deny that 

we have, in terms of the paid hours per patient-day, that we 

have a low number there. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I’m glad you don’t deny it because Statistics 

Canada, Mr. Minister, indicates that Saskatchewan ranks 

number eight in Canada in terms of paid nursing hours per 

patient-day, and Saskatchewan ranks ninth in Canada in terms 

of total paid hours per patient-day. And obviously, Mr. 

Minister, because of your underfunding to hospitals, this is 

having a serious impact upon patient care, the quality of care in 

our province. 

 

And we have examples of that, Mr. Minister, time after time. 

And I note that you got a copy of the SUN,  

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, hot-line report, and it was sent 

to you, Mr. Minister, and it talked about some of their concerns, 

concerns of people who were calling the hot line. I just want to 

read into the record some of those concerns, Mr. Minister. 

 

Here’s an example. This man has been waiting one year for a 

prostate operation. The condition is not cancerous but is very 

inconvenient. The client suggests, “start petitions to open beds.” 

The caller has cancer of the bladder and is having to wait two 

months for surgery. He states: 

 

In my opinion, if money is the problem, I’d gladly pay to 

keep beds open rather than walking around knowing I 

have cancer. 

 

Another caller; this caller’s been waiting for hip replacement 

surgery since November ‘86. she was asked if she wanted to be 

placed on the urgent list. She declined if it meant replacing 

someone who has cancer. She had a daughter die of cancer. She 

requested the government stop closing hospital beds. 

 

And it goes on and on and on, Mr. Minister, example after 

example of people calling the hot line. This man is on a waiting 

list for removal of a kidney stone. He has waited six weeks thus 

far. He’s had several attacks of pain and there is a very real 

possibility of having severe kidney infection with possible 

damage to the kidneys. The client has spoken to the aide of the 

Minister of Health, with no satisfaction. He has tried all 

avenues to discuss his concerns, with no results. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Minister, you know, at a time when we have over 11,000 in 

Saskatoon waiting to get into hospital, at a time at the end of 

June when we had close to 11,000 people in Saskatoon waiting 

to get into hospital, hospitals in Saskatoon had to decide how 

they were going to attempt to balance their budgets. And they 

decided, Mr. Minister, to close 308 hospital beds in our city, in 

the city of Saskatoon, of which I’m one of the members of the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have a document from St. Paul’s Hospital that 

shows that the administration that expected to save between 500 

and $800,000 by closing hospital beds. 

 

Mr. Minister, your underfunding is causing hospitals to close 

hospital beds for 10-week periods in the summer. When those 

hospital beds are closed, it means more people on the waiting 

list; it means people waiting for longer periods of time to get 

into hospital. 

 

And my question is simply this: why wouldn’t you put more 

money into the system so that hospitals don’t have to close beds 

in the summer, that they can bring in replacement staff? Nurses 

want to work, hospital workers want to work, doctors are 

prepared to do surgery. Why not fund them so that they can do 

what they do best, and that’s look after the people of this 

province who are sick and require operations? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, to make the point,  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3325 

 

and I want to make it very clearly with some numbers which 

will be clearly and on the record in terms of the commitment, in 

terms of the kind of money that’s been spent, the number of 

people that have been funded by this government related to 

hospitals. Then it will go nursing positions right across the 

whole piece. Total staff. . . Oh, the member says, why won’t 

you put . . . You know, the question is always the same: why 

won’t you put more money into the system; you know, dump 

some more money. The answer is more money. Always the 

answer is more money. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Chairman, we have put significantly more 

dollars into it. Spending over the actual — now this is actual, 

1985-86 until now, over a two-year period, and a difficult 

period in terms of the economy of this province which we all 

have responsibility for — up $6 million or 8.3 per cent. That’s 

an increase; that’s an actual increase in the spending. And that’s 

an increase over and above other increases which went on just 

prior to that. 

 

Let me just give you some numbers as it relates to the end of 

June. So this is an updated number; you will not have had these 

numbers before — updated. In total staff, 1,193.87 more total 

staff in the period from 1981-82 through to the end of June 

1987. 

 

Now let’s just break those down: R.N.s, 337.112; CNAs, 

95.889; nurses’ aides, 142.43; other nursing staff, 97.45. Total 

nursing staff, if you take all of those and add them — to the end 

of June now, so I’ve given you the 653 number which was to 

the end of the fiscal year, and now it is 672.89, so that’s an 

increase even from March till now — and other staff, 520.98; 

for a grand total of . . . the total of nursing staff plus other staff, 

1,193.87 additional staff in the hospital system in difficult times 

— 1,193.87 for my colleagues who are showing some interest 

and wanting to know the number. In some difficult times that, 

Mr. Chairman, is the commitment that we have. 

 

And as I’ve said to the member before, I only wish there was 

more money to put into some of the system. But I can also say 

this is a tremendous commitment given the circumstance we 

find ourselves in. And when I say we find ourselves in, I don’t 

mean we the government, or we the treasury benches, I mean 

we the people of Saskatchewan, we the people who live in all 

corners of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I didn’t hear whether these 

people that you’re referring to are in nursing homes or 

hospitals. Are they in hospitals or nursing homes or both? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — All of these numbers are related to 

hospitals. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — That’s pretty interesting, Mr. Minister, 

because you write a letter in August to the nurses, and you 

indicate, Mr. Minister — now this is from 1982-83 — but you 

indicate, to present there are 655 new positions; some of those 

positions are registered nurses. Are you telling me between 

1981 to 1982 that you brought on stream an additional 500 

nursing personnel, Mr. Minister? Is that what you’re telling me, 

in the year  

1981-82? Or are these simply another example of phoney 

numbers, phoney figures, phoney funds? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, Mr. Chairman, I knew, or at least I 

thought that probably the member would revert to those kinds 

of terms that she likes to use. And she uses the word phoney, 

and she always uses all these word which are really very, very 

far from being responsible, frankly. But she would go to those, 

and her parrot over there from Saskatoon South will sit there 

and babble away, which is his contribution to this place. 

 

I will say that, as I said earlier in my early remarks, in 1981-82 

through to June of 1987 in the hospital sector. So the numbers 

that I have quoted here are on the basis of the hospitals — 

’81-82, fiscal ’81-82, through to 1987 up till June. Those 

numbers are updated as of June 30 of ’87. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I simply don’t believe 

you. I’d like you to take me on a tour of Saskatchewan and 

show me where these new positions are, point to individuals, 

oh, this is a position that was hired, or put together since 

1981-82. I simply don’t believe you, and neither do the nurses 

in this province and all the other health care professionals in 

this province, and neither do the doctors, and neither, for that 

matter, do hospital administrators, Mr. Minister. It’s simply not 

true. And I’m just asking you again: can you take me around 

this province and show me where those new positions are and 

people who actually are in those positions, because we can’t 

find them? 

 

You know, Mr. Minister, the other day in estimates we talked 

about your patient care fund. And you talked about how, in this 

year, there’d be some 18 or $17 million for additional positions 

in patient care. And, Mr. Minister, I pointed out to you that that 

was physically impossible in view of your budget. Your budget, 

Mr. Minister, is one-half of 1 per cent increase. It’s a $3 million 

increase in hospital spending alone. Mr. Minister, it was a 

phoney fund; we showed that to you the other day. It was a 

phoney fund. 

 

There’s no increase in budgeting for staff in our hospitals and 

nursing homes, and when you tell me there are 1,193.87 

additional staffing positions in our hospitals in this province, I 

don’t believe you. Prove it. Table the names of the people who 

are in those positions, and then we’ll check with those hospital 

administrators to make sure that, in fact, you’re telling us the 

truth. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the numbers that I have 

laid out here in the House are the numbers that are in the funds 

which are provided through the formula to the various hospitals 

of Saskatchewan from the Department of Health of 

Saskatchewan. Those are the numbers that are there. 

 

The budget submissions are brought forward by the hospital 

boards and administrators across this province, as it should be. 

Those submissions come forward, and those submissions are 

approved or discussed or whatever, and when the final numbers 

go out, that is what is there. The numbers that I have given to 

the hon. member and to the committee are the numbers that 

have been provided in the funding formula for the hospitals  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3326 

 

across this province. 

 

The member says, take me around the province and point over 

here — and here’s Sally who’s a nurse, and she was hired on 

that date, and she’s one of the 672. I’ll say to the hon. member, 

she has a very simplistic way of looking at the world. That’s 

unfortunate. It’s not surprising, but it is unfortunate. 

 

And all I’m saying is the numbers that I’ve laid out, the 

numbers that I’ve put forward, are the accurate numbers up to 

— and the most updated numbers that there are — up to the end 

of June of 1987. And I stand by the numbers, predict, Mr. 

Chairman — she will stand up again, and she’ll say, I don’t 

believe you. I don’t believe you; she’ll say that. Well I could 

say that to her. I mean, how many times has she been up here 

with some kind of an accusation about this or about that? How 

many times have we seen it in the short, well I was going to say 

the short time this session has been on, but I shouldn’t say that. 

How many times have we seen it in the long months that the 

session has dragged on? We’ve seen it more times than any 

member should ever want to have happen, the kinds of things 

that she will bring forward. 

 

So I will just say, those are the numbers. We stand by the 

numbers. They’re the numbers compiled by Saskatchewan 

Health. We stand by them as a department. They’re accurate. 

And the hospital boards, that the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana has decided that she will say, well I’m sorry we don’t 

believe you folks on the hospital boards that you got this 

money. 

 

I heard her even say that administrators don’t believe that those 

numbers are there. Administrators know that those numbers are 

there because it is the administrators who do the budgets of the 

various hospitals, and they know how many positions they’re 

funded for — they know that very well. And it’s the 

administrators that are charged by their boards with the 

responsibility of operating their facilities and their institutions 

for quality care that they provide across this province, and they 

do provide quality care. 

 

And let me reiterate one more time, regardless of whether or not 

you believe me or not, the fact is, quality care, the quality of 

care has not been compromised in any way in this province — 

is not being compromised. And you can say what you like, but 

the fact is this hospital sector in Saskatchewan is operating very 

well, is in fact operating more efficiently than it once did. And 

there have been some difficult times in arriving at that, but they 

are to be congratulated, not condemned for having done it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well I see you have your little cheer-leading 

section out today, Mr. Minister, and I’m sure you do thank them 

for that because they’re the only people in Saskatchewan that 

are cheering you. No one else is — no one else is. Doctors 

aren’t cheering you. They think you give misinformation to the 

press all the time, that obviously you don’t understand the 

hospital waiting list situation; you don’t understand health care. 

 

Nurses don’t believe you. They’re not cheering you, Mr.  

Minister, and neither are patients, Mr. Minister, who know 

exactly what’s happening in those hospitals. And they know 

that nurses and other health care professionals are running off 

their feet — running off their feet, Mr. Minister, because you 

won’t properly fund those hospitals. We have example after 

example of people calling our offices, talking about what’s 

happening in those hospitals, what’s happening to the quality of 

the care. And they don’t blame the nurses, Mr. Minister, they 

blame you. So you can have your little cheer-leading section all 

you want, but they are the only people that are cheering; no one 

else is. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you talk about 1,193.87 staff positions. And 

I challenge you, Mr. Minister, take me around the province. I’ll 

go with you. I’m sure we’d have a nice drive around this 

province; it’s a beautiful time of year. And I want you to show 

me where those positions are and who occupies those positions. 

Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, some more facts. I want 

to refer the member to the statistical tables supplementing the 

annual report, ‘85-86. Okay. You may not have this page, but 

I’ll put it on the record so you can look this up — Saskatchewan 

hospital services plan. If you refer to page 32, table 16, here. 

The title of the table is: average number of full-time employees 

in Saskatchewan general hospitals and paid employee hours per 

patient-day for selected years. I just want to refer you to a 

couple of the numbers. 

 

Nursing staff, which includes central supply. In 1976 there were 

5,434 — 5,434. In 1984-85 there was an increase of 1984-85 

over 1976, of 24.1 per cent. That’s an increase, that’s an 

increase. 

 

(1545) 

 

No, it’s not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member from 

Rosemont says we’re fudging. I just say we picked ’76, and that 

includes some years in which those were increased; that 

includes some years of your jurisdiction, your administration, 

and some years of ours. But I just want to point out, because the 

member is painting a picture or attempting to paint a picture for 

the committee that there has been and there’s a continuing 

decrease, there is not a continuing decrease. There is a 

continuing increase in the number of nursing staff and the 

number of other patient care staff. 

 

As it refers to other patient care staff, which includes everything 

from physiotherapists to pharmacists, all the kinds of . . . the 

other professionals around the hospital, the increase over . . . 

from ’84-85 over 1976 is 29.1 per cent — significant increases 

over admittedly a significant period of time. 

 

But still it shows a trend, and it’s the trend that continues. And 

it’s the trend that’s been accelerated by this government in these 

difficult times, not slowed down by this government, which is 

the picture you’ve been trying to paint, and it’s an inaccurate 

picture. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, it wasn’t myself or the 

members on this side of the House that announced  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3327 

 

this patient care fund in response to a serious concern expressed 

by the nurses in this province and other health care 

professionals — wasn’t this side of the House. It was your side 

of the House. And the Minister of Health, the former minister of 

Health announced in February 1986 a new patient care fund 

spending of a hundred million dollars over the next five years. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s very curious. It didn’t even get mentioned in 

this year’s budget. No mention of it at all. There was a mention 

last year, but no mention this year — the patient care fund. 

 

Mr. Minister, we went through this exercise the other day on 

what happened to the patient care fund. And the patient care 

fund was there to assist hospitals and nursing homes in gaining 

more money for new nursing and health care positions, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

When I talk to administrators in this province and other people 

involved in the health care field, they advise me that with your 

no increase in funding, with your, in essence, cuts in funding to 

hospitals because of our inflation rate, there’s only been a 

one-half of 1 per cent increase in the budget, Mr. Minister. 

 

And with your changes to the prescription drug plan, where new 

drugs have gone on to the plan and hospitals have to provide 

those drugs to their patients, Mr. Minister, but no increase in 

funding from your department to take that into account, with the 

increase in inflation rate when it comes to medical supplies and 

all of the other things that hospitals have to have in order to run 

a hospital, that they are taking money, Mr. Minister, out of 

position . . . funding from positions, and they’re using it for 

other supplies, Mr. Minister. That’s what happening. 

 

You’ve got flexibility when it comes to staffing, Mr. Minister. 

You’ve got flexibility when it comes to labour costs, and as 

you’ve admitted 80 per cent of the costs of a hospital are labour 

costs. But you don’t have a lot of flexibility when it comes to 

supplies. 

 

Mr. Minister, hospital administrations, in response to your cut 

in funding, in response to the hospital crisis, are taking dollars 

out of positions and using that money to pay for other things. 

And we, Mr. Minister, have a crisis in our hospitals. We have 

underfunded hospitals to such an extent that we don’t have 

adequate staffing. And you can ask hospital administrators or 

nurses or union members or doctors, and they will tell you that. 

And you can talk about your funding 1,193.87 positions since 

1981 but, Mr. Minister, I suspect, and I would ask you to prove 

that those people actually exist. You might fund the positions, 

but the money, Mr. Minister, is being used for other things. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, we had to close 308 hospital beds in the city 

of Saskatoon in response to the funding crisis — 308 beds. And 

what do you do? What do you do, Mr. Minister, in response to 

the growing waiting list in Saskatoon of over 11,000 persons — 

11,000 persons? You have the Premier of this province get on 

free time broadcast and announce some extra money to deal 

with the hospital waiting lists. But, Mr. Minister, here’s what 

they say, here’s what Dr. Harvey Michaluk says, and he’s  

at St. Paul’s Hospital. He says: 

 

It came as a complete surprise and our staff is really upset 

after having to take 10 weeks’ forced vacation during the 

summer (during temporary bed closures) and now (we’re) 

being expected to work . . . extra hours. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you make a commitment to this House that 

additional staff will be hired to deal with those hospital waiting 

lists in Saskatoon; that you’re not expecting already 

overworked and over-stressed hospital staff to try and deal with 

that hospital waiting list; that you’ll put new money into the 

system so we can hire more people to start dealing with the 

hospital waiting list? Will you make us that assurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I want to put a couple of 

. . . you know, and I hesitate sometimes to go back to numbers, 

but I want to because it’s important that the numbers are clear. 

Because as part of painting this picture, what concerns me more 

than anything else, I think, as it relates to the hon. member, is 

that she may now be . . . I understand this place and the political 

forum that it is. We all should. I do. I came into these estimates 

and into this House a number of years ago now with my eyes 

open, realizing that this is a place for political points to be 

made. You are attempting to make yours. But let me tell you 

this, let me tell you, it’s important that you also look at the 

numbers, and I will put the numbers there to show you. 

 

You paint the picture that says the hospitals have less money 

than they had last year. I say the hospitals have more money 

than they had last year, and let me just give you some examples. 

I’ve given you these before. Saskatoon University Hospital, an 

example, in operating money, the increase is $1,366,008. Now 

you ask the people at Saskatoon University Hospital if they 

received that money. They will tell you, yes, we received that 

increase, regardless of the picture which you try to paint which 

says, ask the administrators, you say, ask them and they’ll tell 

you they didn’t receive this money. Well I’ll tell you, they will 

say they received this money, and they received a million 

dollars more at the University Hospital, or more than a million 

dollars more. 

 

Saskatoon St. Paul’s, $98,136 more; Saskatoon City, 

$1,162,200 more than they received one year ago; Regina 

Plains, 538,608; Regina Pasqua, $702,696; Regina General, 

729,696. All of those numbers are increases over last year. All 

of those numbers indicate more money going to the hospitals, 

not less. 

 

An Hon. Member: — St. Paul’s. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — St., Paul’s, I did say, $98,136. Those are 

increases over last year on very high and significant budgets. 

Very large numbers of dollars are being spent into this sector. 

 

We come now to this discussion that you have because it’s been 

some time now, and you said, address waiting lists. And I have 

said to you, and I’ve said to the province, and I’ve said to the 

people in Saskatoon through a variety of consultation — a 

variety of consultation, let me assure  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3328 

 

you — we need the long-term solution to this kind of problem 

and we need to understand it well. That’s number one. 

 

And the long-term solution will be . . . Some of it is on stream 

now in terms of the new beds, which I went through today 

earlier — the new beds which are being added at the three 

hospitals. That’s part of the long-term solution. Another part of 

the long-term solution which the hospitals, frankly, have been 

. . . or the medical staff certainly, and some of the hospitals 

have been reluctant to deal with, it goes back certainly into your 

jurisdiction and now into our jurisdiction when anybody talks 

about rationalization of the operations of the hospitals in the 

medicare centre which is Saskatoon. And everybody 

acknowledges it to be that for northern Saskatchewan and a 

good percentage of this province. 

 

Rationalization is something they have been reluctant, frankly, 

to talk about very much. They will talk about it a little bit. We 

asked the hospitals in Saskatoon to come forward with a 

rationalization plan on July 1 of this year. They have been 

hesitant, let’s say, to put it nicely. They’ve been hesitant 

because they know of the various pressures and the various 

status quo thinking that goes on in the various groups across the 

piece up there. 

 

But the fact is rationalization of the use of three very large 

hospitals in a centre that is a medical centre must take place, 

and has proven to be successful in almost every province, in 

almost every large medical centre in this country and outside of 

this country, and one of them including this city of Regina 

which serves southern Saskatchewan. That has proved to be 

successful to varying degrees in many places. 

 

Saskatoon has been reluctant to some degree, although there is 

an increasing view in Saskatoon among all of the players that 

that can take place and that it will take place. And I give you the 

assurance and them the assurance that there will be some 

rationalization take place at those three hospitals. There’s no 

question about that. That’s all part of the long-term strategy 

which must be done to deal with the various procedures which 

have to take place, or the various procedures which are there, 

and where there are long line-ups. I’ve mentioned those before, 

but they bear repeating. 

 

Ophthalmology, orthopedics, and ear, nose and throat are the 

three major ones, and then general surgery the fourth. But the 

first three are more acute than the others. All of those areas 

have to be dealt with. We are dealing with them. The plan that 

you say — and you use your terms of derision any time you 

speak about the Premier reporting to the public of 

Saskatchewan, which I will report to you he will continue to do 

because the people of Saskatchewan want him and like it. 

 

So the plan that was announced by the Premier, the plan that 

was announced by the Premier was a plan that came forward 

from the hospitals of Saskatoon. It came forward from the 

hospitals of Saskatoon to say, yes, we are more and more in 

agreement with the long-term strategy, and we’ve been a part of 

that — and they have in  

terms of the planning of the hospitals that are being constructed. 

That plan came forward from the hospitals. 

 

You say that you were quoting from Doctor A or Doctor B, or 

Specialist A or Specialist B. I will readily admit that nothing 

will ever take place in terms of dealing with this issue, either 

short-term or long-term, if we are to wait for 100 per cent 

agreement from all the players in the game up there, or in any 

community in that matter; that’s just not the way it will happen. 

There will never be 100 per cent agreement in how to deal with 

some of these issues. 

 

I am not worried about the fact that there may be some who 

have, whatever interests and their own particular interests in 

mind, who will say, no, we disagree with that. What I am 

concerned about is to deal with the waiting list issue, as many 

have called upon us to do, you included. We will deal with it as 

I have said before, and we will have the courage to deal with it 

in both short and long term. The plan came from the hospitals. 

The hospitals assured the deputy minister of Health as late as 

last Thursday that they have been in consultation with their 

medical staff on this plan, and with the various number of 

procedures which will be increased over the six-month period, 

which was part of the announcement that the Premier gave. 

That’s the case. 

 

Now the plan is relevant, and I just want to make that point. I 

just made myself some notes. The plan is relevant because it 

deals with the long term and it deals with the short term. Now 

the article in the paper that you refer to earlier today and once 

again just a few moment ago, and you mentioned one doctor, 

president of the medical staff at St. Paul’s who claims that the 

surgeons, anesthetists, and other staff are angry about the 

waiting list initiatives because for one reason they were not 

consulted; second reason, they were forced to take some weeks 

of vacation due to summer bed closures. 

 

(1600) 

 

An official of the Saskatchewan hospital services plan 

contacted St. Paul’s and received the following responses: “(1) 

Medical department heads were consulted about the program by 

the administration,” one point that must be made; and “the 

department heads stated they were prepared to support the 

waiting list initiatives if extra funding would be provided,” 

which it will. There will be extra funding provided for the 

staffing which you’ve referred to earlier, and I’ll say that to you 

here as I have said in the past. And the last point is, no one was 

forced to take 10 weeks vacation. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, what happened was that 

people were asked to go on holiday. It wasn’t necessarily what 

they wanted to do, but they were asked to go on holiday, Mr. 

Minister, that’s what happened. And so in essence what you did 

over the summer by your underfunding, by the closure of 308 

beds, Mr. Minister, you closed hospital beds, a hospital, Mr. 

Minister, in essence, the size of Pasqua hospital. When you 

close 308 beds, that leads to more people on the waiting list and 

longer waiting lists, Mr. Minister. 

 

At the end of June there were approximately 10,700 people on 

the waiting list. At the end — and that’s in  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3329 

 

Saskatoon — at the end of August, Mr. Minister, there were 

over 11,400 people on the waiting list; that was an increase, Mr. 

Minister, of 700 people — 700 people. And now you talk about 

“alleving” the problem by getting rid of 2,000 people on the 

hospital waiting list in the next six months, and you talk about it 

in terms of putting a million dollars into the system in 

Saskatoon. But, Mr. Minister, it didn’t have to be like that. You 

should have left those beds open this summer. We asked you to 

leave those beds open. We asked you to leave the beds open, 

and we also asked you to extend the hours of surgery as a 

short-term solution. Now what these people are saying, what 

these medical staff people are saying, is that this is not the 

solution, Mr. Minister. 

 

They say it’s unreasonable to close hospital beds each summer, 

and the times are getting longer; you used to close them for a 

month; now they’re being closed for two months. And the 

number of beds being closed are larger, they’re larger, Mr. 

Minister. And so as a result of those bed closures, Mr. Minister, 

700 additional people are on the hospital waiting list — 700 

additional people. 

 

My question to you is this: why don’t you fund hospitals so that 

they can replace staff in the summer, so that they can continue 

to operate so that we don’t have this crisis — and it is the worst 

crisis in the country of over 11,000 people on a hospital waiting 

list — when you people, your government, your PC government 

won’t fund the hospitals to such an extent that they don’t have 

to close 308 hospital beds. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, in the three years 

preceding the present year which is under construction here, we 

put an additional $9.5 million into the system, which was just to 

do the kinds of things which the member now suggests: why 

don’t you do more of this? And it was to keep hospital beds 

open, and it was to do those kinds of things which you mention. 

And, frankly, what has been the result of that? Because $9.5 

million, even though the budget we talk about here is 1.2 

billion, which is a mind-boggling number — it certainly is for 

me, and I’m sure it is for you — it’s a very large number; it’s 

one-third of the budget of this entire province. And I just say 

that 9.5 million, while it’s small in comparison to that very 

large budget, is a significant expenditure. 

 

That money was put into the system for just the kinds of things 

which you suggest. And I will say to you that had that money 

been targeted in the way in which this money that is now going 

in — because there’s a clearer understanding of the system and 

how it will work — if that money had been targeted, it would 

have addressed waiting lists in a greater way than it did. That is 

not that it did not address waiting lists, because it did to some 

extent. 

 

What I’m saying is that the plan that is now going to go into 

place will target, and so every one of those hard-earned 

taxpayers’ dollars that is being spent will be maximized by 

targeting at the specialties and at the procedures which are 

causing the log-jam in the system in Saskatoon and that’s . . . I 

can’t think of a better term because that’s exactly what it is, 

right into two or three of the specialties. 

And just to put this into context a little bit, the total surgery 

cases, Regina — let’s just talk about Regina and Saskatoon — 

in ’82-83 there were 26,658 procedures performed in Regina, 

26,658, and in 1985-86 there were 32,626, an increase of 32 per 

cent over that period of time. That’s in Regina. In Saskatoon 

there were 27,201 performed in ’82-83, and in ’85-86 there 

were 36,653 performed, a 35 per cent increase over that period 

of time. 

 

There’s no question, Mr. Chairman, that those pressures we’ve 

talked about and which, I think, we both acknowledge in our 

more reasonable moments, are the kinds of pressures on the 

kinds of services which, until just very recently, were not even 

available to our citizens or to citizens anywhere. Because if they 

are available to citizens anywhere, for the most part they’re 

available to our citizens here in Saskatchewan through the 

technology and through the specialists that we have. 

 

So in Saskatoon, for example, four of the 85 specialist — 85 

specialists in Saskatoon — four of those specialists are 

responsible for 21 per cent of the waiting list. Four out of 85 are 

responsible for 21 per cent of the waiting list. That’s why 

targeting is so extremely important in this, and this targeting. I 

suggest, because I’m assured by the hospital administration and 

the boards there, will bring results, as it relates to bringing 

down the waiting lists which you and I, at least on this point can 

agree with, is unacceptably high. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’ve caused an even 

greater concern as a result of what you’ve just said. Are we 

talking about targeting funds only to ear, eye and throat, only to 

ophthalmology, and only to orthopedic surgery? Is that what 

you’re talking about, Mr. Minister? 

 

Because I want you to know that 80 per cent of that hospital list 

isn’t dealing with eye, ear and throat, ophthalmology, and 

orthopedic surgery. It’s dealing with things like gall bladder 

operations, elective surgery, gall stones, kidney stones — all of 

those kinds of things that people are waiting months and 

months and, in fact, over a year for many of those operations. 

So what are we talking about when we talk about targeting? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I said before that it’s based on four 

specialties — ophthalmology, orthopedics, ENT, and general 

surgery. And those that you mention are obviously in the 

general surgery category, and that’s part of it. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, Mr. Minister, I just . . . I have a final 

question before I turn this over to my colleague from Moose 

Jaw South. Can you tell me whether or not your department has 

any plans to close any rural hospitals in this province during 

this fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well that’s good, Mr. Minister, because there 

are a number of rural hospitals that are concerned as a result of 

that budget leak of yours in the spring of this year, where you 

were talking about closing 18 rural hospitals. And I just want to 

ensure the people of this province that in fact if you’re going to 

close rural  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3330 

 

hospitals that you’ll bring it before the legislature so we can 

have a debate. 

 

I just want you to remember what happened to Ross Thatcher 

when he decided to close rural hospitals. Rural people have a 

difficult enough time, Mr. Minister, having access to services, 

particularly in view of your recent changes to the children’s 

dental program, and to take hospitals out of rural Saskatchewan 

would cause a great deal of hardship in terms of access to 

medical services. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I would just say to the hon. member, 

when you see a budget leak, you’ll see it on budget documents, 

and you certainly didn’t see anything like that. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

would like us to return to the continuing care side of your 

portfolio just now, and I would like to begin with what is 

clearly a betrayal of commitments that your department has 

made over the past number of years. 

 

I have in my hand here, Mr. Minister, a release issued by the 

former minister of Health, released April 12, 1985, in which the 

former minister announced additional special care home 

projects as part of a five-year $300 million health capital fund. 

And in this release he talks about 1986-87. He says: 

 

Work will begin on a project to completely replace St. 

Anthony’s Home in Moose Jaw during the year 1986-87. 

 

And as an appendix to this release, he sets out the nursing home 

projects schedule for 1987-88, 1988-89. 

 

Mr. Minister, in this release the former minister committed your 

government to creating an integrated facility in Cabri, a new 

facility in Cut Knife, a replacement facility in Elrose, an 

addition to the Fort Qu’Appelle facility, an integrated facility in 

Leoville, an integrated facility in Loon Lake, an integrated 

facility in Montmartre, phase 2 completion of the replacement 

of St. Anthony’s Home in Moose Jaw, a new facility in 

Nipawin, an integrated facility in Theodore, and a facility in 

Wadena. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government committed itself to those 

projects for this budget year. I ask you: which of these projects, 

as we meet today, are now under construction?  

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I will preface my remarks with a sort of 

a brief statement. The member rightly refers to the 

announcement that was made over, you know, for a period of 

time by my predecessor, and which we are still committed to, 

frankly, except that the time frame will have to change. And 

that was announced at the time that some deferrals were 

announced, for some very obvious reasons, at least to those of 

us who really recognize the financial strait that the province is 

in. 

 

I have spoken to . . . Well, I’ll just give you . . . to the specifics 

of your question. Canwood is going ahead now, Kyle is going 

ahead now, Leoville is going ahead, and Theodore is going 

ahead. Those are the four for this fiscal year that are going 

ahead. 

And those on the list, which I believe you read, which was the 

’87-88 portion of the list, those which are not are Cabri, Elrose, 

Loon Lake, Montmartre, Moose Jaw St. Anthony’s, which is by 

far the largest of these, Nipawin, and Wadena, are not going on 

ahead and have been deferred — is the term that we’ve used. 

 

And in most of the cases that I outlined, those that have been 

deferred, we have had meetings. 

 

(1615) 

 

If I have not personally, my Legislative Secretary who does a 

good deal of work in this area, the member from Nipawin, does 

a good deal of work in this area in terms of dealing with the 

boards and discussing over the longer period of time with the 

boards the kinds of things that are done. 

 

The member from Regina Rosemont points out that one of 

those that is deferred is in the constituency of the Minister of 

Health, my own constituency of Loon Lake. I want you to know 

that whether it’s in Loon Lake or it’s in Elrose or it’s in Cabri 

or it’s in Montmartre or where it is, every deferral of a project 

which has the hopes and the dreams of the people in the 

community raised, and expectations raised, is a difficult 

decision to make — every one. And Loon Lake is certainly 

included in that for the minister, when I go home to my 

constituency. But I will say that the folks in Loon Lake, as they 

are in Cabri and In Elrose and in Montmartre and others, are 

very understanding of this and of the circumstances surrounding 

the deferral. They are. 

 

Now let me say one more thing as it relates to these. As we 

have told all of the people, when those projects went on to the 

capital list, they were on there on the basis of the need which 

was recognized by this government. There is a need there. 

There’s no question about that. We don’t dispute that in any 

way, shape or form. Just a matter of how many capital dollars 

do we have in the particular year that we’re in. And we came to 

the decision that we don’t have them, and so the deferrals will 

go out. 

 

As a result of ’87-88 projects being deferred, and as a result of 

these projects being one year ahead of ’88-89 and ’89-90 which 

follow, deferral letters went to all of those that were on the list 

for subsequent years. And that’s as it should be, because they 

were placed on the list in the location that they occupy on the 

basis of need. 

 

So we’ve told them — if I might use a bit of an analogy here- 

it’s like a car race, you know, there’s a bit of a wreck on the 

track, and the flag is down so hold your position and when we 

get the wreck cleared off, which is the fiscal circumstance of the 

province, the race will carry on. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, so you are saying to this House 

and to the communities of Cabri and Cut Knife and Elrose, 

Loon Lake and Montmartre, that it’s the fiscal crisis of your 

government that has caused the deferral of these projects? Will 

you say that very clearly: is this the reason that these projects 

are not going ahead, because of the fiscal and financial state of 

your government? 

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3331 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the member uses Cut Knife in his, 

and I want to be clear just so we’re not . . . because Cut Knife is 

operational now. Cabri, Elrose, Loon Lake, Montmartre, Moose 

Jaw St. Anthony’s, Nipawin, and Wadena — those are the ones 

that were on this year’s ’87-88 list which have been deferred. 

Okay? And I’m saying very clearly that the reason is . . . that’s 

the reason and it’s a clear reason. And he says that it’s because 

of the financial state of our government. I say it’s because of the 

financial state of the province of which we happen to be the 

government. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, will you confirm for this House 

that in . . . and I’ll use St. Anthony’s Home, Moose Jaw, as an 

example because I know it best; it’s in my own constituency. 

But it’s typical of each of these. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you confirm for this House that during the 

October 1986 election campaign, the commitment was again 

made in the constituency of Moose Jaw South and in the 

community of Moose Jaw that St. Anthony’s was going ahead, 

that indeed following the election that the commitment was 

again made? Is it unreasonable to assume that the people of 

Moose Jaw and the people of these other communities were 

confident that their projects were going ahead? When was it, 

Mr. Minister, that you discovered that the financial state of the 

province wouldn’t allow us to go ahead with these projects? 

When did you discover that? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, we went through the 

process, the budget process which now we’re all very familiar 

with. And how long it was — it was a long and arduous 

process, and I don’t know how else I could describe the process 

we went into, coming into this budget which we’re now 

discussing here. And we started well back at the beginning of 

the year and we went on until the budget was finally presented 

here — what, June 17? — which was obviously late. And we’ve 

heard that point here before from you and others of your 

colleagues that it was too late and all the rest of it. And we say 

it was necessary to go that period of time to get an excellent 

look, line by line, department by department, in terms of where 

will the expenditures go. 

 

I say, as the Minister of Health, you mentioned St. Anthony’s 

and let’s just use St. Anthony’s as an example. There’s no 

question, no question in my mind whatsoever that there’s a need 

for a new facility at St. Anthony’s. I’ve talked to the people at 

St. Anthony’s. We have excellent co-operation from the people 

and the administrator of St. Anthony’s and the folks involved 

with their board. There’s no question about that, and frankly 

I’m pleased with their level of understanding of just the 

circumstance that we all face, including that they face as 

taxpayers and we face as government, they face as 

administrators in trying to operate in these times. But they also 

know and understand that their project is recognized by 

government as one of great need. They also know and 

understand that they will have a project at St. Anthony’s, and 

there’s no question about that, I’m sure, in their minds nor is 

there in mine. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, your argument then is that the 

projects can’t go ahead because of the financial state of your 

government, or the situation that we find our  

province in. Mr. Minister, why then is this argument now 

applied to projects such as Shand, Rafferty project? Why is it 

that that argument doesn’t also apply to that kind of $1 billion 

boondoggle in the Premier’s constituency? Why do we have 

money to go ahead with projects like that, but not money to go 

ahead with nursing homes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It’s always easy if one gets into the, you 

know, political rhetoric. I mean, you oppose the fact that there’s 

to be a power project at Shand, I think you mentioned. You say, 

oh no, don’t build a power project. And you try to . . . you 

know, so send it over to my colleagues in Manitoba, you say, to 

buy power from them rather than build at a capacity in our 

province. I mean, that’s a debate that goes on in another forum, 

in another place — maybe the same forum and another 

auspices. But what I say is, when we look at the total picture of 

government, which we did in this budget, obviously health is a 

major aspect of that, and nursing homes and the construction of 

nursing homes are a major part of all of that. 

 

It rings very, very hollow, frankly, for members of the New 

Democratic Party, or adherents, or whatever you call yourselves 

of the New Democratic Party, to say that, you know, there’s no 

commitment to the facilities that are there, because there is 

commitment from this side. And I’ve given you that 

commitment again for badly needed facilities in this province 

for the long-term care of our elderly, which your colleague and 

I discussed a little while ago in terms of the pressures that a 

population, and an increasing percentage of that population over 

75 will bring to bear on the system. 

 

Let me just go back a little bit to show you — because you 

haven’t heard of these before, maybe, all of the places — you 

may not have heard of these. But these that I will read into the 

record now, Mr. Chairman, and I would like all members to 

listen carefully because this is a bit of a geography lesson in 

terms of this province; this is a bit of a lesson in geography for 

this province in terms of commitment to all people of the 

province regardless of how remote their community may be, 

regardless of how far they are from the main highway that you 

live on. I just want to point this out to you. 

 

This is the result of the backlog that was there from the 

moratorium that your colleague put on. Okay, in 1982-83: Birch 

Hills, a new 30-bed facility built, completed and now operating; 

Weyburn, one new and 49 replacement beds, badly needed 

replacement beds in Weyburn, 1982-83; Biggar, 12 new and 12 

replacement beds; Wakaw, 15 replacement beds; Meadow 

Lake, 36-bed replacement facility, for a total of 156 special care 

home beds in this province in that year, in ’82-83, a direct result 

of the moratorium which had built a tremendous backlog for 

this province and for the senior citizens of the province. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in 1983-84, the second year of that program 

which addressed the very, very short-sighted moratorium 

imposed by the troops over there, Central Butte, new 30-bed 

facility; Whitewood, new 30-bed facility; Spiritwood, 15 new 

and 21 replacement beds. 

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3332 

 

And when we speak of replacement beds, I’m somewhat 

familiar with some of the facilities that these replace. Those 

facilities were in dire straits, and they were left in dire straits 

through some very good times by some of your troops that are 

now sit in those sides, and those who went before you, who 

came here before you wearing the same label that you now 

wear. 

 

Herbert, 19 replacement beds — for a total of 115 beds in 1983 

and ’84. 

 

1984 and ’85, the program, 1984-85 . . . Listen carefully 

because all members of the House should be very interested in 

the communities that are mentioned here. Because as I travel 

this province, as my colleagues travel this province, as my 

predecessor, the former minister of Health travelled this 

province and opened these facilities, and discussed with the 

board these facilities, and gave approval for these facilities, this 

Progressive Conservative government, under the leadership of 

this very able Premier, said to the senior citizens of 

Saskatchewan, we are committed to special care home beds for 

you; you have not had such a commitment from any 

government prior to this, and it’s unlikely that you will ever 

have such a commitment. 

 

1984-85: Davidson, 10 new and three replacement beds; Indian 

Head, 15 new and two replacement beds; Kelvington, 10 

additional beds; Kindersley, 80-bed replacement facility; 

Kinistino, 16 new and two replacement beds; Lloydminster, 16 

new and three replacement beds — no, I’m sorry — 

Lloydminster, 50-bed replacement facility; Outlook, 16 new 

and three replacement beds. I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman. Regina 

Lutheran, 11 additional beds; Saskatoon Circle Drive, new 

50-bed facility; Stoughton, six new and 24 replacement beds; 

Wawota, new 30-bed facility — a commitment to the seniors of 

the province, a commitment to the seniors, for the most part of 

rural Saskatchewan, where they had been neglected for so long 

they hated to try to remember how long they’d been neglected 

by you folks over there. 

 

1985-86, Mr. Chairman, a very important list and another whole 

series of communities who are very, very happy with the 

commitment of this Department of Health in this Progressive 

Conservative government for this facilities. Let’s just go 

through the list: Arborfield, new 36-bed facility — and what 

I’m doing on passing, Mr. Chairman, is taking the members 

opposite on a bit of a tour of Saskatchewan, that is outside, 

outside of where they are on a daily basis, and that is in the 

cities. Okay? We’re going on a bit of a tour of places that were 

neglected for so long that the people were sick about it, frankly. 

The people saw the commitment. 

 

Arborfield, new 36-bed facility; Big River, new 30-bed facility; 

Dalmeny, nine new and 27 replacement beds; Foam Lake, 10 

new and two replacement beds; Goodsoil — I feel excellent 

about the one in Goodsoil, by the way, in my own constituency 

— 12-bed integrated facility; Lampman, 19-bed integrated 

facility; Lucky Lake, 12-bed integrated facility; Meadow Lake, 

25 replacement beds; Melville, 30 new and two replacement 

beds; Nokomis, 12-bed integrated facility;  

Rabbit Lake, 12-bed integrated facility; Rose Valley, 12-bed 

integrated facility . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . For those of 

you that are asking questions, the member from Saskatoon 

Centre, I could send you a highway map and mark these places 

so you’d know where they are. Saltcoats, new 30-bed facility; 

Saskatoon Lutheran Sunset Home, two new and 78 replacement 

beds — so there are some in the cities. 

 

And all I can say to the members opposite, and I want to say 

very, very clearly to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, we have an ’86-87 program as well, and I want 

to say clearly, we had that commitment before, we delivered it, 

and those facilities are up and operating with significant 

increases in the amount of money which goes from 

Saskatchewan Health to the facilities for the operation of those 

facilities. 

 

1986-87 program: Cut Knife, new 30-bed facility; Dinsmore, 

12-bed integrated facility; Esterhazy, 10 new and four 

replacement facilities; Fort Qu’Appelle, 10 new and six 

replacement beds; Gainsborough, 12-bed integrated facility; 

Invermay, 10 new beds; Langenburg, 10 new and five 

replacement beds; Lumsden, new 30-bed facility; Mankota, 

12-bed integrated facility; and Norquay, 10 new and one 

replacement bed — for a total in ’86-87 of 162 beds. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, it’s obviously a long list, 1982 to 1987, 

five years. Five years, 1,675 special care home beds built by 

this government with the kind of commitment to the people, and 

especially the elderly people of this province — 1,675. Why 

that many? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — My colleagues feels justifiably proud of 

that because it’s a commitment that this government under this 

Premier made to the people. They feel justifiably proud of that. 

But the fact is, the reason that there was a need, such a dire need 

for 1,675 beds, the reason that that need existed was because of 

the moratorium — was because of the lack of commitment that 

you had when you chose in good times to sit and rest on the 

laurels. You rested on the view that someone else at some other 

time, another generation, who said, we are committed to health 

care; we built this. And what did you folks say? You said, we 

don’t have to build this because the seniors in our province 

believe, oh, the NDP, they’re for health care. 

 

But what did the NDP who were for health care do for the 

people? We hear what they say, and we heard for so many years 

what they had to say. But what did they do? was the question 

asked by people all across this province, in all of these 

communities that I’ve outlined here, and in others who are still 

on the list and who still have the commitment from this 

government that they will have those facilities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I say, we’re justifiably proud of the record 

in nursing home construction. The member raises a legitimate 

point, as it relates to being a member from Moose Jaw, on St. 

Anthony’s Home. I have acknowledged to you, and I 

acknowledge to you here again, there’s a need at St. Anthony’s 

Home for a new  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3333 

 

facility. There is a need, as there was a need in all of these that I 

have outlined, and there will be a new place at St. Anthony’s 

Home. But the circumstances that the province of Saskatchewan 

finds itself in does not allow us to build to the same level, to the 

same extent this year as what we had hoped we would be able 

to do as we continue to catch up on a backlog that was left by 

an irresponsible bunch, and that’s what you were. And that’s 

what you still remain. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, let me just add to this just so we have it all 

into perspective. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Let’s get it all out. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Let’s get it all out in the first time here. 

I said 1,675 beds build in the period 1982 to ’87. Let’s go back, 

1975 to ’82, a similar period, both seven-year periods. How 

many beds were built by the troops opposite? How many? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sixteen. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The member says 16, but they actually 

built more than that. They built 776 beds in seven years. This 

government built 1,675 beds. There was a need for those 1,675 

beds, I will submit, prior to this government ever coming to 

office. But did they meet that need? No. Did they leave the 

people of Saskatchewan in dire need of these kinds of facilities? 

The answer is yes. Should they be ashamed of themselves? 

Obviously, they should be ashamed of themselves. Are they 

ashamed of themselves? Obviously, no, by the looks on their 

faces. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, as a member of that party that 

government this province so irresponsibly for that 11 years as 

you describe it, when we had a balanced budget or a surplus 

budget each of those years, Mr. Minister, I want to respond 

initially to that long-winded statement of yours just now by 

saying this. I want to congratulate you for every bed that you’ve 

put in place in this province. We welcome every one of them. 

 

And now I want to complete the list. Let’s go back then, you 

read right down from 1982 to 1987. Now I want to complete the 

list here — 1987-1988: Cabri, dream destroyed — promise 

made, dream destroyed; Elrose, promise made, dream 

destroyed; Loon Lake, promise made, dream destroyed; 

Montmartre, promise made, dream destroyed; Moose Jaw St. 

Anthony’s, promise made, dream destroyed; Nipawin, promise 

made, dream destroyed; Wadena, promise made and dream 

destroyed. 

 

Mr. Minister, I question both the wisdom of your decision in 

deferring these projects and the ethics on the question of the 

wisdom of your decision to defer. How much money, Mr. 

Minister, do you anticipate it would have taken in your budget 

this year to put these projects on stream as planned? How much 

money has this saved your budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I might just say in response, while my 

officials dig up the number, so I give you accurate figures . . . 

But you say, if I quote you properly here: promise made, dream 

destroyed in Cabri and in Loon  

Lake and in Montmartre and in St. Anthony’s and so on. I just 

want to correct you on this. Promise made, dream not 

destroyed. The dream continues, and they will have it; they will 

have their home. 

 

And in every case, in every one of those boards the people 

responsible, the people there all know very, very well that they 

will have their facility. Their dream is not destroyed. There 

have been some attempts by some, and I don’t say you because 

I believe you have not, the member who is now conducting the 

questioning, who does have the integrity to stand and say we 

congratulate you for every bed you build. That’s fair ball 

because that’s the way . . . that’s true. And I appreciate that very 

much. 

 

But I would say to you that there’s no dream destroyed. Those 

people know that those facilities are coming; those people 

understand better than many in this House the circumstance that 

whatever sector they work in, is in, and the circumstance that 

the province finds itself in. So we will have the beds, and 

there’s no question that we have gone a very, very long way in 

working off the backlog that was left there for a good, long 

period of time. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, let me quote to you from an 

editorial while your officials are finding the figures that I asked 

for. Let me quote for you from an editorial which appeared in 

the Moose Jaw Times-Herald after your announcement that the 

St. Anthony’s Home project would not be going ahead in this 

calendar year, and you have given no assurance to the 

community of Moose Jaw or to the board of St. Anthony’s 

Home when this project will be going ahead. You said it may be 

next year, it may not be. It may be the year following. 

 

Mr. Minister, the editor of the Moose Jaw Times-Herald, 

reflecting on your decision, said this, the point is this: a dream 

has been demolished in Moose Jaw and the Premier’s 

government is the cause of it all. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to read into the record — because I 

think it puts a this issue so concisely and so clearly in a way 

that I could not — a letter that was written to you from a 

constituent of mine in regard to your decision to cancel the 

rebuilding of St. Anthony’s. She writes: 

 

Dear Sir: It is with great concern that I’m writing you and 

I hope you will forgive me for taking your time. It was a 

shock to me that St. Anthony’s building was put on hold. I 

worked 21 years at the Union Hospital in Moose Jaw and 

so many times a dozen beds were filled with aged people 

who needed nursing care that is capably given at St. 

Anthony’s, and these people were on a waiting list, and we 

had a lot of younger people waiting for surgery in the 

hospital. 

 

So when the plans for building at St. Anthony’s were 

announced I was pleased to hear that. I am 73 years, live 

in my little house, and hope I will never need to go into a 

home. I cannot afford things like applying for a home 

improvement grant, but I scraped up what I could to 

donate to St. Anthony’s building fund and donated through 

my church, Emmanuel Lutheran, as they also did in  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3334 

 

other churches, and even small children’s groups collected 

for it. I belong to a caring society, as I’m sure you know 

many Saskatchewan people are. If I have to pay income 

tax on my small pension, then I want my money to work 

for the people who need help. 

 

I was raised through the years when our car was made into 

a Bennett buggy. I worked for $5 a month. I was a maid 

for people who could afford to pay more, but I was not 

bitter. I was glad my father had one less mouth to feed. 

My father taught me to be proud and remember that 

money and power did not necessarily make a lady or a 

gentleman, but helping the ones who needed your help 

were special. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, here’s the question that I would ask, the 

question she put to you: 

 

I trust that you would reconsider the plans to put St. 

Anthony’s on hold an give someone a home and someone 

a job. 

 

By reconsidering this decision of yours, by putting St. 

Anthony’s on stream, and the other nursing home projects 

which you have deferred, you accomplish two goals. You meet 

that need which you have recognized — you give someone a 

home — but you meet another need, and that’s the need to give 

people in this province a job. 

 

And surely if you argue that putting funds into home 

improvement grants creates employment, then surely putting 

funds into creating new homes for our seniors and disabled, 

surely that too will create employment. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, would you address the question so capably 

put to you by my constituent: 

 

I trust that you would reconsider the plans to put St. 

Anthony’s on hold and give someone a home and someone 

a job. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t recall the 

specific letter, but I did get several letters like that. I recognize 

the disappointment of people who . . . A couple of things. 

 

I know across this province . . . and I’m very, very familiar with 

one in my own constituency, in Loon Lake, where people have 

donated money and put money forward to raise the local level 

of funding and so on, and you made some reference to that, or 

the person in that letter made some reference to that. 

 

And I understand how that works, in terms of you put your 

money in and then the interest is being collected by the local 

board rather than by the individual who put their money in, and 

they wonder about the project going ahead. All of that, that’s 

the nature of how things happen. 

 

But I will say to you this, the people of this province are 

pragmatic people who understand, and they do, and they have 

shown that in each of these circumstances that you’ve outlined 

today — those seven projects which have been deferred. They 

understand the necessity for that  

kind of thing. What they have asked for and what they have 

received is an assurance that they are not being dropped from 

the list. In other words, a deferral does not mean cancellation, 

and it’s extremely important that that’s clear and that was made 

clear to them. Deferral is not cancellation. Deferral means that 

it’s just put on hold and when the fiscal circumstance will 

allow, they will go forward because the need is still there. 

Okay? 

 

(1645) 

 

So I understand the disappointment. I understand the 

disappointment of those who tied some hopes and some dreams 

and some wishes and so on, to the kind of homes that are to be 

built in their communities. And obviously Moose Jaw, that you 

represent, is one of those. I know that. 

 

But the point is and will always be thus — the decisions are 

difficult ones. Like it’s not something that I’m really happy 

about that we had to defer these projects. I don’t like to do that. 

I don’t like the decision, making that kind of decision. But it 

has to be done — has to be done. It’s a responsible decision. 

 

And when one is given a responsible position, that I suggest 

that this is, to look after this large budget in Health, you have to 

make these kinds of decisions. They’re not easy, but they’re 

necessary. People understand that. Board people that I’ve talked 

to and that my colleague from Nipawin has talked to, 

understand that in spades across this province. And that’s why 

. . . and they also understand that their needs that were 

identified are still needs that are identified. 

 

And the integrity of this group right here — the integrity of this 

group right here in terms of our track record of delivering 

nursing home beds, our track record of having developed the 

concept of integrated facilities which will increase the viability 

and in fact ensure the viability of some very small hospitals in 

this province, this is the group that developed that program, that 

developed that concept. This is the group that delivered that 

program and that concept to several communities across the 

province, and this is the group who now says, despite some 

difficult times, there will be nursing home spaces built in the 

future. 

 

And like I say, I don’t know what more I can say except to say 

to you, I understand totally the sentiment that the letter writer 

expresses, the sentiment that you express in bringing her 

concern to the House, but it will always be thus. 

 

Those who are given the responsibility of making decisions will 

have to make them in a responsible way, and those who are 

given the responsibility of criticizing those decisions will 

criticize the decisions because they do not have to be 

encumbered as you aren’t encumbered by the responsibility of 

looking at the global budget as we are. We’ve looked at that. 

We’ve taken our responsibility seriously, and we’ve made good 

and responsible decisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3335 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I asked a question a little earlier, 

on how much money has been saved from your budget by 

deferring these projects. I’ve yet to get an answer to that 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m sorry I had it in front of me, but I 

had a couple of points that I wanted to make and I was happy 

that they were made. Seven projects were deferred in ‘87-88 

budget; 312 beds deferred; and the total capital cost of those 

projects is 24.7 million. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So $24.7 million, Mr. Minister, is what you’re 

saving, which my rough . . . by just my quick, rough calculation 

is about one month’s interest payment on the public debt 

created by your government. Now here we come to the reason 

for this kind of deferral. We are now paying out of the treasury 

of Saskatchewan some almost $300 million a year in interest 

payments on a massive public debt. Therefore, yes, we are 

financially strapped. Therefore we do not have the funds to go 

ahead with these very necessary kinds of projects. 

 

And yet we do seem to have the funds to go ahead with other 

things — home improvement grants. We have funds to go 

ahead with power projects. We have funds to go ahead with, we 

heard today, an 85 per cent increase in the Executive Council 

spending. Mr. Minister, I submit, yes, it is due to fiscal 

problems that we can’t go ahead with these projects, but fiscal 

problems primarily created by your government. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well this goes back to the point that I 

tried to make a few minutes ago. And the point is that all of us 

in this cabinet, or whatever cabinet at whatever day you look at, 

and all of us in this caucus and in this government have to make 

decisions on the global budget. We must make them, and we 

have to make them. Because you will say by comparison, well, 

that’s this percentage of the interest on the public debt, or it is 

this payment on the interest on the public debt. You will also 

say through — I mean, let’s just put this all into perspective — 

you also say, don’t raise taxes; do not raise taxes. They’ve said 

it how many times here? — don’t increase your revenues, no 

taxes, no tax on fuel, no increase in the sales tax, none of those 

things. That’s what they’ve said. 

 

They say that so many times, Mr. Chairman, because . . . but all 

of that goes back to what I had said earlier. It’s not a 

responsible thing. It will always be thus. Opposition members 

will never be encumbered by that thing we call responsibility — 

never. But that’s the nature of the system we’re in, and that’s a 

legitimate system. It’s a legitimate system. 

 

So they say, don’t raise taxes. They say, don’t deal with any 

projects which will be wealth-creating in our province and 

diversity the economy in this province, which will then in turn 

create the kind of wealth which will generate revenue, which 

will in turn come back to the province so that we can in fact use 

it to do just the kinds of things which you say we should be 

doing at a greater rate than we are. Okay, you say, don’t do that. 

 

Well I say we are doing it in looking at the total budget. And 

that goes back to the things like the power projects, the 

development of a paper mill in Prince Albert, value  

added to the nth degree, which is something that you folks, or 

not you, but your ilk over there who were here prior to this last 

election, who would say, no, don’t deal with Weyerhaeuser; 

don’t build a paper mill; don’t do anything that’s 

wealth-creating; don’t do that. And then it’s been reiterated by 

some of you who have come in the class of ’86, who say, oh, 

don’t deal with Weyerhaeuser, it was a bad deal; don’t deal 

with anybody who’s wealth-creating. That’s what you said — 

all of that sort of thing. You say that. 

 

You say that, and your parrot over there from Saskatoon Centre 

is now coming into this discussion. But I just say, I ask her to 

stay out of the discussion until she’s ready to contribute 

something worthwhile; and I invite her to do that if she has 

something to contribute. 

 

So all I say to you is, there’s no responsibility in raising these 

kinds of things and those kinds of comparisons. You say from 

time to time, don’t raise taxes; raise the price of wheat; raise the 

price of oil; raise the price of potash; do all of those things 

which you very well know are impossible for a government to 

do. We can’t do that. But you say, do it anyway, because you’re 

not encumbered by any kind of responsibility. You say, don’t 

deal with anybody who’s wealth-creating, don’t deal with the 

private sector, don’t privatize because there may be some 

wealth generated. Don’t do that. That’s what you say. 

 

Well all I’m saying to you is, we have made responsible 

decisions as it relates to this Department of Health and as it 

relates specifically to the building of special care home facilities 

for the seniors of our province. We have made those 

commitments. We will continue to make those commitments as 

the need arises, and the need is certainly out there. And we will 

continue with that, and there’s nothing more I can add, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’d 

like to ask about your level of support for level 4 care, and I 

raise the particular circumstances of a nursing home in my 

constituency, Sherbrooke nursing home. They recently 

completed an assessment on their residents considered to be 

level 4, and it turned out that 38 per cent of their residents are 

assessed at level 4. That’s some 125 residents are classified or 

assessed as being level 4, and Sherbrooke receives no funding 

for level 4 care. I’d like to know how you expect the home to 

operate on this kind of basis, and if you’re aware of this kind of 

problem being encountered at Sherbrooke home. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member raises the 

Sherbrooke home in your constituency, and it’s certainly in 

Saskatoon in any case. There’s no question that we 

acknowledge, as we have, and my comments to your colleague; 

we acknowledge the increasing level of care certainly that’s 

required because of that very fact which points out that more 

and more of our population is 75 years and above, and so 

there’s an increasing level of care required. Now I’ll just give 

you a number here: in ’86-87 there were additional full-time, 

equivalent staff added, 4.2, which is a total . . . an increase of 

$83,059 added into that home to meet that shift to heavier care. 

Now whether or not, you know — and this is where it becomes 

an arguable point — whether or not that meets it becomes a 

debatable point in terms of, you know, some  

  



 

October 14, 1987 

3336 

 

at the home would say, and I recognize the pressures that 

they’re under, especially in some large homes like that, they 

say, well, I’m not sure that it meets the care. But certainly this 

was more than a simple gesture toward that; this was directed at 

just that very point. And we’re making that attempt. 

 

So we recognize the point that you’re raising, and we’ve been 

attempting to increase the staff and the money to pay for that 

staff, to meet the kind of heavier-care needs that are out there. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I realize that the time is getting close, so I would 

ask that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to 

sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 

 


