


















































November 3, 1987 Hansard Morning


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 November 3, 1987 
 

3845 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Tchorzewski, from the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts, presents the first report of the said 
committee which will appear in today's Votes and Proceedings. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
move, seconded by the member from Shellbrook-Torch River, the 
vice-chairman of the committee: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Non-Controversial Bills, I present the second report 
of the committee, which is as follows: 
 

Bill No. 60 - An Act to amend The Forest Act 
 
Ms. Simard: — I wish to report Bill No. 60, An Act to amend 
The Forest Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I just have a couple of short comments and 
perhaps a question regarding this Act. I would like to quote from 
the sale documents of the PAPCO assets to Weyerhaeuser. And 
under one section regarding the trust fund, I quote: 
 

The Licensee shall establish a Fund to be called the Prince 
Albert Reforestation Trust Fund by agreement with a trust 
company. 

 
And I'll move on in that section to section (d) and it says: 
 

At such time . . . as the Licensee, in its sole discretion may 
determine, the Licensee may draw on the Fund for the sole 
purpose of paying any and all costs incurred by the Licensee 
(to fulfil) its obligations under Section 12,04 hereof or in 
carrying out intensive forest management . . . 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

. . . any costs incurred in respect of the Licensee's salaried 
personnel or at the time spent by such  

personnel in connection with such activities. No withdrawals 
may be made from the Fund except by the Licensee. 

 
And I would ask if this is another fund, an extra fund in regards to 
that or if this is just making this agreement legal under . . . so it's 
just making this legal? What you did last summer, you're enacting 
legislation now to cover the agreement you made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, if I may respond to the hon. 
member. Thank you. Yes, it's partly correct in that it is making 
something legal. But in actual fact this Bill would be 
consequential to the one passed previously, The Parks, Recreation 
and Culture Act, which actually establish the forest renewal fund 
from the 15 per cent export tax that's to be levied against the 
companies, and that Act was passed in order to have an avenue 
with which we can spend the money which will be silvicultured in 
reforestation because we agreed with the companies that we would 
establish that renewal fund. And The Forest Act, is consequential 
to that one, just in order to make it all fly. And if you wish, we can 
sit down and run over the documents later if needs be. I hope that 
is satisfactory to you, but it is consequential to the previous Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Insurance 

Act 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to report Bill No. 63 as 
non-controversial, which is An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Insurance Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 64 - An Act to amend The Partnership Act 
 
Ms. Simard: I wish to report Bill No. 64, An Act to amend The 
Partnership Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3846 
 

 
Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Business Names 

Registration Act 
 
Ms. Simard: — I wish to report Bill No. 65, An Act to amend 
The Business Names Registration Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the said Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to,  the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 80 — an Act to amend The Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 

 
Ms. Simard: — I wish to report Bill No. 80, An Act to amend 
The Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 
1979, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move said Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 66 — Bill No. 71 (Inclusive) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to report the following bills 
as controversial: Bill No. 66, An Act to amend The Denturists Act; 
Bill No. 67, An Act to amend The Ophthalmic Dispensers Act; 
Bill No. 68, An Act to amend The Dental Profession Act, 1978; 
Bill No. 69, An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981; 
Bill No. 70, An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act; Bill No. 
71, An Act to amend The Provincial Mediation Board Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Second reading next sitting. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Speaker: — By special order of this House, question period 
will be at 2 p.m. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in accordance with the 
arrangement that has been worked out between government and 
opposition House leaders, I wonder if we might have leave to go 
direct to government orders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That is the general agreement, Mr.  

Speaker. There are a couple . . . I can't deal with them today. 
There's two motions for return that I wanted to have moved today, 
but . . . in respect to the Executive Council, but we can deal with it 
at that time in the Executive Council. But there are two motions 
that I wanted to move but the member isn't here, and maybe we 
can work that out. So that's fine. 
 
Leave is granted. 
 
(1015) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 1 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, we 
left off on Saturday with the Agriculture estimates. We were 
discussing the equity financing proposal and alternatives for . . . 
within that proposal. 
 
Mr. Minister, I had the great pleasure of hearing your interview on 
the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio this morning. 
Unfortunately, your description of the equity financing proposal 
would leave many, many people to believe that they would be 
involved in this program, that they would have something to gain 
from this program. 
 
And I think we established on Saturday the fact that, with any 
equity financing proposal to work, those people who are at the 
bottom end of the scale would not be helped under equity 
financing. 
 
And I went through a scenario whereby a farmer could sell his 
land and still be in debt, so he'd be no further ahead. And yet I hear 
you telling the people of this province that equity financing could 
be a great scheme to help the farmers of this province. It's one 
sweeping general term — helping the farmers of the province. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think you're not coming clean with these 
people. I think that you know darn well that they're not . . . that 
equity financing, for people to invest in it, must have some return, 
and I think that you know that there's no return on a number of 
farms in this province, and therefore those people will not be 
helped. 
 
So I say to you that we have a situation here where you're 
misleading those people. You're giving them false hope. Instead of 
addressing their problem of net income for all the farmers of this 
province, you're pricking on a specific sector and leaving to the 
wolves those 25 per cent of the people who are in deep financial 
trouble. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have gone through this whole proposal, and I 
have yet to hear what your ideas are. We have gone through . . . 
I've asked you to explain your ideas; I've come up short with any 
answers. You're talking about picking and choosing people who 
are going to be in the program, again, as I said, leaving those 
percentages of  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3847 
 

people out. I ask again: who will it help? Who will it help? And I 
think you don't know, or you're not willing to tell the people that 
those people in deep trouble are not going to be helped. 
 
We've gone through the scenario of changing The (Sask) Farm 
Ownership Act, changing the Act and leaving the borders wide 
open for investment on farm land, putting Saskatchewan farm land 
on the stock market. If you can believe . . . anyone can believe that 
you are willing to take Saskatchewan farm land and place it on the 
stock market. And I believe that farmers of this province should be 
getting any profits, not the brokers and large investors. So, Mr. 
Minister, when you don't deny that the land will be on the stock 
market, when you put forward all your inconsistencies, I think 
farmers of this province are left very, very short on your idea of 
what equity financing will accomplish. 
 
I would ask you, Mr. Minister, a couple of questions now. First of 
all, will the government be using lands branch land as land that 
will be put into any equity financing body? Will lands branch land 
be the government's contribution to equity financing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I'm here today with the 
copies of the five major presentations of the equity finance 
symposium that I will forward to the hon. member because he 
wanted the specifics as soon as he could get a hold of them, and it 
includes the . . . for the overall economic analysis of the state of 
farm debt from Mr. Lloyd Quantz, and the Farm Credit 
Corporation, the Credit Union Central, and the Australian Rural 
Property Trust, and the Peat, Marwick and Mitchell presentations. 
So I will forward these to the hon. member so that he can review 
them and his caucus colleagues can review them. 
 
At the same time, the cabinet committee on farm input costs that 
travelled across the province and also reported to the 
parliamentary committee, that the hon. member asked for, is here 
in summary form. And I'll present that to the hon. member so he 
can use it. 
 
With respect to what property might be put into an agriculture 
equity corporation concept or instrument, anything is possible. 
Several suggestions have been included from some federal, some 
provincial, financial institutions participating. There are large 
combinations. And as you look through that report, you will see 
various alternatives that are suggested in there. 
 
So some of the ways that a provincial government, for example, 
could contribute is, rather than cash, you could allocate some of 
your property to an equity corporation. And we have that as assets; 
we carry it on the books. I mean, it's here. So you could contribute 
some cash, or you could look at a tax credit to encourage people to 
invest. 
 
If I could mention to the hon. member just in closing, or this 
question at least, is that when I suggested that to the Leader of the 
Opposition, he responded, and I quote: 
 
On this basis, I think it has lots of attractions for farmers and 
precious few for investors right at this stage of the game. 

Well if you provide the appropriate tax incentives, plus a 
guaranteed return, plus the possibility for capital gain, as you do in 
any other market, that's why people do invest in it, because you 
can see a reasonable rate of return, plus you hope your stock goes 
up like any other mutual fund or people who invest. That's what 
we do all the time with the teachers' pension fund or mutual funds 
of any kind. 
 
So if in fact the farmer has the ability to buy back his property, and 
he can do that at any time, and we've replaced a lot of his debt 
with equity and cut his interest rates because the banks have to 
charge full interest because they can't have capital appreciation, 
then you've got that combination of things that as we've seen in 
Australia and New Zealand, and perhaps any way we could design 
it here might be helpful to farmers and ranchers in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, you know, as I said to the Leader of the Opposition, if you 
have suggestions on how we might want to design this, or you 
know farmers who have suggestions on how we might want to 
replace the debt with equity and reduce that cash debt burden, I 
would be more than happy to receive your suggestions. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, do you perceive that there will be 
tax incentives for investors who invest into an equity corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well as I just mentioned, you could design 
tax incentives for people to invest in this, as opposed to investing 
in something else in Saskatchewan, or something else in any 
particular mutual fund or investment portfolio. You have that 
possibility. And if you think it's a good idea, we can explore it. 
 
If some think that there are modifications you could make to it, 
please suggest them. We have not ruled them out, because 
obviously if you can encourage people to invest in Saskatchewan 
agriculture and benefit farmers and encourage the investors, 
maybe people in the legislature will invest their savings, in some 
part, in an agricultural instrument — a bond — to help farmers. 
And they've got a guaranteed return for themselves and some 
appreciations over time, because like any other stock, it may rise. 
Maybe people would like to do that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, what I'm trying to get at was what 
your idea of this proposal is because I think the farmers of this 
province have to know. And right now, you know, you've had the 
proposals, you've commissioned the study; I'm sure that you have 
some ideas. And if you're going to give a tax incentive to those 
investors who are investing into the equity finance corporation, 
then what about the farmer who's not going to invest in his land or 
sell his land to this corporation? Why should investors get a tax 
benefit, a taxpayer's benefit, from investing in a corporation. when 
a farmer who may not wish to go into the corporation receives no 
advantage to continue him farming? 
 
So I mean, what you're setting up is a double standard here. If 
somebody puts this land into a corporation and there is tax 
incentives, and somebody wishes not to, the person who wishes 
not to is set at a disadvantage. Could  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3848 
 

you provide us with some information on your thoughts to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we often have tax 
advantages in various kinds of investments that people can choose 
to take advantage of. They may not, I mean, when you talk about 
various kinds of standards, nobody wants to design standards that 
are any different for a various range of people. 
 
I can remind you of the land bank. People who paid the rent and 
invariably have paid rent in land bank have paid less than market 
value in most cases. Would you say that's a double standard? I 
mean . . . You may or may not. I mean, I think it's been, you know, 
in the ballpark, but you could have arguments that people who 
have been on government land have paid lower rent than those 
that were in the market. 
 
I mean, you try to design a program that would encourage people 
to invest in agriculture and at the same time benefit people in 
agriculture who want to take advantage of it. And if we can do that 
. . . Because the debt burden is real, the banks are going to own a 
lot more land, the credit unions are going to have an awful lot 
more land, and they don't want it. And we don't want them to have 
it. So we'd like to have a way to replace some of that debt, lower 
interest rates, and allow the farmers to buy it over time and to have 
that assurance that they can buy it over time. 
 
And all we're doing is giving them a partner who is prepared to 
take some of that risk with them, provide them lower interest rates. 
And if they have a guaranteed investment, a secure investment, a 
good investment, and farmers have some leverage, again. I say in 
all respect, I don't think for any partisan reasons we should close 
our eyes to these possibilities. If Prime Minister Hawke in 
Australia can review it and examine it and explore it for his 
farmers, I don't think we should be hidebound by any one 
particular political persuasion. 
 
People around the world are noticing problems in agriculture. We 
don't have enough money in the country to buy all the farm land, I 
mean, and there's awful lot of it with a great deal of debt, and 
perhaps nobody's fault because of the interest rates of international 
markets and of a lot of other things. But it's there, and we're going 
to have to deal with it, so let's . . . 
 
As your leader says, the member from Elphinstone, the Leader of 
the Opposition, said — I can't find it here — but he said, there's 
lots of capital in the country, lots of money in the country. Now 
that's true. Now he says this is very good for farmers. So if we can 
get it interesting for the capital that's out there to replace some of 
this debt, you've put the two together. And let's at least explore 
that possibility. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, the whole scenario . . . You keep 
repeating this reasonable rate of return to the investors, and I'm not 
sure where this reasonable rate of return is coming from, because 
every farmer I talk to now has little or no rate of return. So first of 
all, that aspect is pretty well eliminated. 
 
You can talk about the land values going up as a  

long-term benefit, but I think any farmer who works on that land, 
for whatever period of time, should receive the return from the 
appreciated value of that land. 
 
And I think that we're not addressing the problem, and the 
problem is net income. What we're doing here is we're trying to 
have a band-aid solution to camouflage the problem, and we can 
do that, and we can do it in the best manner for farmers. But what's 
going to happen is, we're still going to lose a number of farmers — 
a number of farmers that we shouldn't lose. 
 
So I think that the whole thing is, is that we're setting out a 
situation where the banks won't lose their money. The investors, as 
you say, are going to get a reasonable rate of return, and they're 
going to get some portion of the appreciated value of the land. But 
where does it leave the farmer? When all is said and done, I'm 
very, very afraid that the farmer is not going to be any better off 
than he was when he started. 
 
And if your idea is to take farm land and consolidate it in the 
hands of fewer people, well I don't think that's right because I 
think we should have to be addressing the debt, the debt the 
farmers are holding. We have to address the income, the input 
problem, the high input costs, and in that way work on the net 
return to the farmer. But I think this solution, from what I see, is 
simply a band-aid remedy and to camouflage the real problem, 
because you're not addressing the real problem. 
 
Something that especially concerns me is the whole area of 
opening up the borders — opening the borders to investment, and 
that ties in very, very handily with your free trade agreement. And 
that's what I'd like to concentrate on now for a few minutes. 
 
Mr. Minister, your Mulroney/Reagan trade deal that you've blindly 
signed, or agreed to in principle, will open the borders to 
investment in Canada. And I've asked you this question before: 
what's to stop, Mr. Minister, American investment or European or 
Japanese investment from coming in and buying up Saskatchewan 
farm land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree with the hon. 
member that the income problem is the key in agriculture — net 
income. There are a couple of things that he, I'm sure he agrees, 
that would be very helpful, and one is to get, for example, the 
price of wheat up to 5 or $6 a bushel and keep it there. And that 
takes a lot of work internationally. It's not easy to do. 
 
And secondly, is to get your cash payments down on the debt that 
we have. I mean, most farmers that are in trouble have big debt, 
and most of their cash is going on these payments. Now if we can 
help address that side of it, then we directly influence net farm 
income, because their cash can increase — their cash flow. so if 
you're paying the bank 12 per cent now on $100,000 and you 
could cut that in half so that your payments . . . your cash flow 
would improve by 50 per cent, it would be a significant difference. 
 
And if somebody's prepared to do that with you because you see it 
as a long-run investment — he says, I'll take 6  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3849 
 

per cent on my money now, lock it in, and I'll run with you over 
the period of five or 10 or 15 years because there may be capital 
gain — they'll invest in it. Now the investment specialists tell us 
that's what they do when they invest in . . . for everything from 
student credit cards . . . student loans to credit cards to whatever 
else is on the market. And mutual funds do. Now some have tax 
bells and whistles on them to encourage them; some don't. 
 
All I'm saying is that if the farmer knows that he can always have 
control of that land and the option to purchase, and have the 
liquidity to purchase, then he might like the chance to lower his 
costs on his interest rates right now — give him a break — and he 
says, I got a partner that's going to ride with me for a while until I 
get $5 wheat and $6 wheat. Now all I'm saying is that in other 
parts of the world they're trying it and looking at it. 
 
And if I could . . . There was a research done by Mr. Jim Halford. 
Mr. Jim Halford did this for the NDP administration, and Mr. 
Gerry Gartner, deputy minister of Agriculture, back in 1981. And 
if I could just point out to the hon. member . . . And I just say this 
to show that all political persuasions can look at this, and look at it 
fairly, whether they're in Australia, or whether it was the NDP 
administration, or others. And Jim goes on to say this, on page 64 
of his report, and you can get it: 
 

Farmers in Saskatchewan have not raised capital through the 
sale of land. From a rational, economic view it would appear 
to be a logical choice, because farming is probably the most 
capital-intensive industry per individual employed, and . . . 
(inaudible) . . . such as low output for dollar invested. 
However, emotional attachment to individual ownership, 
desire for a particular rural structure, and the settlement 
history in western Canada, have all encouraged individual 
owner-operator farm units. 

 
A few alternate systems which would facilitate opportunities 
for more land to be owned on an equity basis (on an equity 
basis) and still operated by farmers, are proposed. 

 
Mr. Halford looked at it. Now that's precisely what they've looked 
at in Australia, which means, rather than just have the bank own it 
and charge you full interest and they hold the titles until you pay 
for it, you get a partner, an equity partner like your mom, like your 
dad, like a neighbour, like an investor, who says: I'll be a partner 
with you, and you can buy it back over time; I will have a fixed 
rate of interest, and I will run the risk that maybe we'll both make 
some money at the end of the day, like you do any other 
investment. Now people have been doing this kind of research for 
some time, so I just point that out. 
 
Now with respect to people who can buy farm land, whether 
you're in Prince Edward Island or whether you're in 
Saskatchewan, you can designate who can own farm land. In the 
province of Saskatchewan right now, only Saskatchewan people 
can own farm land — period. In most of Canada, Canadians can 
own farm land. In P.E.I. they just passed a law that said 
Maritimers or P.E.I. people will own property resort around the 
ocean because there  

isn't much of it there and they want it to be held for Canadians, or 
people who live on the island. We have that right. 
 
So with respect to farm land, with respect to energy, potash — this 
House just passed a Bill with respect to potash — we have the 
sovereign right to control that any way we like. And we can turn 
the tap off or open it up; that has not changed. 
 
But to encourage people to invest, we could say, yes, Canadians 
can invest in Saskoil, for example, and we've passed that here in 
this legislature. so they have now the ability to invest in Saskoil as 
a national company here, and that stock is traded on the Toronto 
Stock Exchange. Now with respect to farm land, that's a 
possibility, that we could allow other Canadians to invest here, as 
we have in other things, as do other provinces. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Minister, you failed to mention the 
Mulroney trade agreement as it relates to American investment in 
Canadian farm land. I think that that's a very, very dangerous way 
to go — having a trade agreement, opening investment, having 
you changing the farm ownership Act to allow investment ties 
hand in hand with this free trade agreement, so I don't think 
Saskatchewan farmers want large American corporations or 
anybody else coming in here and owning their farm land. And 
besides that the investors that are coming in . . . if, like you say, 
the grain price goes up to $5 a bushel, you think they're going to 
let that investment go? I mean, let's be realistic about this. 
 
Again I'd say the farmers are the guy who are still at the bottom of 
the totem-pole. He's working for somebody else, and the reason is, 
he's going to have this partner; he's going to have this partner to 
help him through tough times. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Minister, and it scares me to hear you keep 
referring to the Australian model, because in the Australian model 
they've picked the cream of the crop to go into their corporation. 
They have criteria of rainfall — you have to have over 15 inches 
of rainfall and you have to have a three- or five-year ledger 
showing that you've made money. 
 
Well, I mean, what is that going to do for the 30 or 25 per cent of 
the people who are in trouble? Again I say, the farmer that is being 
put into a severe financial situation, because of no fault of his own, 
is not . . . I can't see him being helped by this situation. 
 
And you keep giving us the rhetoric about your mother and your 
brother and your grandfather investing in the land. Well that 
sounds all well and good but, Mr. Minister, I say to you, that's not 
your motive. Your motive is to entice investment in this farm land 
to try to get you off the hook and at the same time leaving those 
people who are in severe financial shape, leaving them to the 
wolves. 
 
So do you envision the possibility of American investment, 
through the combination of a trade agreement and relaxing 
ownership laws, you envision American investment in 
Saskatchewan farm land, and what can we do to stop that? 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3850 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I'd say to the hon. member 
that I assume that you are sincere in your wish to help farmers, and 
I will assume that. And if that's the case, I think that you have at 
least a moral obligation to review alternatives to help farmers. And 
I don't think that if, for example, as your leader has pointed out — 
the Leader of the Opposition has said, this has some very attractive 
features for farmers. He says he doesn't know yet whether 
investors would go for it, but at least as it's designed conceptually, 
as we've talked about — very attractive for farmers. That's what he 
said. 
 
Now if that's the case, if that's the case, why would you want to 
say, oh, it's all tied to the Prime Minister's free trade agreement? I 
mean, why would you want to say that? I mean, if you're sincere 
in helping the farmers, if you're sincere in helping the farmers, 
then at least look at the possibilities. And I give your leader credit. 
He has looked at the possibilities. 
 
Speaking of that — and the reason I say this is, for the very reason 
that I think that your new leader is doing what he's doing today. 
And I just look at the paper — and I'm being very sincere here. 
 
The member from Riversdale . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
the member from Riversdale says this: 
 

If the NDP is to win the next election in Saskatchewan, it 
must break out of its 'comfortable pew.' 
 
Romanow says the NDP has rested on (all) policy positions 
of a previous era for (far) too long and the time has come for 
it to reclaim its role as a source of . . . 

 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — My point of order is this, Mr. Chairman. 
The other day I read from a newspaper article. You said that it was 
wrong, even though I was quoting from the article, to name one of 
the members of the House. Now the Premier is doing the same 
thing. I expect you to call him to order on it. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The point of order is well taken. I would ask 
the members to refer to members by their position or their 
constituency. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I apologize for that, Mr. Chairman, thank 
you very much. The member from Riversdale says: 
 

. . . the NDP has rested on the policy positions of a previous 
era for too long and the time has come for it to reclaim its 
role as the source of progressive policy innovation. 

 
And they go on and say: 
 

There is always room for more discussion (but Mr. Durst 
says that the member from Riversdale) . . .  

does a good job of opening it up. 
 
But there seems to be a lot of apathy at the lower levels. I 
don't know what it is. Maybe it's because people just feel 
disheartened by their situation . . . 
 
(and while the member from Riversdale) admits it has been 
difficult trying to spark policy debates during his leadership 
tour . . . he expressed some disappointment at the slow 
response and a lack of new ideas (on the tour). 

 
Now all I'm suggesting to the hon. member is, I'm sure that the 
arguments you're making about change are as old as the NDP is. I 
mean, what I'm asking you is that, for Heaven's sake, the people 
that even wrote the Regina Manifesto in 1933 had some 
imagination. They were going to go try to do something better. 
 
But I hear the same arguments from the members opposite: we 
can't do this, we can't do that, we can't do this. Why don't you give 
your imagination a chance? I mean, you've got your own research 
done by the former deputy minister of Agriculture who says equity 
may be a good idea. Equity financing may be a good idea. 
 
But please, for Heaven's sake, give the farmer a chance. He needs 
your help and you're saying, oh well, this is tied to the Prime 
Minister's free trade stuff and the Americans are going to own all 
the farm land. You know that's not true. Americans are not going 
to own farm land. There's better buys in the U.S. on farm land. 
There's better buys in the U.S. on farm land than there is here, for 
Heaven's sake. We've got Canadians going down there buying 
farm land and Japanese buying farm land. I mean, if you'd look at 
the market . . . 
 
In any event, I'm saying, we can control who owns the farm land. 
It is for Saskatchewan people and it is for Canadians. So rest 
assured, rest assured, that that will stay that way. If we can get 
Canadians to invest in agriculture and if it would help and if 
farmers would be comfortable with it as we design it properly — 
and we can design it any way we like — then I believe we have a 
moral and a financial obligation to explore every means to help 
them and not deny them that opportunity for assistance. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, my idea of a new idea is not 
reducing the number of farmers in this province, and that's what 
you're going to do. You've said it in 1971, and you continue to say 
it today because that's the thrust. 
 
I'm not opposed to new ideas, and you know that, but what I'm 
opposed to is you bringing forth some policy that will enlarge the 
farm size in this province and get rid of the number of people who 
are in financial difficulty. And that's what I'm afraid is going to 
happen. And if that's the direction you're going, then we've got to 
stop it. I mean, it's great to talk about something that may do this 
and may do that, but what I'm saying is that it's not addressing the 
real problem. 
 
I'd just like to continue. I take your assurance of no American 
investment in our farm land very lightly, because I think that's the 
direction we're heading, and I think we have to stop that. 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3851 
 

(1045) 
 
And you can say that to me now, and it's on the record, so that 
we'll have to just watch and see what happens in the future, but I 
think many, many farmers are scared out there as to what's going 
to happen to their farm and their town. And this is what we're 
talking about. We're talking about the whole infrastructure of rural 
Saskatchewan. And if a new idea is to revamp that, well then, yes 
I'm opposed to it. And I don't care if you call it a 40-year-old 
argument, because that's what this province is built on, and that's 
what this province has to maintain its viability on. And if you want 
to have us look like Montana, well that's your prerogative when 
you're in government, but when we're in government, we will not 
have us look like the depopulated state of Montana. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, in this Mulroney-Reagan trade deal 
we have talked briefly about the two-price wheat being lost, and 
we have a situation now where farmers are going to have the 
roughly $280 million that they get from a two-price system taken 
off the value of their product and added to them . . . given to them 
from the federal treasury. Now, Mr. Minister, I say: why did you 
put it in the agreement? 
 
Why is it in the agreement? Because as farmers in this province, 
we are trying to get value for our product. And you keep talking 
about, well, when we get back to $5 wheat to get our cash flow up, 
but we had a situation where we could get $280 million into 
western Canada from a two-price system. That means I take the 
grain to the elevator, I get my cost, and then the value for domestic 
consumption came back to me through the pooling system. 
 
And now you're adding to the hand-outs to farmers, and in the 
whole spirit of this secret trade agreement you're saying that the 
Europeans and the Americans and Mulroney is going to talk about 
decreasing farm subsidies. And here we have right in the 
agreement, we're taking the value of the product away and 
bringing it back as a payment from the federal government. 
 
And oh, sure, we have a little full page ad in the paper saying . . . 
talking about free trade. That's: 
 

Canadian consumers will save $280 million annually from the 
elimination of this policy. Canadian consumers (that means 
every Canadian consumer) will save money. 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, I ask you: where does the money come from 
to pay through the federal treasury if it doesn't come from the 
Canadian consumers? And, oh yes, I know you're going to say, 
well, the rich are going to pay, blah, blah. This is misleading — 
misleading, because you're trying to sell this secret deal. And I 
say, that's not how a government should operate. You should be 
very specific when you're saying that. 
 
But the real point is that the value of the product should go to the 
farmer right from the negotiation of a sale, buyer to seller, and 
we've taken that away. So it's a step  

backwards. It's another payment. So I ask you: why did you agree 
to the elimination of the two-price system under this agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I want to point out to the 
hon. member, as he has a prelude to this last question about why 
this would indeed help farmers or not help farmers if they could 
their interest rates lower and still have an opportunity to buy their 
land. 
 
And if I might, I will just quote his leader again from October 31 
here in Hansard. The leader, the member from Elphinstone, says: 
 

Sure, it makes sense to provide farmers with a lower rate of 
interest now and they're going to have to pay for it in the 
future. That's the proposal when the value of the land goes 
up. Everybody understands that and it makes some sense. 

 
Well I think every farmer in Saskatchewan would like to have 
lower interest rates and an opportunity to purchase it later because 
he's got a higher cash flow. Now if you and I and people in 
Saskatchewan can design that mechanism so that you can cut his 
interest rates down, and because he's got an equity partner he can 
purchase it at any time and give him the opportunity to own the 
land, people to retire, young people to get into farming, because 
we've got cash there rather than debt, I mean that's a . . . As the 
member from Elphinstone, the leader of the NDP, says: 
 

Everybody understands that and it makes some sense. 
 
Now that's all we're after. That's what the research that you were 
doing 10 years ago pointed out — equity, get some cash in there, 
as opposed to the debt. That's what they're doing in other 
jurisdictions. It's got nothing to do with the fact that we're in a 
bilateral trade agreement with the United States or multilateral 
negotiations at GATT, the general agreement on tariff and trade, 
or anything else. And you will be held responsible if you're going 
to stand in your place day after day and year after year and deny 
people the right to try this, because you're all over the place with 
respect to trade. 
 
Let me point out, and I will just go through it again. If, in fact, 2 or 
$300 million that is tied to two-price wheat is paid for by the 
federal treasury as opposed to charging consumers, it's a net 
benefit to the Canadian economy. It's a benefit to consumers and 
families, it's a benefit to the economy in terms of jobs, and it is 
progressive. It's fair because it's based on the fact — and you 
acknowledged it — those who have income pay tax; those who are 
poor do not. Why do you charge the poor for too much 
expensive-priced bread? 
 
You see, the point is you can have three benefits. Consumers . . . 
And basically it's important to the poor — that's why we don't 
have tax on clothes in Saskatchewan; that's why we took the tax 
off utilities; that's why we took the tax off gasoline; that's why we 
have interest rate protection for homes — so as the essentials of 
life in any progressive society should be protected for the poor. 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3852 
 

 
I mean, just think about that. The low income should not be taxed. 
The low income should not be taxed. As you have more income, 
you're taxed. So if you want 200 or $300 million to go to farmers, 
why charge the poor? Because it's not in the market; they can't get 
it in the market unless you make it law. So it isn't the market price. 
If the price was 6 or $7, if you let them have the market price . . . 
But it isn't; it's $2.50. 
 
But you're saying to the poor, I will charge $7 a bushel. That's 
what you say to the people on welfare, to senior citizens, to 
students, to people who have problems. You will charge them 7 or 
$8 a bushel and look them in the eye and say, this is good for you'; 
this is fair. That's wrong. And please think about that. That's 
wrong. And you say, if you need money, go to those who have 
income. That's what income tax is for. That's what it's for. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You give them tax credits. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well the hon. member from Saskatoon 
South speaks up and he says, we will give them all tax credits. All 
right, if you want to give them all tax credits. Then you're saying 
that you will set up a mechanism so that, in fact, that you will 
charge them the tax, and then you will give them a credit. 
 
You've been on our case for 100 days because we're doing that 
with respect to other tax credits. And you got to be consistent. 
 
Let me make the point to my hon. friend. One is, if you want to be 
fair to consumers and to the general public, you don't tax the poor. 
Secondly, if you want to have the jobs associated with processing 
and manufacturing, you've got to allow the processors to buy at a 
world price, to be competitive, or they can't sell their noodles and 
their bakery products and their buns and their doughnuts, 
nationally and internationally, because they can't compete. They're 
paying $7 instead of 2. 
 
So if you want the jobs, and if you want the benefits to those of 
low income, then you do it through the tax system. And you say, 
here's the equivalent amount of money, as they do in the U.S. farm 
Bill and says comes right out from the treasury — bang, you got it. 
Now that's as clean and direct as you can make it. So if with that 
we benefit because it's fairer, consumers of low income don't have 
to pay too much for good, and particularly two-priced food. 
 
And three, we can have the jobs associated with processing and 
manufacturing here, then I ask the hon. member, I ask him 
sincerely: what's the down side? Who is hurt by a system that 
takes money from those that have and gives to the farmer the 
equivalent amount they're giving today, and protects those on low 
income, and create jobs all at the same time? 
 
I don't know why the NDP would be against that. I mean, again it 
goes back to your leader's tour. He's asking for progressive ideas 
to have young people working, to give benefits to consumers, to 
do all kinds of things for farmers, and yet when an idea comes 
forward, the NDP is locked right in the same way they've been for 
some time. 

 
Why would a farmer want to walk through the streets of Regina, 
and the people who are on the food bank and the line-up and 
saying, I'm so glad I'm charging you twice as much for wheat than 
I am the Japanese? How does that make him feel? Why would you 
do that? Why would people who are poor have to pay more than 
we sell the wheat to, to Japanese or to the Soviet Union or 
anybody else? Only the NDP would encourage that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member from Saskatoon Nutana doesn't realize 
that the biggest food bank in Canada is in Winnipeg under the 
NDP administration. Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! Order. I would ask 
members, if they want to get into debate, to rise and be 
recognized. They don't have to get into debate from their seats. 
Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I'm sure that the hon. members can ask me 
questions when they want to. Mr. Chairman, we always can tell 
when we're making points because the opposition speaks from its 
seat. If they have the courage to listen to something, maybe they 
should travel with their new leader and find out about some new 
ideas and progressive ideas. As soon as we start to make some 
points, they catcall. I would say in all respect, our side won't 
catcall, yours won't. Okay, let's get on with this. 
 
I just say to the hon. member, just review. It's better for 
consumers, it creates more jobs, and it's fair in the scheme of 
taxation because it comes from those that have income as opposed 
to the poor who . . . where bread is very important to them — 
break is very important, the essentials of life. Why would we ever 
want to charge them more if there was a better way to do it? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, I find this very, very incredible. I 
think the poor of this province know who supports them and who 
doesn't. And if you want me to stand up here and give your record 
from the poor people of this province, it would take me days and 
days and days. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Any time. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Any time, he says. Well I think we've gone 
through this whole session seeing how you have treated the poor 
of the province, from taking away their transportation, to the 
health care, all the health . . . (inaudible) . . . but I'm not . . . I won't 
expand upon that in the interests of time. but we all know that 
that's such garbage, saying that we're going to put a more cost onto 
the poor. 
 
Mr. Minister, you again, you're rising and splitting, trying to drive 
a wedge between the farmers of this province and the consumers 
of this province. Because you know, or you should know, that the 
farmers' share of a loaf of bread is 5 to 7 cents. And the consumer, 
I don't care how poor he is, doesn't care about that. He says, that's 
okay. But will you talk about what the millers are taking, ripping 
the consumers off? No. five to 7 cents on a loaf of bread, and 
you're talking about the farmer's share? 
 
Well, my friend, you're way off base because it's not the farmers' 
costs or the price of bread that's causing the  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3853 
 

problem. And you trying to tell the people of this province that it 
is, well that is just a mile from being right. You know that the 
millers are getting exorbitant profits. You know that that's the real 
problem. And you're standing up here and said, oh, we're going to 
keep the costs down to consumers, and we're going to pay it back 
to the farmers through the federal treasury. Well how ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Minister, this trade agreement that Reagan and Mulroney have 
conjured up does a number of other things, and I'd like to mention 
some of them. The spirit of the agreement has already been broken 
because the Americans are subsidizing more sales to other 
countries. And, Mr. Clark has admitted that, and many others have 
also said the spirit of this agreement has already been broken. 
 
We have seen the export enhancement program being tripled — 
not only being tripled but locked in so that in future we won't be 
talking about the export enhancement program. And I find it very, 
very, very amazing how you can believe, or anyone can believe, 
that the Americans or Europeans are going to be reducing their 
subsidies. You know and I know that the Europeans will not 
reduce their subsidies. Their subsidy programs are about 1 per cent 
of their GNP (gross national product), and so is the Americans'. 
 
And if you stand up and tell me that they're going to be reducing 
their subsidies to their farmers, for one thing, the European 
farmers won't allow it, and for the other thing, the Americans will 
not; even though in rhetoric they're saying that, you should know 
that that's not going to happen. 
 
So this whole spirit of the agreement has already been broken. 
We've seen the tripling of the enhancement program, and we've 
heard the rhetoric about reducing subsidies. Also in this secret 
agreement that we really don't know what we're into yet but you're 
blindly leading this province into it, is the wheat board. We've 
seen the licensing restrictions loosened, adding to the problems 
that the wheat board already have. 
 
(1100) 
 
Now we need this wheat board because in Canada the Canadian 
Wheat Board is the sole thing that's kept us in the market, and you 
know that. And they have done that by making sure the quality of 
the product is there. Our portion of the market compared to the 
Americans' is very small, but the wheat board has had a quality 
factor built right in so that every boatload that goes out of a port 
has one sample of grain out of it, whereas the Americans, when 
they load a boat, every carload has a sample of grain taken out of 
it. And here we go in this agreement, undermining the wheat 
board. 
 
Something else that we've talked bout is the reduction of the 
subsidies for oil seeds and meal to the U.S. through western ports. 
 
Other things are marketing boards — marketing boards in your 
agreement you say will not be touched, but we know different than 
that. They'll be maintained, but any  

expansion of the market, they're restricted to the free flow from the 
United States. So what you're saying is that the marketing boards, 
oh yes, they're going to be maintained — that's fine — but if a 
producer wants to expand, oh no. If there's any increase in the 
market, it's fair game for the Americans to come up and fill that 
gap. 
 
So how can you say that you're not affecting the marketing board 
or the people producing under the marketing boards in supply 
management. That is such garbage. We've already seen the 1 per 
cent increase in the quotas in the feather and the poultry . . . A 1 
per cent increase, Mr. Minister, if you do not know, means an $18 
million loss to the poultry industry. And what's to stop that from 
continually climbing. 
 
We've seen a relaxing of the quotas on yogurt and ice cream — a 
substantial part of the industrial milk. Is that not going to mean a 
loss to the Canadian producers? And you will stand in your place 
and say, oh . . . you stand there and say, oh, it's not going to affect 
supply management. That is totally garbage. Over the long 
process, Mr. Minister, it will affect supply management. It's a 
sell-out of the producers under supply management. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, how can you say that the free trade agreement 
will not affect the wheat board and the supply management 
industries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will make a point to 
the hon. member, and I hope that his colleagues listen to this very 
carefully. I got into it a little bit on Saturday, and I'm quite serious 
about it when I'm talking with people across western Canada, and 
we see the reluctance of the NDP to change. 
 
The truth is under the existing two-price system 4 per cent of the 
wheat all produced in Canada, grown in Ontario, gets 25 per cent 
of the benefit under the two-price system, and the hon. member 
knows that. Now who does he listen to day in and day out about 
trade and about agriculture and about economics and about jobs? 
— Bob White from Ontario. 
 
Who do you think Bob White is protecting with this system? This 
two-price system as it exists today, 25 per cent of that benefit goes 
to 4 per cent of the production, and it's out of central Canada. And 
he's standing here in his place defending that, defending charging 
consumers in Saskatchewan without income to ship back to Bob 
White in Ontario so that they can receive the benefit. You don't 
make any more sense than that glass of water you're drinking. 
Now think about this. Your leader is going around the province 
looking for progressive ideas to help people, and you're standing 
in your place absolutely making no sense at all to anybody. 
 
Secondly, we just met with the feather industry and the milk 
industries yesterday with respect to trade. I'm sure you'd 
understand this. If beef and pork are not allowed to be exported 
into the United States, what will happen to them? They will start 
to be backed up here. And as we can't sell, it will grow here in 
supplies. What will happen to the price of beef and pork? It will go 
down. When the consumer goes into the store to shop, will she 
buy cheap beef, cheap pork, or will she buy supply-managed  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3854 
 

chicken? You know what she'll do. The consumers will not buy 
chicken or anything else if there's a lower priced alternative. 
 
If we don't allow goods and services to go back and forth across 
the border, like grain and like meat and like pork, how in the 
world would you have a supply-managed industry survive in the 
retail store at the Superstore when you've got beef and pork piled 
up here 25 feet high because you won't trade with the United 
States? I mean, think about it! 
 
We make a living trading with people all over the world, and 
particularly with Americans. For heaven's sakes, Ontario trades 
more with the United States than any other country in the world. 
Ontario itself could cut a free trade deal with the United States. It's 
big enough. 
 
Now we have a chance for the first time in history to be on the 
same playing field as Ontario — not paying the freight both ways, 
having a fair chance, being able to have access to other markets 
like Ontario does for automobiles, cutting a deal in potash and oil 
and grains and meat, the same as Ontario has, and you're standing 
in your place denying it, for only partisan reasons — only partisan 
reasons, because you won't look by your nose with respect to what 
would benefit consumers here at a lower price wheat and all the 
benefit we're charging them now going to Ontario — the lion's 
share of it. But you're afraid to look at the truth. 
 
Well let me just say, we have talked with people in processing and 
manufacturing. They agree we should have access to the U.S. 
market. We've talked with people. Yesterday we met with the 
manufacturers, and they endorse reducing the tariffs. 
 
If I could just say with respect to trade, and then I'll let him ask 
another question. Since 1944 we have been working hard in the 
world to reduce tariffs. The first general agreement on tariff and 
trade was 1947, and we reduced tariffs world-wide. Then came the 
Kennedy round in the '60s and early '70s. Then came the Tokyo 
round, and we've been reducing tariffs. 
 
In the '60s, 60 per cent of the goods and services between Canada 
and the United States were duty-free, tariff-free. By 1987, 80 per 
cent of the goods are without tariff. By 1999 we hope that 100 per 
cent are without tariff. And we've grown in terms of jobs and 
opportunities and economic growth, just by gradually around the 
world reducing the tariffs. 
 
The opposite is true in times of war or strife. If you want to hurt 
countries, you put up tariff walls. I mean the whole argument 
today is if you want to hurt a country in Africa you apply 
sanctions on them. Why? To hurt them, to hurt them. When you're 
at war with a country, you blow out their machinery, you blow out 
their communication systems, their railroads and others, because 
you don't want to trade with them. You try to hurt that country. 
 
Why in the world would you want to put sanctions on yourself? 
Why would you . . . and history shows any time we've put up 
tariffs it's hurt us. When you want to have freedom, when you 
want to have peaceful relations —  

peaceful, not antagonistic, peaceful world-wide — you trade with 
each other. It's safer. We're linked environmentally. Even our 
pensions are linked internationally. On every stock exchange in 
the world, trade at 24 hours a day. don't deny the people a chance 
to do better because of a philosophy that says, no, we can't trade 
with them, or no, only do it my way. 
 
I mean, again I go back to your leader, your new leader who's 
running around the province — bless his objectives — to try to get 
some new ideas from his party. Let me say, if we can help 
consumers and help create jobs and help manufacturers and still be 
fairer in the tax system and get out from under a system of 
two-price wheat that provides 25 per cent of the benefits to 4 per 
cent of the farmers in Ontario, why wouldn't you be for it? What 
philosophical reason, or economic reason wouldn't you be for it? 
 
If our standard of living is going up ahead of every other country 
in the world as we get more and more trade, why wouldn't you be 
for it? Who's got into your mind or your head that would restrict 
you from that freedom to explore? Why are you frightened? Don't 
be frightened. I mean, you would listen to Bob White. You would 
listen to Bob White and say, no, no, in Saskatchewan the NDP 
have to do as I tell them because Ontario's picking up the benefit 
of two-priced wheat. Ontario's picking up the benefit of GM 
investing in Oshawa, all that money in Mr. Broadbent's riding — 
or the member of parliament from Oshawa. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, just let me say to the hon. member, there is 
no justification; they're not wanting to make the system fairer and 
allowing more income to people. Mr. Chairman, if I could just ask 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana and others to, when they want 
to question me — Saskatoon south, pardon me — if they want to 
talk with me they can raise questions, but speaking from their seat, 
I don't think it's fair to the hon. member from Humboldt that's 
asking the questions. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. Can we have 
order, please? I'm asking everyone to be quiet. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, instead of supporting the Canadian 
Wheat Board and having change in the direction that we need 
change in, where, by putting that percentage that came out of 
Ontario into the whole pool — which we should be fighting for — 
you stand up here and say that I'm supporting the Bob White and 
the eastern . . . well how ridiculous. Because you should be going 
in the direction of having that money . . . now that dollar's coming 
from domestic consumption being put into the Canadian Wheat 
Board pooling system, and the farmers would benefit from it that 
way. 
 
But no, but what you're doing is you're undermining the Canadian 
Wheat Board by having this agreement. And add on to that, Mr. 
Minister, the fact that the federal treasury is very, very . . . in very 
tough straits, and when it comes time to budget cutting, what 
makes you think that they're not going to say, well that $280 
million, the two-price wheat system, times are tough, we've got to 
cut something — she's gone! So the whole argument that  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3855 
 

you're putting forward is that it's okay for farmers to have the 
Canadian Wheat Board undermined; it's okay for the Americans to 
put pressure on us to destroy our wheat board so that they can 
control our market. And you ask the Americans and they say, the 
Canadian Wheat Board has to go. You say that's fine. 
 
So instead of . . . you're saying, why are you opposed to change. 
Well I'm not, or nobody else is opposed to change as long as that 
change is for the better, but this is not a change for the better. This 
is a change that puts the skids under our orderly marketing system 
through the Canadian Wheat Board. It puts a . . . potentially takes 
$280 million out of the hands of the farmer at some point down 
the road . . . which is . . . why am I scared? That's one reason I'm 
scared because again the farmers are going to be cut. As we've 
seen in all of the other programs: variable rates, all the 
transportation — putting farmers at a disadvantage. That's what 
you're doing — putting them at a disadvantage. 
 
Now, Mr. Minster, you mentioned beef and pork. Well first of all 
this agreement does not end the countervailing duty of $4.39 a 
hundred in the United States, so you didn't accomplish anything 
with that. Secondly, we have a system here whereby we had a 
quota on beef, and you're somehow saying there's going to be this 
great huge export of beef to California and the American market. 
Well, Mr. Minister, we haven't met our quotas in recent history. 
We haven't even come to the top of the quota, so there was no 
restriction — simply the 1 per cent tariff either way. So all of a 
sudden because of free trade we're going to have this great surplus 
of beef going south. Where's it going to come from? And I 
suppose your next comment will be, well, we're going to build our 
industry. Well, I ask you, why hasn't Montana built their industry? 
They've had free trade. They've had open trade with the rest of the 
states, even closer to the California market than we have been, and 
they have not built their industry. 
 
So how can you stand here and tell us and tell the people of this 
province that all of sudden there's going to be this great surge? 
You're saying it's going to be a benefit. Well, Mr. Minister, if there 
was to be a benefit, I think that there's going to be a long time 
seeing it. And if there is a benefit, why not do it sector by sector 
instead of having the whole package with its downfalls and a few 
pluses. This is the type of leadership we're seeing, talking in 
riddles, and trying to convince people that there's to be this great, 
great benefit. 
 
(1115) 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I say to you with the free trade agreement, this 
deal that we don't really know all the facts on, that you've blindly 
accepted, asking no critical questions and not supporting the 
feather industry or the supply management or the Canadian Wheat 
Board, why do you stand in your place and say this is going to be 
great for us? 
 
Mr. Minister, I think that the whole trade agreement has many, 
many, many, many questions to be asked, especially the fact that 
we really don't know what the text of the agreement says. You're 
accepting the agreement not knowing what the text says, telling 
farmers this is the  

greatest thing since sliced bread, and who can they believe that 
when they've seen the record of this government? How can they 
believe that when they can't believe anything else this government 
says? 
 
So I say to Mr. Premier, the whole idea of free trade is going to 
hurt this province. It's going to be a sell-out of this province, and I 
think you're going to be responsible for it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say to the hon. 
member, I suppose that we could agree to disagree; that he thinks 
trade with the United States would hurt the province. I think trade 
with the United States would do the province good. We sell oil 
and pulp and soon-to-be paper and livestock and natural gas and 
potash and uranium — 80 per cent of the market for United States 
potash comes from Saskatchewan, and he's against trade with the 
United States or a free trade agreement. I mean, even the Leader of 
the Opposition, the member from Elphinstone, agrees that a free 
trade arrangement in potash is a good idea. but he won't accept it 
because it's a Conservative Prime Minister that is doing it, and he 
wouldn't dare give him any credit. 
 
Let me say with respect to the wheat board, there was a 
Conservative government that was in power when we set up the 
wheat board, and it's been doing a relatively good job for long 
time. And it's a Conservative government that's in power now, 
with the Canadian Wheat Board setting record sales, increasing 
our market share. Now those things are facts. 
 
With respect to the federal government responsibility in response 
in agriculture, I mean, we've debated that for some time. But a 
deficiency payment and low-interest loans and the capacity to help 
the farmers with drought payments and flood payments and so 
forth is unparalleled in the history of Saskatchewan or Canada, 
and he knows that. 
 
Let me say as well, if the hon. member thinks that he could 
convince the livestock industry that the U.S. market isn't 
important, I will personally invite him to agribition . And we will 
take you through agribition — hundreds and hundreds and 
probably thousands of farmers that are involved in the livestock 
business — and we'll go hand in hand, and you try to convince 
them that the United States market isn't a good idea. And you use 
your logic that well, my gosh, it isn't good for Montana, so it isn't 
good for Saskatchewan or Alberta. And, my friend, you know, 
you've probably tried that. You wouldn't make it to first base. 
They wouldn't even understand it. I mean, they'd laugh you out of 
the barn, the hog barn or the beef barn or any one of them, and you 
know that. 
 
I mean, you can stand in here and think you're immune from any 
sort of common sense, but I'll take those quotes — this is an NDP 
Agriculture critic — and I'm going to give them to everybody in 
agriculture that I know. And I'll say, this is the alternative. This is 
the alternative in the commodity business, in the hog business and 
others, that he thinks everybody is going to be exactly like they are 
in Montana. 
 
You try growing wheat in most of Montana, or barley — you just 
try that. I mean, maybe you haven't been in  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3856 
 

Montana; I don't know. But you come into agribition, and I'll take 
you through the livestock sector one by one by one, and you try to 
convince them that they're on the right side — when you're on 
trade, my friend. 
 
Let me review the major criticisms that you and others, and Bob 
White, have raised with respect to trade. Because . . . and my other 
brother Darrell, right? Bob White and my other brother Darrell. 
 
The first question they raise, Mr. Chairman, and he says it's a 
sell-out to Saskatchewan, is that we would no longer be 
Saskatchewan, or we wouldn't be Canadian. That's what he says. 
Well he would have to convince everybody in Europe that joined 
the European Economic community that they don't have their own 
nationality. 
 
And he knows that's not the case. The French are still French, and 
it's a free trade agreement. The German are German. Greece has 
decided to join recently. Under a socialist leader, they've decided 
to join it. And Greek culture is going to be there for a long time, 
even though they trade with other people — probably take a long 
time to change the culture. I mean that's just . . . That's nonsense. 
 
With respect to investment, they say Americans might invest here, 
Mr. Chairman. Well Bob White can have $4.8 billion invested in 
Oshawa by an American firm called G.M., and it's fine for Bob 
and it's fine for Ontario, but the NDP out here are told, don't let 
them invest in the West — don't let them invest. I mean, Bob 
White can have tens of thousands of new jobs, union jobs, in 
Oshawa because Americans are investing there — 4.8 billion in 
Oshawa alone since 1980 — and Bob White says to the NDP, 
don't let them do it across the rest of the country, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Well look it, all we'll say, why don't you just go to Bob and say, 
Bob, all we want is just the same amount as you've got in Oshawa. 
Mr. Broadbent, all we want is just the same amount of investment 
in Saskatchewan as you get in your riding in Ontario so we can be 
on equal footing and won't have to pay the freight both ways and 
all the two-priced wheat and other things won't have to just go to 
Ontario. Why don't you give the West a chance, Bob White? At 
least you could say that to him. But you just follow along like little 
puppies. When Bob says jump, you all jump. Look at them — 
they're still jumping! 
 
Then, Mr. Chairman, they say, well, if you're doing to do this and 
the puppies all want to do the same thing, we should vote on it — 
we should vote. Well even Bob White doesn't let his own union 
vote. So be inconsistent, and that's how pathetic it can be. They 
say oh, we should vote on this or vote on Meech Lake, but when 
the union members are asked if they can vote, they say no, no, 
union can't vote; that's not fair; he would rip them apart. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they say if you reduce tariffs it would make the 
economy weaker — it would make us weaker. I don't know 
anybody but the NDP who would apply sanctions to themselves. 
 
Well the member from Saskatoon South doesn't like to hear this 
part. But why would anybody in their right mind  

put sanctions on themselves? History would show that if you want 
to weaken any economy, you put tariffs on them. And the NDP 
say, let's put tariffs on Canada; that would really make us strong. 
Nobody's been able to figure that out except Bob White and the 
NDP. Why would you want to put tariffs on yourself? 
 
Well when they say it would make us weaker, we've been stronger 
and stronger and stronger, Mr. Chairman, since we have reduced 
tariffs world-wide, and it's even consistent — and young people 
know this — with peace world-wide, to trade. That's what you do. 
If you want good, friendly relations you reduce the tariffs and 
allow people to do business. 
 
Well the second argument is that we're not big enough in Canada 
. . .(inaudible interjection) . . . fourth argument, we're not big 
enough in Canada to take them on. Well I pointed out, Ontario is 
bigger than any other country in the world with respect to trade 
with the United States. 
 
And they're out here, Bob White can do it. He can have his nice 
auto pact and all this American investment, but he says, the rest of 
the country doesn't count like Ontario does; you'd better not do 
this. Well why do they let him get away with it, Mr. Chairman? 
Isn't it time that Ontario and Quebec played by the same rules as 
the rest of the country with respect to agriculture, with respect to 
tariffs, with respect to commodities, with respect to all kinds of 
things? 
 
Well finally, Mr. Chairman, in response to the member who wants 
to know all about trade and the impacts on Saskatchewan, let me 
say as well, he says the agreement is not perfect. He says, my 
gosh, they'll still have laws on their side of the border and on our 
side that says you can have anti-dumping and countervail laws. 
My friend, just let me say this: if you struck a perfect deal with a 
trading partner, one things' for sure — you can't cheat on it; you've 
got to have rules. 
 
We've got the same dumping, anti-dumping rules as they do. And 
if we had the same countervail rules, and over time they were 
identical, you still couldn't cheat. So if you subsidize here and 
export into the other man's market, he's going to say that's unfair. 
 
So there's no point in telling me that we haven't had a change here. 
We have now bound the United States for the first time in its total 
political and economic history to having a third party, agreed by 
them and by us, examine the rules, not just them. 
 
And he smiles and he says, that's no progress. There isn't an 
ambassador in the world or a country in the world that wouldn't 
take that agreement. They said, absolutely, that's what we should 
be doing, and then a process to harmonize the laws over time. 
 
Well, I mean, he relates everything in agriculture to trade. I go 
back and say, I've heard it all before with respect to Bob White 
telling the NDP exactly what to say with respect to trade. I mean, 
if we go back in terms of the research . . . let me point out. In the 
Progressive Conservative Party across Canada, Mr. Chairman, 66 
per cent of the people support free trade with United States; 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3857 
 

 21 per cent don't. In the Liberal Party, 48 per cent support it; 36 
don't. Among unions, Mr. Chairman, across Canada, 46 per cent 
of the membership support free trade with the United States; 38 
don't. 
 
There's only one political group in the country that says no. The 
NDP, 41 per cent say yes, and 45 per cent say no, within their own 
party. Now if all the political persuasions . . . the union members 
themselves support it because they're in potash, and steel, and 
uranium, and coal, and hydro projects, and all the rest. Why do 
you deny them that right? Why are you so hidebound by the 
political philosophy of Bob White and the old radical left, not to 
allow yourself the opportunity to grow? That my friend, you and I 
will look at 20 years from now, and 30 years from now, and say, 
you were on one side of history and I was on the other. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — That was definitely a long speech, but there 
wasn't much substance in it. I don't think it would do very much, 
Mr. Minister, to reassure the people of Saskatchewan. I think the 
poll that you should be talking about or worried about is the one 
that came out last Friday, because that's what the people are saying 
to you about your policies, including free trade. Well let's look at 
that one, and you should be worried about it. And if you're not, 
you shouldn't be here. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a number of things to go through today, and 
at the risk of hearing another long-winded rhetorical harangue, I 
would like to move on to the beef stabilization plan. Beef 
stabilization, as you know, has been changed over to a tripartite 
system, or is changing. Could you give me the status of that . . . of 
the beef stabilization board as it relates to Saskatchewan and to the 
tripartite system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the ministers of 
Agriculture met in Quebec City several months ago and they 
agreed on two things. The first was what we called a national red 
meat accord, which said the provinces over time would agree with 
the national beef tripartite system that was consistent with our 
obligations under GATT, the general agreement on tariff and 
trade, and consistent with the principles outlined by the OECD 
(Organization for Economic co-operation and Development). 
 
In other words what we said, in this country we're going to start 
removing the barriers to interprovincial trade, get our agriculture 
subsidies in the meat business, the red meat business, down to 
something that is consistent with our obligations internationally 
when we're trading with the United States and other countries. 
That's the first thing. 
 
The second thing we agreed in is bring all the provinces into a 
national beef tripartite mechanism and see if we can harmonize the 
way that we now have several different provinces operating. We 
have provincial plans, we have nation plan . . . We've got three or 
four provinces in the national plan; we want to get all the rest of 
them in. 
 
It's going to take some effort to make sure that they can all come 
in and feel comfortable and all have access to federal funding, but 
the intent is twofold: one, to live by  

the long-run agreement, the accord we sign to be fair to our 
international trading partners; and secondly, to get everybody in 
the plan and start gradually over a period of time to get our 
subsidies and our programs consistent with a national program that 
would allow us to hold our head up, if you will, internationally 
with respect to our trading partners. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, there are a number of differences 
between the two plans, one of them being that the beef board . . . 
In the Saskatchewan plan, the beef board is made up of producers, 
and they set the policy, but in the tripartite plan, the federal 
government has proposed a board of directors made up of 
ministers of Agriculture. 
 
Do you agree with that aspect? And also do you agree with the 
board responsibility in administering the plan came from that 
producer board, and now we're going to see it come from six 
bureaucrats and three producers? Do you also agree with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that is under 
discussion with all the provinces because we've got . . . To be 
consistent with a national plan, you have to have something that is 
acceptable from coast to coast. 
 
And so there's some compromise being reviewed in terms of how 
many farmers you have on it and how many people who are 
involved as specialists in the livestock and how many in terms of 
trade, because obviously we have to be cognizant and aware of the 
trading relationship with others. So it's a combination, and we're 
looking at alternative proposals coming from provinces and the 
federal government. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — You didn't tell me whether you thought that was 
a good idea or not, Mr. Minister. Can you just give us a brief 
answer, whether you think that the differences are acceptable. 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I said to the hon. 
member, it's going to have to be acceptable across the country. So 
there's going to maybe have to be a little bit of water in 
everybody's wine to get it done if you want a national program. 
You can stand here in Saskatchewan, as you often do, and say, we 
will not change for whatever reason, and you've said that a 
hundred times this morning. But I'm saying in the spirit of 
nationalism and co-operation in dealing with an international 
trading commodity, we may have to have some provinces back off 
their bottom loading, we may have to have some provinces back 
off their top loading, and all the other forms of subsidies we have. 
 
And if that means we have to have some trade specialists involved 
in this, as well as producers, to have some international 
consistency, that may be considered, and I would think that's a 
reasonable idea to find the appropriate mechanism for the country 
to have a national program. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, the formulas will be changing also 
under the tripartite system. We now have  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3858 
 

cost-of-production farming which I think everyone is quite happy 
with and maintains it should be kept. The tripartite program has an 
averaging . . . an index average over a period of years. Now, Mr. 
Minister, I find that is not acceptable because we have to maintain 
the cost of production. 
 
Also we have a situation where we will lose central-desk selling. 
Under the tripartite plan it's weighted by national markets, and in 
Saskatchewan we have the central-desk selling feature. I find that 
totally unacceptable and that's the direction that you're headed. 
And you're taking the beef producers of this province and you're 
saying, well they maybe have to make some compromises. Well I 
don't think compromise is necessary, especially now, seeing the 
fact that, you know, the beef stabilization board is about $56 
million in the hole, or roughly thereabouts. But the industry is 
starting to come back up, and that will be being paid back. So just 
at a time when things are starting to turn around, you're going to 
sell it out and what are you going to do with the $56 million? 
Taxpayers going to eat it? Whereas now the industry is coming 
back on its feet, the industry itself could pay back that. 
 
Also, Mr. Minister, the support levels will be very much lower. 
Granted that the levy will be lower, but the support levels under 
the tripartite system will be very much lower. And I'd just like to 
read briefly from a letter from a beef producer saying, and I quote: 
 

I did a comparison for the two plans, and had the tripartite plan 
been in effect for the past five years, we would have lost about 
$30 a head on about 3,000 head of finished cattle in our own 
operation. 

 
So the fear that I have is that, as this person does, because the plan 
is a lesser plan, he would have lost $90,000 over that period. And 
you're going to stand up and say, well we're going to negotiate. 
We're going to make sure that all the provinces of Canada are 
happy about it. But what about the beef producer in Saskatchewan 
who already has a plan, a plan that's more beneficial to him than 
the tripartite will be as I see it. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, that you better, in your negotiations be 
very, very careful. And I would ask you if you can assure us that 
central-desk selling will be a feature of the plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, just a couple of points 
for the hon. member. He talks about, and we both agree, that you 
want the plan as protective as possible, but one that pays for itself. 
Now let me raise a caution for the hon. member. The reason that 
there has been so much difficulty in getting people to join a 
national program, and why you have, for example, on Alberta 
producers so hesitant to change, and the Saskatchewan stock 
growers and others who are involved in the feeding business, so 
hesitant to change, is that they have seen what the province of 
Quebec has done in hogs. 
 
And do you know what they've done? I'm sure you're aware of 
what they did. They subsidized hog production so much in 
Quebec, they've taken a great part of the  

industry for years out of the West because the provincial treasury 
has subsidized the hog business — to a very large extent. Now 
they did that with the dairy business and they've done it with the 
chicken business and they've done it with the egg business, and 
you know that's true. 
 
They want us to provide them with cheap grain in central Canada. 
They want feed freight assistance. They want us to pay the freight 
both ways, and then their treasury can subsidize the industry, like 
in the meat production, and history shows that's the truth. They 
have stolen a fair amount of the pork production. 
 
Now you say, well we'll have a nice fat plan here, it's only cost us 
$60 million in terms of deficit in total in the stabilization, and we'll 
hold that up as an example. Well we have to be careful, my friend, 
or Quebec is going to say, well 60 million, hey, we can probably 
find 400 or 500 million, and if you want to play by those rules, 
boy, we'll just slip some money in there and we'll continue to steal 
the industry. Now then it will be Quebec farmers who support the 
NDP versus Saskatchewan farmers who support the NDP, carving 
up the pork market like they did the chicken and egg market and 
the milk market across the country. 
 
Now there's a big difference in philosophy. Should you be able to 
earn the right to capture that market and grow and hogs and beef 
here? Or should you leave it with somebody who has more 
population and more votes than we do — Quebec and Ontario? 
 
From my own experience in the '60s, I went through what were 
known as the chicken and egg wars, and they sat around the table 
and Ontario and Quebec got more votes than we did. And they got 
more of that market. And you can count the number of producers 
in the feather industry and the dairy industry almost on two hands 
here in the West, compared to Ontario and Quebec. 
 
Now if you want to play that game and you want to say, we can 
keep up to subsidizing by Quebec and Ontario, I'll tell you, there's 
a lot of people in the red meat industry are going to say, Slim, 
we've been there and there are more and more and more voters 
there. And if you leave it up to marketing mechanisms politically, 
so that the NDP down there and the NDP out here will carve out 
and tell you what you can grow, then we're right back to Bob 
White saying, and this is what you will do. You're into the old 
philosophy that says, we can out-subsidize somebody else. 
 
Well I caution the hon. member. We are going into these 
negotiations carefully, but we are going to bind other provinces so 
they can't take away our comparative advantage. We can grow 
grain, and we have the largest feed grain base in Canada right here 
— 50, 60 million acres that we have here that we can apply to 
agriculture. We don't want that wasted on some darn fool socialist 
subsidy that might take place in another part of the country. 
 
Now if you understand what I'm saying, if you get into that game 
where you're going to have national, national boards or national 
people vote and tell you how many hogs you can grow, Ontario 
and Quebec will win every  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3859 
 

single time, and history knows that. Don't let them do it to you, 
because the union leaders in Ontario are more powerful than the 
union leaders out here. And the NDP leaders in Ontario are more 
powerful than they are out here, and they all listen to them. When 
it comes to agriculture, when it comes to processing and 
manufacturing, and so forth, that's always the case, because where 
are the votes? Where are the votes? The votes are in Ontario and 
Quebec, and they're certainly not going to be in Regina North 
when it comes to that kind of decision. 
 
So I caution the hon. member. He believes he knows a little bit 
about politics; let me tell him something about food politics. If you 
leave it in the hands of political leaders, and Ontario and Quebec 
decide which parts of the country can grow hogs and beef, history 
will support the argument, they'll all vote on it and say, it matters 
right here in Ontario and Quebec; that's where the hog quotas will 
be, and that's where the beef quotas will be. 
 
We want the freedom to sell to Americans, to the Japanese, and 
other people, and not have to compete against treasuries in other 
provinces. So we're going into this very carefully. We will have a 
good program when we get out from under it, but we are going to 
bind other provinces so that they can't do any darn fool thing they 
like to steal our competitive advantage. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, that may be your thoughts on 
the matter, but I'm telling you one thing, the producers that I've 
talked to in this province who have contacted me are scared that 
they're going to lose the advantage they already have. 
 
And you can talk about Quebec and Ontario all you like; changing 
this program to a lesser program will not help the Saskatchewan 
producer, and that's what I'm concerned about — the beef 
producer in Saskatchewan. And they are saying to me that 
changing this program to a tripartite program will not help, will 
not help their industry. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would like to turn now briefly for a second 
to the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute. Mr. Minister, last I 
heard from the acting minister was that there was negotiations or 
consultations going on to decide what the future of the Prairie 
Agriculture Machinery Institute was. Can you just tell me, are you 
going to continue funding at present levels, or continue funding at 
last year's levels, the Prairie Agriculture Machinery Institute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, two points. One is that just 
for the hon. member's information, so he can record it, Quebec's 
stabilization plans are presently 500 million in deficit. And I just 
point that out so he knows who's bidding for whose share of the 
market. 
 
Secondly, with respect to PAMI, the Prairie Agricultural 
Machinery Institute, the Alberta government has said it would no 
longer put funds in it. Manitoba and Saskatchewan are reviewing 
it to find out which parts are effective, and where it could be most 
useful to farmers. So we're talking with the university, we're 
talking with research people, and talking with my colleagues and  

counterparts in Manitoba, and we will make a decision with 
respect to longer-run funding after we are satisfied — both 
governments are satisfied and farmers, and research people — that 
we're putting the money in the right place for the right kind of 
research, so that we get a good benefit for the dollar that we're 
putting in. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, the situation that we have 
with PAMI right now is that . . . is great uncertainty. The workers 
don't know if they're going to have a job. The machinery 
companies are coming to them and saying, are you going to be 
funded? What's the situation? Can we sign a contract? And they 
say, I don't know. We don't know because the government won't 
tell us what they're doing. So you're creating a situation where the 
whole atmosphere around there is one of uncertainty. 
 
Therefore the possible result is that they could lose potential 
contracts. So you're taking the power that they have to make 
contracts and to evaluate machines, and especially going into 
development, developing machinery; they don't know where they 
are. So could you please tell me, or tell them, if in fact the Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute will have any funding from your 
government for the next three years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, they have funding 
now till March 31, 1988, and we are reviewing it with the 
Manitoba government and with research organizations and 
institutions at the university to explore the future. That's what 
we're doing. so when that review is done with both governments 
and the university, then we will announce if we are going to fund 
it further. And when that review is completed, then we'll make the 
announcement. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well I'm sure that will be very reassuring to the 
people in the institute, Mr. Minister, knowing no more now than 
they did many months ago. And that's the way this government 
runs. 
 
We've talked about it before in these estimates. You're saying we 
have to make sure things are running right. I say we have to let 
people know what you're thinking. They have to be able to plan 
from one year to the next, whether it be the farmer, whether it be 
the small-business person, or whether it be PAMI. You just said, 
well we could close it down. Would I like that? No, I wouldn't like 
it, and I fear that you may close it down. 
 
You may close it down, and that's not what this province needs. 
You're talking about expanding and diversifying. The only OECD 
tractor test station in North America, and you're going to possibly 
shut it down. Is that expanding? Small manufacturers in 
Saskatchewan who can go to PAMI with an idea and have them 
help develop it and with less cost and less time have a product on 
the market, and you're considering shutting it down. What kind of 
leadership is that? 
 
Well that is something, Mr. Chairman, evaluation was the prime 
aspect of PAMI initially, and now, if the members opposite only 
knew, they're moving from less evaluation to more developmental 
projects. And they say they don't do that, that's not true. Well that's 
how much they know about, and that's why they're cutting out 
programs like  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3860 
 

this, and that's why the farmers in Saskatchewan are going to lose 
and the small manufacturers are going to lose because this 
government doesn't know what's going on in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I'll tell you, Mr. Chairman, we've gone through a 
number of things in these estimates, and there's a number more 
that we could go through, but I'd like just to wrap my section of 
this up by saying we have a government here who has taken the 
hatchet to Saskatchewan — and agriculture is no exception. 
cutting the agriculture budget by 26 per cent, Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Chairman, is no small thing, and the people and the farmers of this 
province know that it's no small thing. 
 
We have a Premier and a Minister of Agriculture who stands in his 
place and says, yes, I'm going to do this, and yes, I'm going to do 
that. And everything that he does, that he has said in the years 
before, he has completely reversed — and agriculture is no 
exception. 
 
He is propagating this myth that he's going to stand up the rural 
people, for farmers in this province. And that's just what it is, it's a 
well-propagated myth, but the people don't buy it. He walks hand 
in hand with Brian Mulroney and the federal government walking 
down the path of destroying farmers, not supporting those in need, 
using them as political pawns in their little games of deficiency 
payments. The only time it comes that farmers will be advantaged 
by this government is when it's politically opportune for them to 
do so. And I think that's disgusting. 
 
We have seen him talking about an agricultural equity program, 
and we don't know who it's going to help. We see him talking 
about a trade agreement, a trade agreement that's going to sell out 
this province. We see him talking about things like the calf 
program. We have many programs, helping very few farmers, but 
oh no, we're helping you. Agricultural extension — probably wipe 
it out and put it into the private sector. Not forward-thinking about 
biodynamics or any other types of agriculture. 
 
This is the type of government that we have, Mr. Chairman. We 
have seen him in the last six years take the farmers of this province 
and lead them down a path of rhetoric, a path of rhetoric and 
broken promises. And I'll tell you, Mr. Chairman, that there is no 
one in this province, there is no one in this province who is going 
to believe him because he has the record of mistrust, and mistrust 
will drag every government down every time. And that's the point 
we're at right now, and that minister knows that, and so does 
everyone else on that side. 
 
I've been out in the country and I know, talking to farmers, what 
they're saying about you. In fact, the little poll here started to say 
. . . You may think, Mr. Minister, that your rhetoric and your 
talking about Bob White and your talking about 1980 or '82 is 
going to win you another election, but you're wrong, because the 
farmers of this province have seen your record, they've seen your 
broken promises, they've seen you affect them, not only  

in agriculture but in all the other things — in health, the dental 
plan. 
 
Everything else is affecting them because they have to take money 
out of their pockets. R.M. revenue sharing — all the money 
coming to the R.M.s has to come out of the farmers' pockets, all 
the moneys that you've cut. We've seen the school boards, you've 
cut them back — the money's coming out of farmers' pockets. 
 
So it's not only directly your lack of response to them in 
agriculture; it is your lack of response in general to Saskatchewan 
and the rural communities. So you can add to that 26 per cent 
budget, Mr. Minister, all the other cuts that you've placed that have 
to come out of farmers' pockets. And I say to you that that, Mr. 
Minister, is going to be the demise of this government and the 
demise of you as the leader of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We've been through this many times with 
the leader . . . or the . . . well I suppose the Leader of the 
Opposition and of course the member from Humboldt. To be fair, 
if the member would recognize that in 1987 if we look at the total 
payments . . . Would the member . . . I just want to give him these 
figures so that he can write them down when he's travelling 
around Saskatchewan. The western grain stabilization payment 
will be worth approximately $12,000 this year. The crop insurance 
benefits will be approximately $2,200 per farmer. The deficiency 
payment will be approximately $7,000, and the federal fuel tax 
refunds on top of that means about $20,000 per farmer in benefit 
in 1987 — per farmer, one year — $20,000. 
 
And he's standing in his place and saying, well nobody is helping 
out the farmer. Let me point out that in 1986 our total interest 
rebate to farmers is $72 million. That's bigger than your total 
agriculture budget when the NDP were in administration. Just 
interest protection and rebate for farmers is bigger than your whole 
entire budget. And you're standing there sanctimonious and quite 
self-righteous about all you've done for farmers. Well look, all I 
can say, Mr. Chairman, is that you can take their record in 
agriculture and in interest rate protection and in deficiency 
payments and drought payments, and you can compare them to 
any of our terms, Mr. Chairman. And that's why farmers 
appreciate what the federal government has done and the 
provincial government has done. 
 
And then he goes on and he says, well, rural programs. Who 
brought in the rural gas distribution system? Who provides natural 
gas to farmers across the province? We did. You denied them that 
right. You said it wouldn't work. Who's going to bury the 
telephone lines? Who's going to provide direct telephones, 
individual line service to rural people? 
 
Mr. Chairman, that's 1.2 to $1.5 billion in rural infrastructure that 
this administration is providing, recommended by the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities). Six per cent 
money out to farmers at $1 billion recommended by the SARM 
and the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the livestock directors. Big 
deficiency payments recommended by everybody that are out 
there. About up $20,000 cash benefits per  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3861 
 

farmer in 1987, and the NDP stands there and says, well gee, you 
didn't do as good as we did back there when there was real 
problems and real people in government. 
 
Well, sir, the record will speak for itself in agriculture and in 
interest rate protection. I mean, I can go back and look at it. And 
you talk to rural people or urban people about a freeze on nursing 
homes or no removal of extra billing because you didn't have the 
courage. We did. big payment to senior citizens — 500 bucks and 
700 bucks a couple. You wouldn't do that. We did. New CAT 
scans, new hospitals, new rehabilitation centres — you didn't; we 
did. 
 
Well when the people learn the truth, as always, and eventually 
they will, Mr. Chairman, then in fact they'll say, you know, the 
NDP as usual has been just talking, but they never really did 
deliver. They didn't in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and believe me, 
when they look at trade and agriculture and health and education, 
they'll come to the same conclusion. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, 
you're responsible for the Saskatchewan Council for International 
Co-operation. As you know this is an organization of voluntary 
agencies from across the province. Organizations such as 
Canadian Catholic Organization for Development and Peace, 
Foster Parents Plan, Mennonite Central Committee, Canadian 
Hunger Foundation, Presbyterian World Service, and 31 other 
agencies. On behalf of these agencies, I'd like to ask you if you 
envision being able to hold the line, or increase funding for the 
matching grants program for SCIC (Saskatchewan Council for 
International Co-operation). 
 
I ask this in light of the fact that your government has cut 
consistently, funding for SCIC. It now is at its second lowest level 
in history since the program was initiated. In fact, it was only in 
the introductory year, back in 1974-75, that funding for SCIC was 
lower, and that was in the introductory year. We have seen a 
match now on this dollar-for-dollar program with your 
government of only 15 cents to the dollar. What kind of 
assurances can you give the Saskatchewan public who contribute 
through the voluntary sector to these programs that you will not 
carry out your restraint program at the expense of the very poorest 
of the poor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the Opposition 
and I got . . . had a good exchange in this the last time we went 
through my estimates. And I would point out that . . . two or three 
observations. There have never been so much money allocated to 
relief as under our administration, ever. When you look at the 
contribution we made to Ethiopian aid in Ethiopia it was $4.3 
million. And that was matched because we encouraged the federal 
government to do the same, so you're looking at $8.6 million in 
aid. 
 
Now that is larger than any other single package that has ever been 
generated, and it was contributed to by farmers who could deliver 
grain, and for cases where they didn't because we had drought, we 
picked it up. And as a result of the drought, we picked up a good 
portion of it. Let me also add that Agdevco (agricultural 
development corporation) is now involved in projects all over the  

world. I mean, we've got dairy and forage projects in China worth 
$2.7 million for people who need the help; a drainage project in 
Pakistan, $18 million; integrated soil and water improvement 
projects in Cairo, 1.2 million. We've got the dry land farming 
project in the Sudan to help people, 9.25 million. We've got 
another rural integrated development project in Lesotho, 3.75 
million, and we've got one in Zambia, in terms of wheat 
development, 12.0 million; we've got $46.95 million in projects on 
education, food development, and those kinds of things. 
 
Now the last time we discussed this we said . . . we had some 
question whether . . . respect to all of the money going into these 
particular programs with the churches was all directed in strictly 
economic and food development, as opposed to some of it going 
politically. And the church isn't without its politics, and you know 
that as well as I do, and you have something to do with the church. 
 
All I'm saying is that I would never give a dime of money to the 
Ethiopian government — I won't. I mean they've spent $100 
million a year celebrating their 10th anniversary of that Marxist 
revolution, and people were dying all over the place. We sent 
food, and we will send aid, and we'll send agriculture, but I will 
not finance that rather radical organization over there. 
 
And any organization that thinks it might, will not get money out 
of this government, okay. Now we are matching, and we believe 
that's fair ball, and I'll give money for food and agriculture, and 
I've funded it up to $46 million, projects world-wide, but not 
politically — not politically. 
 
I mean, we all watch on television, churches involved world-wide 
in politics, okay? Well I'm a politician, and you're a politician. The 
good we can do for people should be directed at economic 
development and education and the growth of food and so forth. 
But if you stand in your place and you say you're prepared to give 
funds, organizational funds or anything else to the Government of 
Ethiopia, then I want you to stand there today and say your party 
favours that, because it is a cruel, cruel government, cruel 
government, that we've got to be careful and make sure that you 
don't allocate funds to dictatorships, no matter where they are, 
right? 
 
You give it to the people and you help them through aid, 
education, agriculture production, and so forth. And I've said, and 
I make no qualms about it we will be careful and we will fund, 
we've got $46 million in agriculture development funds 
world-wide, and we're very proud of it. So I would just . . . but I 
will not buy the argument that there is not some politics involved 
in church organizations. 
 
I mean, and the world talks about it, the Pope himself talks about 
it, and he takes some of his people and chastises them for it. I 
mean you and I both know that. So we will fund it, and we will 
continue to fund, in large measure, aid to countries all over, and 
particularly where there's difficult problems. But when we look at 
the second consecutive drought in Ethiopia and people starving by 
the thousands and tens of thousands, and a Marxist  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3862 
 

government taking money to celebrate its revolution in the face of 
that and moving people all over and no care for them, I mean, it's 
the history of that kind of government. Then you tell me why I 
should finance them? Because I won't. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Sir. Mr. Minister, you've indicated that you 
provided 4.3 million in grain relief to Ethiopia last year. That, in 
fact, is less than the total of your cut-backs to the Saskatchewan 
council's work in terms of the matching grants since you've 
assumed government. I don't want to dwell on that unduly, but I 
would like to ask you: what are your plans with respect to 
continuing aid to Eritrea? One of the agencies involved in the 
work of the SCIC is the Eritrean Relief Association. Do you plan a 
follow-up to your grain endeavour of last year for this year? You 
certainly must know that experts are beginning to tell us about the 
prospects of famine developing very rapidly in Ethiopia. What do 
you have in mind in that regard? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have here, for the 
hon. member, three . . . two and a half or two pages and a bit on all 
the projects that are out $1 million has gone towards. 
 
Your specific one — and there must be maybe 40 on each page, so 
you're looking at 80-90 projects, so I can't tell you specifically . . . 
your comment with respect to the one you mentioned. I'll look it 
up, or I'll get my officials to look it up. 
 
With respect to Ethiopia, we're very aware of it, very aware of it, 
and we're prepared to help. All I point out is that we are very, very 
ware of what kind of government is there and what they're going 
to help people — nothing! I mean, I've very reluctant to again fund 
any political organization when people are starving across 
Ethiopia. I mean, we have funded them and we put food aid like 
no other administration, but we didn't give it to the government, 
we gave it to the people. And I think that's extremely important 
that folks here in Saskatchewan recognize the difference. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Do you have plans, sir, for Eritrean relief in the 
next . . . over the course of this winter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, on the money we 
contribute to SCIC, we let the church organizations recommend 
the projects, and we normally agree, yes, this, this, this, this, and 
this is where the money can go. so with respect to their 
recommendations being . . . we will look at them very seriously, 
and in the majority of the cases, in 99 per cent of the cases, we 
say, yes, that's fair ball. 
 
If we need additional funds, personally from the government and 
the people of Saskatchewan beyond what the SCIC is doing with 
their $800,000, we will obviously be reviewing that. We've done it 
in the past, and we're prepared to look at it in the future. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I was listening to your remarks 
very carefully on this issue, and you implied  

clearly to this House that those organizations involved in SCIC are 
somehow in support of the Government of Ethiopia. That's what 
you implied. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: do you believe that World Vision, 
that the Wycliffe bible translators, that the Mennonite Central 
Committee, that the Leprosy Mission of Canada, that Oxfam, that 
the Primates' World Relief and Development Fund, that these 
organizations and the many others who are represented in SCIC 
take matching funds provided by this government for the support 
of the Government of Ethiopia? Is that what you believe, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I will see if I can get the 
records, but I stood in my place here and I listed the left-wing 
radical organizations that were funded on SCIC projects, and I 
went down through them — organized labour, organized unions, 
organized this, organized that — funded by the SCIC. And I went 
through the countries. 
 
I don't have it here with me. So make no mistake about it. If you're 
unaware of it, I'll make sure you get it so you can stand in your 
place as a man of the cloth and say, yes, sir, we funded these 
organizations and we did this politically. It had nothing to do with 
food — nothing to do with food. And you talk about it from your 
pulpit. Here are the organizations we funded world-wide, and I'll 
be glad to provide them. Now I will make sure that we dig them 
up, and I'll go through the list with you. That's when I said, 
enough's enough. We will not provide funds to help people, 
supposed to go for good that are going to go to left-wing 
organizations, organized world-wide, because dictatorships, any 
way you shape it, should not be supported by church groups no 
matter where they come from. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, how soon can I expect to have this 
list from you? When will you provide it? How soon can I expect 
to get it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, those that I quoted the last 
time I was here are in Hansard. He can look them up as well as I 
can. I will go back and dig up my notes. But when I debated here 
with the Leader of the Opposition the last time I was in estimates 
. . . the last time I was in estimates . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . 
You may not like to hear this, so just listen to it. You can go back 
and review Hansard, and I will review Hansard, and we'll get the 
records, and the records showed that they were funding radical 
organizations and left-wing organizations and union organization 
and grass roots political organizations, internationally. And I 
called him on it. And I said, no, no, this is for food and education, 
not for politics. It was time that somebody called him. 
 
And don't tell me . . . You're standing there as an NDP member of 
this legislature, and you're with a church, that there isn't some 
politics in the church. Don't you believe that. Well you must 
believe it, when you can take Father Sean O'Sullivan, who is a 
Conservative and who's a Catholic, and you can take Father Bob 
Ogle who was an NDP member and he's a Catholic — and they're 
both Catholics, so don't tell me that there isn't some politics 
involved. Okay. 
 
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3863 
 

So all I am saying to you is that when it comes to us funding 
international organizations, it's not going for politics, it's going for 
good aid and drought relief and people in Ethiopia that need it, not 
just some Marxist revolutionary government. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 20 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I was out for a few minutes. 
I had previously requested of the Premier certain information 
about property management corporation and space that is acquired 
from them, and he had responded back in August to me, and also 
about consultants by the department. And I wonder if he has that 
information to provide to me? 
 
I don't need to have the information at this moment. If the Premier 
will provide it later in written form, that's perfectly all right with 
me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well we can provide that information and I 
will provide it to the hon. member, but we don't have it here. 
 
Item 20 agreed to. 
 
Items 21 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 2 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 2 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Agriculture Development Fund — Vote 61 
 
Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 61 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Agriculture 

Vote 146 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 146 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Agriculture 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 1 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 2 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Agriculture 
Agriculture Development Fund — Vote 61 

 
Mr. Chairman:— Any questions? 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Agriculture 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 1 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 50 
 
Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 50 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Loans, Advances, and 
Investments 
Agriculture 

Vote 62 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 62 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Agriculture 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 50 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances, and Investments 
Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan — Nil Vote 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 
 
(1215) 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Vote 165 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I'd like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, thank you very  
  



 
November 3, 1987 

3864 
 

much. I would like to thank all members of the legislature for their 
co-operation. And particularly, I'd like to thank my officials for 
providing a great deal of service to the public of Saskatchewan in 
Agriculture, which has been a tremendously large portfolio, and 
for all their efforts in being as co-operative and helpful as possible 
in providing the information to the general public. And I publicly 
thank them all for their hard work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, I too would like to thank the 
minister and his officials for the lively exchanges we've had during 
these estimates and, I think, appreciate their participation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 


