













































July 27, 1987 Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 July 27, 1987 

 

 

1393 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

under rule 11 to present a petition today, signed by some 642 

Saskatchewan residents from 55 different communities, many 

of them in the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg constituency. 

 

These petitions are opposed to the elimination of the 

Saskatchewan school-based dental plan, and they seek the 

re-implementation of that plan, together with the 

re-employment of the dismissed workers. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure for 

me today to introduce, through you and to this Assembly, the 

member for Vegreville and his family with us today in your 

gallery - Mr. Derek Fox is the New Democratic member for 

Vegreville in the Alberta House. 

 

Accompanying him is his wife, Viola Braun Fox, and his 

daughters, Taneen and Anya. I would like this Assembly to 

welcome them today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome this opportunity 

to introduce a guest to you this afternoon, and to other members 

of the Assembly, who is visiting us from Osaka, Japan. She is a 

young woman who’s attending university in her third year, and 

her specialty is western history. 

 

She is in Saskatchewan, and this is a first trip outside of Japan 

for her. She’s had some other firsts - first horseback ride, first 

attempt at surf sailing in Saskatchewan - and I’m sure in her 

trip, in the rest of the time she will spend in Saskatchewan and 

Ontario, she’ll have a number of other firsts. 

 

The city of Osaka is a city of over three million people, so you 

can understand the impressions she is getting from the province 

of Saskatchewan as she visits here. 

 

After leaving here, she intends to go to York University in 

Toronto for one month of intensive English studies. And her 

name is Mikako Kurokawa. And I’m sure all members will join 

me in welcoming Kurokawa-san to Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tusa: — I, too, would like to introduce to the House 

a guest which I have in the Speaker’s gallery today. The 

individual is the member for St. Catherines in Ontario, Mr. Joe 

Reid, MP. He is accompanied by his wife to our legislature this 

afternoon. 

Mr. Reid and his wife are here visiting Saskatchewan. They 

have come back to a family reunion in Strasbourg. And I might 

add that he was formerly a resident of Govan - Govan district 

and town. Also, in part of his career, Mr. Reid has been the 

former mayor of St. Catherines. They are accompanied this 

afternoon by their niece, Merle Ridley. 

 

I would like all members to please welcome Mr. Reid and his 

wife to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Monsieur le président, nous avons ici 

aujourd’hui des étudiants de la belle province. Bienvenue ici 

aujourd’hui à le législature et à Regina. Nous espérons que 

vous allez enjouir de votre visite. Bienvenue. Bonne chance. 

Merci. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Farmers’ Quota Deliveries 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My question is to 

the Acting Minister of Agriculture. It has to do with problems 

which farmers in eastern Saskatchewan are having today with 

respect to their deliveries - deliveries of their quotas prior to the 

end of the crop year. 

 

In the past, when there have been delivery problems, the 

Canadian Wheat Board has looked at extending the crop year 

for a few days in order to accommodate all the farmers to get 

their equal opportunity of delivery to them so they can get rid 

of their grain, especially this year when the crop prices are 

dropping 8, 19 to 20 per cent? Has the Government of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, contacted the Mulroney 

government to see if an extension of the crop year is possible? 

And I would ask, what was Ottawa’s answer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that 

representations have been made to Ottawa. I can’t be much 

more specific than that, and I will take notice of the question on 

behalf of the Premier. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I assume that you know that last 

year we had approximately 1.7 million tonnes in storage, and 

this year there’s just slightly less - about 1.25 million metric 

tons. The Thunder Bay shipping area, in particular, is very 

congested - both lines, and CN lines apparently are worse. 

 

In your contract with the federal government, have you 

requested that the crop year be extended so that these farmers, 

in light of what I had said previously with the financial 

difficulties they’re in, have you specifically requested that the 

crop year be extended to accommodate them in their deliveries? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can’t comment particularly, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of what the specific representations  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1394 

 

were. I will take notice of the question, although if my memory 

serves me correctly, our Premier enjoyed some success in this 

last year in a similar situation. 

 

Impact of Increased Taxes in Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 

question to the Minister of Finance, and it deals with the 

unprecedented tax bite by your government, sir, in this year’s 

provincial budget, and the impact that those tax increases are 

having on the Saskatchewan economy and on ordinary people. 

 

The flat tax was increased by over $100 million; the 2 per cent 

jump in the sales tax will amount to 100, $120 million; the PC 

gas tax, even after the rebate, will cost an additional $50 

million. Mr. Minister, that’s 250 million or more a year out of 

the pockets of average taxpayers, or the equivalent of a 

19-point jump in the personal income tax rate. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you justify that sort of an increase in taxes on 

average people when your government is collecting not more 

but less from corporate taxpayers in this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated through the 

budget, several questions to the opposition - for some reason 

they’re not listening. The corporate tax rates, as I indicated, 

would remain the same for the simple fact that the differential 

between Alberta and Saskatchewan now is fairly narrow, and 

people will not make the arbitrary decision to set up businesses 

in the province of Alberta. 

 

The big payer of the gasoline tax will be business. And that . . . 

you object to the gas tax, but the rebate exempts the average 

person when they keep their receipts. Business will be the big 

payer of the gasoline tax, Mr. Speaker. Business paying the 

gasoline tax still will not have a distortion vis-a-vis Alberta and 

Manitoba, with the gas tax being 5 cents a litre in Alberta and, I 

believe, 8.9 cents a litre in Manitoba. But the big payer of the 

gas tax will be business. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, your own budget documents show that you plan to 

take an additional 250 million in the three taxes which I 

enumerated, while you are taking less money from corporate 

tax and less money from corporate capital tax, up 250 million 

for Saskatchewan citizens - some of whom will be 

business - down 30 million for corporations. Mr. Minister, does 

that meet your standard of fairness? Does it meet anybody’s 

standard of fairness? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I believe the Leader of the Opposition 

knows full well that the corporate capital tax rate in 

Saskatchewan is the highest in Canada. And it was raised in last 

year’s budget. 

 

I might advise the hon. member . . . again he’s not taking into 

account in his calculations the fact that business is  

the large payer of the gasoline tax in the province. But be that 

as it may, Mr. Speaker . . . and to the Leader of the Opposition, 

as we’ve indicated and as the tables show, the people of 

Saskatchewan, when one takes into account taxes and charges, 

are still the second-lowest taxed people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that if one wants to take a look 

at the tables at the back of the budget, the second-lowest taxed 

people in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And I know the hon. members 

don’t want to hear that, Mr. Speaker. And one of the reasons 

that the Leader of the Opposition had to ask the question, not 

the minister of Finance, because the minister of Finance didn’t 

want to hear that when he’d asked the question earlier. But they 

are the second-lowest taxed people in Canada. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the member is previous; 

he’s ahead of himself. The member for Regina North East is 

not yet the minister of Finance. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, look at your figures. Do you not concede 

that your figures in the budget documents show that while 

individual income tax is up, and sales taxes are way up, and 

gasoline tax is up, some of which I know will be paid by small 

business, the amount received for corporation capital tax and 

corporate income tax is down. And how can you square that 

with any standard of fairness? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well again, the Leader of the Opposition 

knows full well that the corporate capital taxes and the 

corporate taxes are down on estimates and payments by the 

federal government. That’s what we estimate that the revenues 

will generate. 

 

One should look at the rates, because it’s the rates that are the 

important factor. And the fact is that the people of 

Saskatchewan are the second-lowest taxed people in Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again, the opposition does not want to hear that, but they are 

the second-lowest taxed people in Canada. And one again can 

take a look at the rates. The rates, Mr. Speaker, are low; they’re 

the second-lowest in Canada. And as well, when one looks at 

total revenues, I suggest to the hon. member that corporate 

taxes have always been lower than the receipts from personal 

income tax, and it’s been that way for a very long period of 

time. 

 

So if you want to compare apples . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. I think the minister has adequately 

answered the question. 

 

Effects of Federal Government Tax Proposals 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question to the Minister of Finance, and I want to ask him a 

question about a further tax grab that this government is 

undertaking. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, following last month’s publication of the 

so-called tax reform package of the Mulroney government, you 

claimed that the changes could mean a  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1395 

 

loss of $18 million next year to the Saskatchewan treasury. At 

that time you also threatened a further increase in the unfair tax 

to make up the shortfall. 

 

Now I refer you, Mr. Minister, in case you have forgotten, to 

page 50 of Mr. Wilson’s white paper in which it clearly states 

that Saskatchewan will gain $4 million next year as a result of 

these proposed changes, and it will gain $20 million in total 

over the next five years. 

 

Now I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you explain to the people of 

Saskatchewan the contradiction between your statement, which 

is a set-up for a further tax grab, and the statement of Michael 

Wilson from the federal government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, to the opposition financial critic, 

that if one takes a look at the tax reform proposals of the federal 

government, integrated into that, in the first year, is a speed-up 

of the tax collections which means a quicker tax flow back to 

the province for one year. 

 

The net differential, as I’ve indicated, as a result of the tax 

reform packages were, I believe, some $18 million less to the 

province, and we’ve indicated that comes from higher corporate 

tax - lower personal income tax receipts. The differential in the 

two figures is the fact that the federal government, as part of its 

tax reform, will have a one-year speed up of payments to the 

provinces. But over the course of tax reform, that is the effect 

as I have given. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, what you say here and 

what Mr. Wilson says do not square. It shows in the white 

paper that the direct impact of personal and corporate income 

tax reform on the provincial government revenues are going to 

be a gain to the provincial treasury of $20 million over the next 

five years. And that’s a quote, Mr. Minister. Are you saying 

that the federal government is wrong, or are you saying to the 

people of Saskatchewan that Michael Wilson is misleading the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve indicated on several occasions now 

that the differential between the calculations of the 

Saskatchewan Department of Finance and the effective tax 

reform is a net income loss to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The differential comes in the figures because of the proposal in 

the federal tax reform to speed up the flow-through of tax 

collections back to the provinces. It’s a very, very simply 

matter, Mr. Speaker, for those that understand. And the 

differential, as a result of tax reform, is a loss to the province of 

revenues. Again, the calculation means one year of less of a 

differential, Mr. Speaker. But it’s only one year that one picks 

up on the speed-up . . . the flow-through of the tax collections. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The only two people who don’t seem to 

understand are the Minister of Finance in Saskatchewan and the 

Minister of Finance in Ottawa. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, isn’t the real story here the 

fact that you planned to use the Mulroney government’s tax 

changes as a convenient way to undertake another unfair tax 

grab on Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now the flat tax has been set at 2 per 

cent and you announced that in June. And you said at that time 

that it would go back to one and one-half per cent after the end 

of this year. Will you confirm to this House, Mr. Minister, that 

you intend to leave that flat tax at 2 per cent next year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m frankly a little 

shocked at the opposition Finance critic . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order, please. Allow the 

minister to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — . . . wants to get into next year’s budget and 

begin the budget debate, because they didn’t participate in this 

year’s budget debate, Mr. Speaker, and seem to have missed it. 

 

Now what we’ve indicated are the revenue proposals and 

expenditure proposals for the fiscal year which we’re now in. 

Mr. Speaker, I indicated that the flat tax was up one-half a 

point. We’ve been through the collection process. I hope he 

now has that figured out - that it’s one-half a point for all of 

1987. In January 1, 1988 that will drop back to the stated level 

of one and one-half points, Mr. Speaker. That is the 

government’s position. 

 

I wouldn’t want to anticipate next year’s budget. But I can give 

the assurance to the hon. members that next year - next year 

Saskatchewan, at worst, will still maintain the position of being 

the second-lowest taxed province in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the minister to 

cut out the mumbo-jumbo and directly answer the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, will you answer this 

question: who’s wrong here and who’s misleading, or are you 

both misleading? Is Mr. Wilson wrong when he says to 

Saskatchewan people that there will be a gain of $20 million to 

the Saskatchewan treasury in the next five years? Or are you 

misleading Saskatchewan taxpayers by saying you’re going to 

have to leave the flat tax at 2 per cent, in spite of your promise 

to bring it back to a percentage and a half, so that you can have 

another tax grab? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be 

somewhat premature to let the hon. member know what  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1396 

 

next year’s budget will be. I have indicated the following: that 

we would be, as a result of federal tax . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I ask the hon. members 

to please allow the minister to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — As a result of the proposals for federal tax 

reform, we are assessing and reassessing the provincial income 

tax and provincial corporate tax schemes. I have indicated that 

to the hon. member. I have indicated that federal tax reform 

leads to the calculations of the Department of Finance of 

Saskatchewan to a net revenue loss. 

 

Thirdly, I have indicated in no uncertain terms, because I don’t 

want it misinterpreted, that whatever next year’s budget will be, 

Mr. Speaker, that this government - and I give the assurance to 

the people of this province - that Saskatchewan will maintain 

its position, Mr. Speaker, of being the second-lowest taxed 

province in Canada . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Now I have 

asked the hon. members on several occasions to please allow 

the ministers to answer the question. And though they might 

not like the answer they’re receiving, it is still the prerogative 

of the minister to answer in the way he sees fit. So I would like 

to remind hon. members of that, and ask them to not 

continually interfere. 

 

I recognize the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I haven’t finished my answer, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, I believe we will go on now to the 

member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

Legal Aid Commission Fees 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Minister of Social Services responsible for the Legal Aid 

Commission. In answering previous questions, the minister has 

sought to leave the impression that the idea of imposing user 

fees for legal aid in Saskatchewan is the brain-child of the 

Legal Aid Commission, and that he is just the helpless victim 

of whatever it is the Legal Aid Commission decides to do. 

 

Will the minister now confirm that that is not, in fact, the case; 

that instead the Legal Aid Commission of Saskatchewan was 

instructed by this government to impose user fees after a 

decision of the cabinet to that effect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can give you an 

answer similar to the answer that the former attorney general, 

now the member for Riversdale, gave in 1981, where, at page 

781 of Hansard in 1981, the former attorney general at that 

time said, “The legal aid commission is (an) autonomous and 

independent . . .” 

 

We are not in a position to instruct them to take user fees from 

anyone. I am not hiding from anything. I have indicated 

publicly, and I believe on the record, that I am not opposed, nor 

is this government opposed, to some  

people who have some ability to pay, to pay something towards 

their legal fees. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I invite the minister to weigh 

his words with care. Is the minister specifically telling this 

House that the cabinet, or a committee of cabinet, did not 

consider the matter of imposing user fees on legal aid? And is 

he specifically telling the House that he is denying that this 

government advised the Legal Aid Commission to impose fees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’ve already answered the question. I 

told you that this government is not opposed to user fees in 

legal aid for some people who have some ability to pay. And I 

think, if you will recall, I said so last week. So we’re not hiding 

anything. I don’t recall any instruction going out to them to 

impose user fees. I recall an indication that they were 

considering such a situation. And firstly, I don’t recall any 

instruction; and secondly, they wouldn’t be bound by it. 

 

As I told the other member of the opposition a few days ago, I 

told them, and I’m sure you were here and heard it, that legal 

aid has considered its options. All we do is provide a cheque for 

a certain amount of funds. This year, there was a reduction of 8 

per cent. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — May I ask the minister a very direct question, 

and again I invite his careful response. Mr. Minister, last month 

did cabinet or a committee of cabinet specifically conclude that 

user fees ought to be imposed? And did you or your deputy 

minister or a senior officials in your department write to the 

Legal Aid Commission to advise them to impose fees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well first of all, what’s done in cabinet 

is not public, at least, even, not to you. Secondly, not that I 

know of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Table it and I’ll look at 

it. You’re waving a document. If you have a document, table it 

so I can look at it and I’ll give you an answer based on what’s 

in the document. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Effects of Federal Government’s Tax Reform Proposals 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Finance and it deals with the Mulroney 

government’s so-called tax proposals. 

 

You have publicly supported the federal government’s tax 

reform proposals, and those proposals include a new national 

sales tax which will expand the sales tax to include services, 

and would be applied like a value added tax on manufactured 

goods at every stage of production, from raw materials to the 

final consumer. 

 

Can the Minister of Finance tell Saskatchewan taxpayers why 

he supports a new national sales tax on all goods and services, 

including food, and how does he see such a tax as being fair to 

the average Saskatchewan consumer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, fortunately, virtually all of the 

members of the press have heard my comments and  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1397 

 

response to this, and they don’t put the interpretation on it that 

the hon. member has. 

 

I have indicated on federal tax reform that my view that federal 

tax reform is proposed by the federal Minister of Finance is 

only the first step in a very long process of discussion and 

negotiation. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I’ve made it abundantly clear on 

numerous occasions to the public and to the press, that I’m 

opposed to a tax on food, and the government is opposed to a 

tax on food. 

 

Thirdly, with regard to a national sales tax, what I have 

indicated on numerous occasions is that if a federal sales tax is 

to the advantage of the people of Saskatchewan, and we can 

eliminate the duplication between the two . . . of the two taxes, 

then I think it’s very much worthy of consideration and 

discussion. And we’re prepared to consider that approach. But 

if it’s detrimental to the people of Saskatchewan, we don’t 

intend to participate in a combined federal-provincial sales tax. 

If it is workable and if it is to the advantage of the people of the 

province, then certainly. 

 

For particularly small business to only have to deal with one tax 

form, I think is advantage to the small-business community that 

will have to collect the taxes on behalf of the government of 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, the same 

minister. Isn’t the Mulroney government’s so-called tax reform 

package a classic example of giving with one hand and taking 

with the other? Any reductions the average taxpayer might 

enjoy as a result of the changes to the personal income tax will 

be more than offset by higher hidden taxes on all the goods and 

services that they buy. 

 

The sales tax is a back pocket, hidden tax - a hidden tax which 

you and Brian Mulroney . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

The hon. member, I’m sure, has a supplementary question, but I 

believe his preamble is getting inordinately long. So would you 

please put your question. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — The sales tax is a back pocket, hidden tax, 

Mr. Minister, which you and Mr. Mulroney hope Canadian 

consumers will not . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order! Order, 

please. Please stand up and put your supplementary directly. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Isn’t that hidden tax, Mr. Minister, why you 

find a national sales tax so appealing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated that 

there are some potential benefits to a national sales tax. That 

means there would only be one tax. And the small business, 

particularly the retailers of Saskatchewan that would have to 

collect that tax, would only have to collect . . . remit one tax. 

 

I’ve also indicated that if a national sales tax is not to the  

benefit, or to the detriment of the people of Saskatchewan, we 

would not be supporting it. There obviously . . . when one looks 

at simplifying the tax system, conceptually, a national sales tax, 

one sales tax, has some advantages. If you want to complicate 

the system, have two, three, four, five - as many as you wish. 

 

The question that the hon. member raises as to hidden taxes, 

other taxes, is, I don’t think, a valid one. The debate can be, 

quite simply, on the national sales tax, as to whether it is put on 

the final goods, whether it’s put on . . . at what stage that it is 

imposed. So to assume that a national sales tax is a hidden tax 

is a false assumption, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again, I will give assurance over and over and over again that 

we will be the second-lowest taxed province in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 

I want to rise on a point of order. 

 

Under rule number 26 of Saskatchewan . . . Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 1981, 

rule number 26, Mr. Speaker, says, in part, that: 

 

No Member shall . . . use offensive words against the 

Assembly or against any Member thereof. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last Friday, and this is the first opportunity I’ve 

had to review the record, and I think that the parliamentary 

language . . . unparliamentary language, whether presented 

from one’s feet or from one’s seat, Mr. Speaker, is nevertheless 

equally unparliamentary. 

 

And on page 1372 of the Hansard of July 24, 1987, in response 

to . . . or a heckle across the floor, an hon. member said, 

directed to the member for Social Services, “Where’s the 

swastika?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that kind of language is offensive to all 

people, and that kind of language, Mr. Speaker, I think is 

unparliamentary. Now I don’t know, or I didn’t know, what the 

source of that comment was, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that Mr. 

Speaker couldn’t know because Mr. Speaker wasn’t in the 

Chair on Friday. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, in the Saturday Leader-Post of July 25 

. . . July 25 in the Dale Eisler column, it says that: 

 

On Friday, the verbal sparring took on ugly overtones . . . 

The most stark example came yesterday from NDP 

front-bencher Murray Koskie, who is without question, the 

loudest and most raucous heckler in the legislature. It 

came (Mr. Speaker) while . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I’m 

listening carefully to the member’s point of order - and he 

definitely has a point of order. I would allow him to continue, 

but I would caution him not to make it too long. 

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1398 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker: 

 

(This) came while (Mr.) Schmidt was being questioned by 

the NDP justice critic . . . As Schmidt was responding to 

Mitchell, Koskie shouted from his seat “where’s your 

swastika.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, my point of order is quite simple. In 

Beauchesne’s, rules of debate, page 114, 323: 

 

Unparliamentary words may be brought to the attention of 

the House either by . . . (Mr.) Speaker or by any Member. 

When the question is raised by a Member it must be as a 

point of order and not as a point of privilege (Mr. 

Speaker). 

 

I have had at the immediate . . . first opportunity that I had to 

review the record, Mr. Speaker, have done that. It’s clear that a 

member said, where’s the swastika? It is alleged, at least, by 

one Dale Eisler, that that member was the member for Quill 

Lakes. I’m sure that other members have heard it. Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. I wish to allow the member to finish his point of 

order immediately. Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. Order, please. Order. 

 

When the Speaker is on his feet all members realize that they 

must give way and be seated. And I would allow . . . ask the 

member, the Deputy Premier, to please, quickly, in a few 

words, end his point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the point of order is quite 

simple. There can be no doubt that there was unparliamentary 

language used in this House on Friday. I ask the Speaker to, 

himself, review the record and the evidence presented here, and 

the Speaker to decide whether the point of order is 

well-founded or not. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, may I speak to the point of 

order? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, you may. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity to speak to the long fabrication of the member from 

Souris-Cannington. 

 

When a point of order - I think, Mr. Speaker, you will 

recognize this - when a point of order occurs in this Chamber, it 

is dealt with at the time it occurs. Now if, in fact, this occurs as 

the member has said, then it should have been dealt with with 

the Speaker at that time, or the member himself should have 

raised on a point of order at that time. 

 

There is no opportunity for members to accumulate grievances 

and hurts in this House and bring them all to your desk at one 

time or another as a collection of grievances, or long after the 

occurrence has happened. I think . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. We are now 

having this member interrupted, and I would like  

you to honour his position as placing his point of order and 

allow him to complete his point of order, if he has not already 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. The member has finished. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Speaking with 

respect, and to the point of order raised by the Government 

House Leader, I refer you to page 1372 of the July 24 Hansard 

of this House where it indicates: 

 

An Hon. Member: - Where’s the swastika? 

 

And my reply at the time, Mr. Speaker, was: 

 

Well, I take exception to the allegations the members are 

making from their seats, and I don’t think they . . . should 

be proud of them. Publicly accusing the member for 

Melville of being a Nazi is not parliamentary language . . . 

 

The unparliamentary language was raised at the very time that 

it was heard: however, it was not clear until we checked 

Hansard, that the offensive language was so loud that it could 

be heard on the microphones throughout the legislature and 

reported in Hansard. 

 

I rise today to point out that calling a member of the legislature 

a Nazi has been ruled in Beauchesne’s to be unparliamentary 

language. Hansard points out the word “swastika”; however, 

the same members who are shouting now were shouting Nazi at 

that time. The issue here is not whether the member from 

Melville has been offended, because the member from Melville 

is a politician who is used to some difficult situations, used to 

some . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: What’s the point of order? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Hon. members 

have the opportunity to speak to a point of order which has 

been raised in the House. A point of order has been raised in 

the House, and the hon. member is speaking to the point of 

order, and he has that right, although we don’t wish him to 

make long and prolonged speeches. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reason 

that the laws of this Assembly are such is to keep order and so 

that there is orderly conduct in this Assembly. And I rise here 

not as an individual alleging that this individual is offended. I 

rise here as a member of the legislature on this point of order to 

indicate that this is a further example of how unparliamentary 

language can cause disorder in the House. 

 

In this particular care there are many thousands of German 

people in this province, and I would ask that it is imprecise and 

unclear exactly which of the members opposite raised the point, 

but when considering it . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. Members do have the right to speak to a point of 

order. I have cautioned the member not to make a long and 

prolonged speech. I believe he has had an adequate opportunity 

to make his point. I will give him one or two more seconds, if 

he has anything critical  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1399 

 

and crucial that he might add. But I caution him that he only 

has a very short time left. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s difficult to 

make a short address when one is constantly interrupted. And 

there is another example. The bottom line, the gist of it all, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the Leader of the Opposition is responsible for 

his members and should apologize to this Assembly and to all 

German people for the conduct of his members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please! Order, 

please. I have over the weekend had the opportunity of reading 

the particular article that the Deputy Premier refers to, as I 

usually read newspapers when I have the opportunity. 

However, articles in newspapers, even though they may name 

names, are not the basis on which I, as Speaker, can make 

rulings. And therefore, while it might have been an interesting 

article to those people who read it - or perhaps it wasn’t so 

interesting - I cannot make my decision on that article. 

 

I have also read the transcripts of Hansard this morning when I 

came to my office, and I did see a comment made by a member, 

as indicated by the Deputy Premier. However, the transcript of 

Hansard does not indicate which member may have made that 

statement, and therefore I cannot rule as to the individual who 

made the particular statement, although it is clear from 

Hansard that somebody did. 

 

However, I would like to take this opportunity to speak a few 

words about unparliamentary language and the effect it has on 

parliamentary procedure here in the province. Unfortunately, 

unparliamentary language has crept in to the language of this 

House. And as hon. members know full well, I have on 

different occasions taken the opportunity to remind hon. 

members that they are not to use unparliamentary language 

since it is an affront, not only to hon. members, but it may be an 

affront to the Chair, to the office of the Chair, and by being an 

affront to the office of the Chair is, in fact, an affront to every 

member in this House. 

 

I reminded hon. members of that, and I am distressed that that 

has occurred again, and I am hopeful that hon. members will 

remember not to do that again. 

 

Now I might add that I have been quite lenient in my rulings on 

this matter. And hon. members will recall that on different 

occasions I have brought this to attention of members but have 

not taken any disciplinary action, have not done that for a good 

reason. 

 

I believe that all members elected to this House are honourable 

people and, being honourable people, they will adhere strictly 

to parliamentary language and not cast statements, hurl 

statements against hon. members like we have just heard 

alleged. I myself have often heard “liar,” “you’re lying,” etc., 

hurled across the floor by hon. members. And I believe that this 

deterioration in the parliamentary language of the House has 

serious implications. And I would like to once more bring that 

to the attention of hon. members that this House cannot,  

and will not, continue to allow that type of language to 

continue. 

 

(1445) 

 

And with that, I would like to say that while the hon. member 

has made his point of ruling . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 

have just heard, in the midst of my ruling, the hon. member to 

my left. And I might admit, quite frankly, that I wasn’t looking 

at him. I know the voice. I will not ask him to withdraw at this 

time, but that’s the last warning he gets. 

 

Now I would like to remind all our hon. members again, very 

briefly, that I will not tolerate that kind of language any more, 

for the good of the House - for the good of the House. 

 

And while the hon. member, the Deputy Premier, has raised a 

point of order, I cannot rule that it was any specific person. It is 

a point of order which raises a serious matter in this House, but 

not a point of order that I can make a particular ruling on, and I 

will end with those conclusions. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Moose Jaw North, Mr. Chairman. Thank you 

very much. Mr. Minister, as the House adjourned with 

estimates for Education on July 23 at 10 p.m., we were engaged 

in a conversation - not a conversation but a review of the 

conduct of your department - a very serious matter. 

 

I was disappointed that you did not come back to allow us to 

complete the review of this matter on Friday, July 24, but I am 

pleased that we have an opportunity to complete dealing with 

this topic today. 

 

Mr. Minister, if we can begin with the review of the exchange 

of information that you presented to this Assembly when we 

spoke about the matter of the dismissal of the principal of the 

Saskatchewan Technical Institute - or the former principal of 

the Saskatchewan Technical Institute, Dr. Andrew Nicol - if we 

can review what you told this House, and I refer to Hansard, 

pages 1366 and onward, Mr. Minister, in which you told this 

House that Dr. Nicol’s position was abolished. You also told 

this House that there is a person acting as principal at the 

Saskatchewan Technical Institute in Moose Jaw. And you 

further said, on page 1367, that there will be a principal there 

that will head up that campus when that campus is established 

as the Moose Jaw campus of the Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Arts and Sciences. 

 

Mr. Minister, then what you said . . . what you told us in  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1400 

 

this House is that, and I quote from Hansard, page 1366, you 

said, Mr. Minister: 

 

. . . what we had was a principal at the community college 

and a principal at STI. We only need one in the new 

structure; one position was abolished . . . 

 

You then went on to say, Mr. Minister, and these are your 

words: 

 

I think what the hon. member is trying to do is to try . . . 

 

Let me begin again: 

 

I think what the hon. member is trying to do is trying to 

lead us into the scenario that would suggest - he would try 

and suggest - (and these are your words, Mr. Minister) that 

somehow this heavy-handed, rotten Tory government has 

somehow done a disservice here to one of its employees. 

And that is not true. 

 

And those are your words, Mr. Minister. You then went on to 

say: 

 

We picked two (and I quote verbatim again) from the 

community college side - two of those principals - and two 

from the institute side. 

 

Mr. Minister, can we seek some further clarification on those 

statements - because I don’t know that the facts of the matter 

established that you were being entirely accurate in what you 

said - and can we review the campuses in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Minister. My first question to you is: who is the principal of the 

institute in Prince Albert? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Bob Gervais is the principal at the 

Prince Albert campus. The acting principal in Regina - because 

I suspect you’ll want all of them before you’re done your line 

of questioning - the acting principal in Regina is Bill Black; in 

Saskatoon it’s Larry Dinter; and in Moose Jaw, acting as well 

again, is Nancy Lynch. 

 

It might be worth noting as well, for the hon. member’s 

information, in Moose Jaw the community college principal is 

acting in a more . . . or the former community college principal 

is acting in a more senior position in the new institute structure. 

The bottom line is two institute positions were abolished, 

namely Moose Jaw and Saskatoon, and two stayed on, namely 

Regina and Prince Albert. 

 

The case is further mudified, if you like, by the fact that the 

principal at Regina, Ray Meyer, has taken on a more senior 

position as acting CEO of the new institute. And I think that’s 

the kind of information the hon. member will probably want. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you said, we picked two from the 

community college side - two of those principals - and two 

from the institute side. You’ve just given me names of four 

individuals who are at the four campuses. Would you please 

clarify for me how that, as a matter of  

fact, is picking two from the institute side and two from the 

community college side, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, first of all, three of those four 

that I gave you are acting. Number one. 

 

Number two is I stand by the basis for what we have done here 

is that we did not want to, when we embarked on the 

amalgamation, to be seen to have the institute side swallowing 

up the community college side, or vice versa. And we stand by 

that. 

 

I think that’s fair. It made eminent good sense. Because this 

was not to be an exercise where one . . . from the start is was 

never an exercise that we were attempting to abolish one side or 

the other and penalize them for some failures of the past. 

Because the reality is that we were not embarking on this 

exercise as a punishment for something they had done in the 

past. This was not . . . this entire restructuring is not being done 

because somehow what community colleges or institutes have 

done in the past was somehow wrong or somehow failed us. 

What we’re talking about here is a structure that in fact can 

meet the demands of the next two decades. 

 

And I think that process that we’ve embarked upon has been as 

fair as one can make it, as reasonable as one can make. There is 

yet lots of work to be done. Certainly some of the institute 

positions I suspect will be advertised before we’re done. And 

I’m certain at the end of the day that we will have the new 

institute that will serve the people of this province well. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, on July 23 you made a very clear 

statement. You said: 

 

We picked two from the community college side - two of 

those principals - and two from the institute side. 

 

I’m quoting from Hansard, page 1366, Mr. Minister. That 

strikes me as being a fairly straightforward and simple 

statement. I’ve just asked you a fairly straightforward and 

simple question. Which two of those people that you’ve named 

to me have come from the community college side; which two 

have come from the institute side? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The point I should make at the outset 

is we’re not talking people, we’re talking positions. The 

institutes, as you will know, up until the legislation is passed at 

least, are an arm of the department of what was formerly 

advanced education, now Education. The community colleges 

are autonomous, governed by boards. We, I suppose, cannot tell 

them what to do. We can negotiate and talk with them, and that 

was the process through amalgamation teams, etc., etc. 

 

We, in all fairness, as I pointed out earlier, thought that it made 

good sense and would be fair and reasonable if we yielded two 

of our positions from the institute side, namely, the Saskatoon 

and Moose Jaw one. And we were hopeful that the community 

colleges, although we can’t tell them, I suppose, what to do 

explicitly, but through the negotiations there’s been some 

expectation that they would yield up two from their side. And I 

stand by that. If you are somehow are wishing to put another  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1401 

 

interpretation on it or twist that logic or twist that basis, that is 

not the case. I’ve been totally up front in this all along. And my 

officials have bargained, if you like, in good faith and 

negotiated in good faith and sat on the amalgamation team with 

others in good faith for the reasons I’ve outlined earlier. And I 

remain committed to that. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, like you I appreciate being up 

front and straightforward responses to straightforward 

questions. Let me try again. I quote again from Hansard, page 

1366 of July 23: 

 

We picked two from the community college side - two of 

those principals - and two from the institute side. 

 

That’s what you said, Mr. Minister. I didn’t say that - you said 

that. Will you tell this House for my clarification, please: of 

these four people, which two are the principals that you’ve 

selected from the institute side? 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I will repeat then, for the third 

time. Yes, we in our sense of fair play and reasonableness, 

yielded up two positions, which is half, it seems to me. The two 

from our institute side that we put on the table, if you like, was 

Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — I’m sorry, I’m not familiar with the person that 

you identified at Saskatoon, at the institute there right now, Mr. 

Minister. You gave me some information about the individual 

referred to from July 23 who’s at the Moose Jaw institute. Can 

you tell me who is at the Saskatoon institute now and the 

background of that individual please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To recap the situation for you at 

Saskatoon: the principal of Kelsey was George Brown, who 

took early retirement and we abolished that position. 

 

Now then we were faced with a situation . . . I think the 

scenario, you might want to paint as well, then - what about the 

college principal there? Well the reality was he had as well 

resigned. So to run the college and the institute for us on an 

acting basis - in this interim period - we went to a fellow by the 

name of Larry Dinter, who was the former assistant principal of 

programs at Kelsey. So I think you can see that there’s been 

nothing underhanded or mischievous or unfair or unreasonable, 

that it was quite a logical chain of events that led us to the point 

to where we have got to in this process. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — So what you’re tell me then, Mr. Minister, is 

that responsible for the administration of the Kelsey Institute 

today is the former assistant principal from Kelsey. And 

responsible for the administration of the institute in Moose Jaw 

is the former vice-president of the P.A. institute. Is that correct, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That is correct. But the point that I 

should make is that they are not . . . these individuals are not 

there merely to run the old “institutes.” They are there in this 

larger capacity, as we move towards the dotting the  

i’s and crossing the t’s on the amalgamation process, to in fact 

put these new campuses up and running, which is an 

amalgamation of the old community colleges and the old 

institutes that existed previously. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you’re telling me . . . I want to 

make sure I have this clearly because it appears, at times, 

statements that have on the surface a very clear implication, are 

not so when we ask further questions. What you’re telling me, 

if I can summarize - and please confirm if I’m understanding 

this incorrectly, Mr. Minister - you’re telling me here today that 

the intention was that at the Saskatoon and Moose Jaw 

campuses the administrator would come from the institute side. 

 

You’re telling me that the administrator of the Saskatoon 

campus is now the former assistant principal responsible for 

programming, and the administrator, chief administrator, at the 

Moose Jaw campus is the former vice-president from the Prince 

Albert institute. Have I understood that correctly, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the points I should . . . I would 

make again is that, yes, we gave up two positions. And what 

has happened since then, in three out of the four instances that I 

have mentioned to you are acting - and I ought to underline that 

word. And to go through that scenario again as to why we have 

who we have in Saskatoon, that doesn’t seem to be consistent 

in your mind with what I’ve said, is for this reason: the 

principal there took early retirement. Of our two that we offered 

up, that position was abolished. That seems straightforward 

enough. 

 

Now the question becomes: well why didn’t you take the 

community college guy? Okay. Well as it turned out, he too had 

resigned. So we went to the person that . . . and I mean I did not 

make the decisions. We have an interim governing council that 

looks after these kinds of things, and I trust their judgement, 

quite frankly. They have in place to run the operation on an 

acting basis, Larry Dinter. And I know the appearance may be 

as you suggest, but I wanted to emphasis that we were trying to 

be fair. We offered up the two positions, but because of early 

retirements and in fact other retirements where people accepted 

positions elsewhere, this is the situation as it exists today. 

 

So the third point, and the point I would want to emphasize 

again, is that this is an acting situation, and I suspect that in the 

not too distant future you’re going to see some competitions 

provincially posted, perhaps even nationally posted, to fill some 

of the executive level positions at the Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Sciences and Technology. 

 

I can only assure the hon. member there’s nothing here that 

we’re . . . we’re not trying to undermine anybody or be 

nefarious or not straight up, etc., etc. It’s a matter of how it 

came to pass, as I’ve described it to you. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would agree full-heartedly 

with your assessment. There does seem to be some 

irregularities, particularly when compared to your statement in 

Hansard, July 23: 

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1402 

 

We picked two from the community college side - two of 

those principals - and two from the institute side. 

 

And I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that there are more than just 

you and I who are having a hard time figuring out what your 

department is doing in its reamalgamation process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — You made the reference earlier in this 

discussion today, Mr. Minister, that, I believe - and again I ask 

for your clarification, because I admit quite freely to having a 

bit of difficulty following the logic here - that the people at the 

P.A. institute and Regina were targeted to be from the 

community college side. Is that so, Mr. Minister, or have we 

got a mumbo-jumbo, you know, conglomeration of something 

else going on over there, too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well in P.A. we have Bob Gervais as 

the principal. Relative to the community colleges’ staff, 

obviously we can’t dictate, as I mentioned earlier, because of 

the autonomous structure of the community colleges, 

particularly there, but we obviously are in negotiations with 

them, and they’re involved in the amalgamation teams and 

those kinds of things. Although, when it comes to P.A., that’s a 

particularly new . . . unique case there, in some other 

dimensions, as well. 

 

There was some . . . I’m not sure I totally follow your question. 

But that’s some information I think might be of use to you. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — You’ve just simply repeated to me what you 

told me before, Mr. Minister. And that’s . . . I asked the 

question because it’s not clear to me. 

 

You told me before that you wanted institute people targeted 

for the Saskatoon and Moose Jaw campuses; you wanted 

community college people targeted for the P.A. and Regina 

campuses. You have just told me, again, that Bob Gervais is the 

administrator in charge of the Prince Albert campus. And 

you’ve advised me that Bill Black is the administrator in charge 

of the Regina campus. I simply ask you: did both these people 

come from the community college side? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — If, on occasion through the debate of 

. . . last Thursday, was it, I interexchangeably used positions 

and people, the correct . . . the most correct term, and the one 

I’ve tried to most often use, is positions. And the basis was we 

would offer up two from our side - that whole scenario that I’ve 

talked about. And all I can do is go through that for you again. 

 

The positions is what we’re talking, as opposed to people. And 

that’s the basis for it because, in the larger scheme of things, we 

didn’t want to see this, you know, power struggle or that kind 

of thing. 

 

And to be really honest with you, I think all of the institutes and 

colleges were very appreciative of an agreement with that kind 

of logic and that kind of thinking. At the same time, it . . . And 

rightly so, as well.  

Managers and the boards of community colleges want to do 

right by their staff. And that, to me, makes eminent good sense, 

as well. And we want to do right by them and make sure that 

this thing can go as smoothly as possible. 

 

As I say, if I’ve used the word “people” where I should have 

been talking “positions,” then I apologize for that. The reality 

is, we’ve yielded up two positions, and I’ve talked about the 

basis for that before. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Let me try again, Mr. Minister. Did Mr. Gervais 

come from the community . . . what you call the community 

college side? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Did Mr. Black come from what you call the 

community college side? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. And do you have three or four of 

these? I could answer in succession for you, perhaps. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Did Mr. Gervais come from what you call the 

technical institute side? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And did Mr. Black come from what you call the 

technical institute side? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — I think, Mr. Minister, you may - if you want to 

just listen carefully - appreciate why I, and anyone else who is 

watching this amalgamation of technical institutes and 

community colleges, is having a little difficulty following the 

blueprint. 

 

I distinctly recall you saying, just a few minutes ago in this 

discussion, and I referred you several times to Hansard of July 

23 in which you have advised this Assembly that there was 

intended to be two people from the institute side at the 

Saskatoon campus and at the Moose Jaw campus; two people 

from what you called the community college side at the P.A. 

campus and the Regina campus. And you’ve now just finished 

telling me that as a matter of fact we have four people, all four 

people at all four campuses have come from what you call the 

institute side. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well you can make what observations 

you like. And I said if there was some appearance of 

inconsistency, it was because of things like the fact that the 

community college principal in Saskatoon and the principal 

there both took retirement, and in one case early retirement. 

 

But if you want to ask the question as to whether we’re 

consistent in terms of yielding up two positions from our side, 

the questions then become this: was the principalship at STI 

abolished and the answer is yes. And the question is: was the 

principalship at Wascana abolished? And the answer is yes. 

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1403 

 

So you can put your view on it and ignore the fact that, in some 

instances in community colleges, both officers resigned. And 

somehow if you were going to take your example, in which 

case you’re getting down to people again as opposed to 

positions which is where your logic breaks down . . . And that’s 

why when I pose the questions I say: was the principalship of 

STI abolished? The answer is yes. Was the principalship of 

Kelsey abolished? And the answer is yes. And I think that logic 

stands pat and meets the test. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you will understand my 

confusion. In the statement you just finished making you told 

me that the principal position at Wascana, at Moose Jaw, and at 

Kelsey was abolished. That’s what you just finished telling me. 

Will you get your facts straight and give serious answers to 

serious questions? Which positions were abolished? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What my notes say is: was the 

principalship of STI abolished? And the answer is yes. Was the 

principalship at Kelsey abolished? And the answer is yes. And 

that is correct. If I said something else in one of the instances, 

I’m sorry. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well your apology is accepted, Mr. Minister, 

and I would ask you to try and, in the interest of clarity, be a 

little more precise in the answers that you provide to this 

House. 

 

There are literally hundreds of people who are directly affected 

in the employ of these institutes who are trying to understand 

the plan and what is going on within the Department of 

Education. There are literally thousands of students in 

Saskatchewan today who don’t know what’s happening in 

terms of their applications to technical institutes who are trying 

to understand what is going on in the education system in 

Saskatchewan today. 

 

And in the interest of clarity - in the interest of clarity, Mr. 

Minister - you and I may disagree whole heartedly in a number 

of the philosophical objectives and plans that you have intended 

to put in place with your blueprint, but in the interest of clarity, 

at least for the people in Saskatchewan, can we get some clear 

answers here. 

 

Let me review again then, Mr. Minister, to make sure I 

understand this clearly, because it is frustrating from this side 

of the House to ask you a question for clarification and then get 

two different answers. 

 

Am I correct in understanding that you abolished the positions 

of the principal at Kelsey Institute and at Moose Jaw, 

Saskatchewan Technical Institute? It was your objective to put 

in place, in Saskatoon and Moose Jaw, after having abolished 

the positions of the principal of the technical institutes, to put in 

place there two people to head up the administration who come 

from, what you call, the technical institute’s side. I believe you 

also told me it was your objective, then, to put in place, in 

Prince Albert and Regina, people who come from what you call 

the community college side. But that didn’t pan out. And 

there’s technical people from the technical institute’s side  

there as well. 

 

I have not asked a new question, Mr. Minister. I’ve simply 

attempted to summarize what, I believe, you have told me here 

today. Will you simply confirm to me whether that is accurate 

or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We are both to the same point now, 

when we talk about abolishments of principalships at STI and 

Kelsey. You’re right. Yes, those two have been abolished. 

 

But you’re not right on the second part, that what we expect 

from the community college side was for them to offer up two 

positions. Now we can’t dictate to them which ones, as you can 

appreciate because of the autonomous nature of the community 

colleges. That is still ongoing, as part of the amalgamation 

process. And I suspect that, when the dust settles at the end of 

the day, the balance that we’ve striven to, or strove, to attain 

. . . What’s the correct language here? The balance that we’d 

like to have will, in fact, be the case. But we cannot dictate to 

them which ones they should give up. 

 

In the interim, because we have to function, as you can well 

appreciate, we have some acting people in place. And so, I 

think, you have to remember that what you see today - even if 

these estimates are in in December - might be quite different. 

And I would remind you of that because these are acting 

positions. 

 

There’s negotiations underway, as I’ve talked about before. 

There’s going to be some competitions. So if I’m imprecise, 

I’m unclear, it’s because of some of those factors which we 

don’t have under our control. But our intentions are sincere and 

genuine. And I stick to that logic, and I stick to that basis 

because that is what I wanted, and we are working hard to come 

to that end point. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I sincerely do appreciate your 

admission that your answers are somewhat imprecise and 

unclear, because they are that. And I find it frustrating. I simply 

share with you my frustration in this House in trying to 

understand from the very top, from the administration of the 

campuses in the new super institute. 

 

This is not the time I intend to debate with you the wisdom of 

that move. But goodness gracious, Mr. Minister, who but you 

had full responsibility for the timing of the decision? Who but 

you had full responsibility for the appointments of the people in 

those four campuses to carry out the administration? All of this 

in the context that there are hundreds of people whose employ 

and thousands of people whose studies are dependent upon 

those institutes being up and running full bore by the first of 

September. And I’m sure you can appreciate the frustration I 

feel. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is not the meat and potatoes of what I was 

wanting to understand today. When I raised this issue about a 

half hour ago, simply to ask who was in charge of these four 

institutes, I thought that was a simple question that would have 

a simple answer and we could get on with it. But goodness 

gracious, what we have here now is confusion in simply talking 

about the relationship  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1404 

 

between your plan and what is happening in the putting in place 

of the people who are running those institutes. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that you have to bear 

full responsibility for the timing of these decisions, you have to 

bear full responsibility, whether you like it or not, for the 

appointments of people who are there. Was Dr. Andrew Nicol 

not, as a matter of fact, someone who had a larger amount of 

seniority and expertise in the advanced education system in 

Saskatchewan than any of the four of these people: Gervais, 

Black, Dinter, or Lynch, who are located in the four campuses 

across Saskatchewan? Can you give me an answer to that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, if 

there is some confusion, it probably is only in one mind, and 

it’s not in my mind. 

 

On the one hand, you criticize us for not having all the 

negotiations done, and the i’s dotted and the t’s crossed. On the 

other hand, you criticize me for knowing full well, as you quite 

rightly point out, that this place has to be up and running for the 

fall. You criticize us for putting in some people and making 

some acting appointments. You can’t have it both ways, hon. 

member. 

 

You’re darn right we’ve got this thing under way. And you’re 

right, we do have people in place to get the job done for this 

fall. And we have Bob Gervais in Prince Albert, and we have 

Bill Black in an acting capacity in Regina, and we have Larry 

Dinter in an acting capacity in Saskatoon, and we have Nancy 

Lynch in an acting capacity in Moose Jaw. And they will have 

the institute and these new campuses operational for this fall. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — You’re very welcome, Mr. Minister. But I don’t 

assume any responsibility for your actions. I hope that we can 

continue this with . . . as a straightforward discussion in the 

interests of the education system, the post-high school . . . the 

secondary education system here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I simply am amazed that when you are the one 

who is laying out this blueprint - this well-defined blueprint for 

the future of education in Saskatchewan - and things don’t pan 

out as you had intended, and you are the one to place people in 

those positions, that you don’t follow your own plan. How do 

you expect the people of Saskatchewan to have confidence in 

you and in the Department of Education when you don’t even 

seem to be following your own plan? That is plain and simply 

the point I am trying to make, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That is what separates the NDP party 

from the PC Party in this province. Where you, typically, like 

to be the central planner, presume that every bright idea 

originates under the dome in this legislature, we on this side of 

the House do not. And rather than sort of take some blueprint 

and ram in down the people’s throats and say: this is the way it 

shall be because it came from underneath the dome of the 

legislature, we don’t operate that way. 

 

We went out (a) and consulted with the people to see what 

should be done, and (b) and more importantly, it’s  

that kind of consultation, and that kind of co-operative effort 

that’s taking place this very day to amalgamate the institutes 

and the colleges into the new institute structure. And that’s the 

way it will continue. 

 

And if there’s decisions that have to be made on an interim 

basis or an acting basis along the way, we shall make them. But 

this institute will be there for the betterment of adult education 

in this province the next decade or two, and in the process we 

are very cognizant of the fine staff we’ve had on both sides. 

And we want to make the best utilization possible of all of 

those people. Those are our goals. We remain undeterred in our 

goals, and we shall continue. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Clearly, Mr. Minister, I do not accuse you of 

having every bright idea in education in Saskatchewan because, 

clearly, you do not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Let me come back to my question again, Mr. 

Minister. First of all, can you just simply confirm for me the 

amount of time that Dr. Andrew Nicol served as principal of 

the Saskatchewan Technical Institute, and what is the number 

of years that he has served the Department of Advanced 

Education? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As it relates to Andy Nicol, the 

person, as opposed to the position, and the process that we’ve 

been talking about earlier, I have no difficulty in answering for 

you as many questions as I can, although I am advised that Mr. 

Nicol has engaged a lawyer and I have to be cognizant of that 

insofar as what my officials provide to me and what I would 

provide to you. And I would want you to have that 

understanding up front. 

 

I’m of the view, as I think I said on Thursday last when we 

were in this estimates, that a public debate of Mr. Nicol’s 

credentials I don’t think serves anyone well. But to relate your 

specific . . . the answer to your specific question is this: six 

years, I believe. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, to give credit to this conversation 

and to this Assembly, and given that we are talking about 

educational institutes, and given that we are talking about the 

Department of Education, would it be possible, that instead of 

referring to Dr. Nicol as Andy Nicol or Mr. Nicol, that we 

could refer to him by his academic credentials, and that is, I 

believe, Dr. Andrew Nicol. And could we use that terminology 

in this House, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, as you’ve described it here this 

afternoon, we have four people serving to head up the four 

campuses that are intended to come under the Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Arts and Science. You’ve advised me that 

they have all come from, what you call, the technical institute 

side. You’ve advised me that Dr. Nicol has worked as principal 

of one of those institutes, the STI in Moose Jaw for, you say, 

six years. 

 

(1530) 

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1405 

 

Mr. Minister, it seems to me, and please correct me - please 

correct me if I am wrong in what appears obvious, in my 

assumption about what appears obvious, it appears to me that in 

Regina there is a person acting in the principal capacity who 

has not served in that capacity before. Please correct me if I’m 

wrong. It appears to me that in Saskatoon we have a person 

acting as principal who was previously an assistant 

principal - had never served as principal before. It appears to 

me that in Moose Jaw we have a person acting as principal who 

had never served as principal before as well, and who, if I’m 

not mistaken, has acted in that capacity for something less than 

a year. 

 

Do I have a correct assessment of the administrative 

experiences of those people that you have heading up those 

institutes on those four campuses, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Your observations may well be right, 

but they’re irrelevant because of fact that you continue to 

ignore is that they are there, the principals, in an acting 

position, at Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw are just 

that - acting. 

 

And I’ll be very surprised if you don’t see a competition, 

Saskatchewan-wide or nation-wide, to fill those positions 

within the next few weeks on a permanent basis. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, was Dr. Nicol available to the 

department to serve in an acting capacity in any of those 

campuses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — These positions I refer to . . . I suspect 

that the many people across this province, or perhaps across 

this country, who feel they have the qualifications, can apply, 

when we put these to competition. And I wouldn’t want to bias 

the competition by saying one person over another has more or 

better qualifications. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, could we deal with 

straightforward answers to straightforward questions, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — I have heard you say a number of times that 

these positions, the new positions, the permanent positions for 

the principals of the four campuses of the Saskatchewan 

institute of applied art and science will be put up for 

competition. That was not my question. My question to you, 

Mr. Minister, was this: you have told us, in light of the fact that 

it didn’t pan out as you had intended, to get the proper balance 

between community college and technical institutes providing 

the administration of the four campuses, you ended up having 

institute people who have come from the institute side in all 

four locations. In light of the fact that I believe you are 

responsible for the appointments of those four people, my 

question to you was simply this, and will you listen carefully, 

Mr. Minister; my question to you was simply this: was Dr. 

Nicol available to serve in any of those four campuses as the 

interim principal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think, hon. member, that we can 

agree to disagree on whether it’s in anyone’s best interest to 

debate qualifications in this House. What I will say to you 

again, for the fourth or fifth time, is that the two positions that 

we yielded from our side, if you like, the department’s side, on 

technical institute’s side, were the ones I referred to earlier, 

Moose Jaw being one of them. That in three of the four for 

various reasons, probably the most important of which is, the 

job must get done, albeit while we’re in the state of transition. 

We have people there to get the job done, but three of the four 

positions are filled in an acting basis, and they will be going to 

competition. And I suspect there will be many people that will 

want to apply for those positions. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you have four people acting as 

principal in the campuses of Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Moose 

Jaw and Regina. Was Dr. Nicol available to the Department of 

Education to fill any of those four positions? Will you answer 

that question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can only repeat what I said insofar 

as the process. There were two positions abolished. We have 

three in an acting position. It goes to competition and I’m not 

going to bias . . . I mean if I make some statement in here, I 

have no doubt that three, or four, or five months down the road 

you will come back to debate somebody else’s qualifications as 

to why they got the job as opposed to this person X or person Y 

getting the job. I don’t think that’s right nor responsible for 

myself as a minister of the Crown, and hence I will not engage 

in a debate over credentials - (a) that is not my job; and (b) it 

would not be responsible nor the right thing to do. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I am not talking about the 

positions that you intend to fill after advertising. I am talking 

about the positions that exist today and that I assume you’re 

responsible for filling. My question to you very simply is this. 

It will not be surprising. It’s the same question that I am asking 

for the fourth consecutive time: was Dr. Nicol available to you 

to choose from as acting principal in any of the four campuses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — You’re asking for a debate about who 

was qualified versus who was not. I have given you the logic 

for what we have done to date: (a) it revolves around balance; 

(b) it revolves around position abolishment; (c) it revolves 

around retirements; (d) it revolves around early retirements; (e) 

it revolves around positions being filled on an interim basis, at 

a minimum, by acting people. And finally and most 

importantly, it revolves around the fact that we wanted to use 

this time period of spring through to September 1 to make sure 

that we had this new institute up and running for the adults, the 

young adults of this province, to get the finest education 

possible in this brand-new institute, which because of its 

structure, because it now will have some of its own autonomy, 

it will be able to be more responsive, and it’ll be a world-class 

institute with a budget close to $60 million, attracting a 

world-wide calibre of people for that kind of an institute. I’m 

very excited about it, and I wish the hon. member was as well. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well believe me, Mr. Minister, that the people 

of Saskatchewan and anybody paying attention to this question 

period today is less than excited about the  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1406 

 

future and the kinds of plans that you are destined to give to the 

direction of education in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — My question to you now, Mr. Minister, is: how 

did these four people - Gervais, Black, Dinter and Lynch - fill 

those positions? Was there an open competition for those 

positions, or were they in some way appointed, and if so, by 

whom? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — They were appointed by the deputy 

minister on an acting basis while the terms and conditions of 

the competitions were being drawn up, and I’m led to believe 

that that’s a normal kind of process for the public service in 

terms of its hiring practices. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Did you concur with those appointments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, I was aware of them and I 

concurred in them. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Was Dr. Nicol available to the deputy minister 

of Education to be appointed to one of the four campuses in 

Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Regina, or Moose Jaw as acting 

principal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The rationale for who we put where I 

have gone through. I don’t know as that any useful purposes 

served in going through it again; however, if you wish, I can. 

 

It revolves around the several points I talked about earlier. And 

the primary one, if we start out from an administrative basis, 

was the point I talked about in terms of balance and fairness. 

Initially . . . not initially, but that was a main basis for our logic 

track, if you like, and I think one that made sense and certainly 

one that made sense to community college institutes involved. 

 

And we stated, up front, that certainly there’s going to be 

negotiations here. There may even be some people who would 

like to have got this versus that. But if we establish the rules up 

front that we would try and have this balance in terms of 

positions, we would yield too, and could they. That seemed to 

make eminent good sense to them, and the rules were 

established up front, if you like, and that’s the way we’ve tried 

to operate through the entire course of the amalgamation, and 

we’ll continue to try and operate through the course of the 

amalgamation. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I do not like to take the time of 

this Assembly to repeatedly ask the same question, particularly 

when it’s not a difficult question. 

 

You have advised this Assembly that all did not unfold 

according to plan in putting into place the acting principals of 

the four campuses. You have now advised this Assembly that 

ultimately the deputy minister, with your concurrence, 

appointed four people to act as interim principals. 

 

It has all the signs and characteristics, Mr. Minister, of a 

scenario which involves a little bit of scrambling. It did not 

seem to unfold just as you had intended, and hoped that it 

would, in the interest of education in  

Saskatchewan. 

 

It seems to me that you had an experienced principal at the 

Saskatchewan Technical Institute in Moose Jaw, as you have 

said, with more than six years of experience acting in that 

capacity, available to you. I simply am asking for confirmation. 

 

Was Dr. Nicol available to the deputy minister and to you, Mr. 

Minister, to fill any of those positions of acting principal at any 

of the four campuses in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the points I will make again is 

the plan . . . that the point which we are in it today is, as I’ve 

said before, has a number of interim acting appointments. I am 

not going to debate credentials because one of the reasons that I 

will not engage in so is that the new positions, if you like, or 

the positions that are being filled on an acting basis, are the 

positions as a result of the institute and community college 

amalgamation. So it’s . . . the position is somewhat broader 

than just simply principalship of the institute or principalship of 

the college. That’s part and parcel of the amalgamation process 

and the formation of this new institute. And I don’t know what 

more I can say for the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, let me give you a suggestion, Mr. 

Minister. You can simply say yes or no. If Dr. Nicol was ready, 

willing, and able to serve this amalgamation process by acting 

as principal at any one of the four campuses, he was available. 

If he resigned his position or refused to work for the 

Department of Education, then he was not available. 

 

In the first case, you say yes; in the second case, you say no, 

Mr. Minister. It’s that simple. Let me ask you again: was Dr. 

Nicol available to serve as acting principal at any one of the 

four campuses in any of those positions appointed by the 

deputy minister and concurred with by yourself? Yes or no? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative to the . . . What happened to 

the principal’s position, the position of principal, at STI, I 

previously suggested to you that that was one of the positions 

that was abolished. 

 

I know that the hon. member would like to have me pass 

judgement on another professional’s credentials. And just think 

about what my judgement might do, in terms of it being on the 

record of the Saskatchewan legislature for all to see, for all 

future and prospective employers to see. What might that mean 

to a professional man’s career? 

 

I will not be lured into that debate because I have a bit more 

respect for professionalism and for the system than that. I don’t 

believe this is the place for it. I will state again that all what we 

have done has been undertaken in good faith; it’s been sincere 

and genuine. I stand by that. And I don’t know if there’s 

anything more I can add. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — You could add a simple yes or no. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Does the hon. member really want 

that? As I said earlier, does the hon. member really  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1407 

 

want us to debate in this Assembly professional qualifications 

of a professional? I mean, one could argue that I am not fit to 

make that judgement, and hence I’m not fit to answer yes or no. 

 

But more importantly, is it fair to that individual? Is it fair to 

that individual in terms of what it could do to his future career? 

I believe not so. And as much as you’ve reduced what some 

might argue is a complex issue down to a simply 

duality - which is a characteristic of oppositions, a simple 

either/or, yes/no, right/wrong - I will not be lured into that 

simple duality. And that’s final. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I am not asking you to tell this 

Assembly whether Dr. Nicol has the qualifications for the 

position yet to be advertised. You gave some indication of that 

when you answered a question on July 23. However, that is not 

the item under discussion at this moment. 

 

The item under discussion at this moment has to do with the 

fact that you are the person in the province of Saskatchewan 

responsible for the future of education according to this 

blueprint that you keep talking about. You are the one who has 

to be held accountable for the carrying out of that plan in the 

best interest, I would hope, of Saskatchewan’s young people, 

particularly, who are hoping through the education system to 

establish some confidence in their futures. Right now you are 

not doing a great deal to establish confidence in your conduct 

or the conduct of your department, quite frankly. 

 

I am simply asking you to tell this Assembly whether Dr. Nicol 

was available to you to choose from in an acting capacity at a 

time in which you were obviously scrambling. You’re telling 

this Assembly the plan for the chief administrative officers in 

the four campuses did not unfold as you had hoped, according 

to your blue plan. You have - you had in the employ of the 

Department of Education the principal of the Saskatchewan 

Technical Institute. Was he available? Was he ready, willing 

and able to act as principal in any of the four campuses? That’s 

the simple question, Mr. Minister. Will you answer that 

question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t think I need repeat what I said 

before. You additionally add at the early part of your question 

there, about positions that are going to be advertised. Yes, there 

will be positions advertised. I’m not going to bias that 

competition, certainly. That, too, would be irresponsible, and 

it’s not the way it’s done, as you will full well know. 

 

But I . . . Those terms, in terms of the qualifications of 

candidates that are needed for these new positions, will be laid 

out in the competition, and I would encourage all citizens of 

this province who can meet those conditions certainly to apply. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you’re not inspiring a great deal 

of confidence within the hearts of people who may be interested 

in filling those kinds of positions. Let me ask again. I ask you 

the simple question: to the best of your knowledge, was Dr. 

Nicol available to serve as an acting principal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Two comments that I would  

make in terms of the blueprint. You suggested that in your 

mind, at least, somehow it’s gone off the rails and is not going 

as we’d expected and hoped for. That is not true. For the most 

part it’s even gone smoother than I might have expected, given 

the magnitude of the changes we are making. So I want the 

record to be clear on that. 

 

Secondly, I would consider it absolutely unusual, irresponsible, 

unparliamentary, undemocratic, and I could go on and on with 

the adjectives, if we were to start filling positions, public 

service position competitions on the floor of this legislature. 

That isn’t the way it’s been done. It’s totally inconsistent with 

the principles and the practice of the Public Service 

Commission. 

 

I think that to do so would make an extremely strong case for 

the hon. member to ask for my resignation, and I have no 

intention to give him a case for that. I have stated, time and 

time again, the basis for what we have done; there are going to 

be competitions. I mean, I suppose if there weren’t 

competitions, you’d be saying, oh yeah, you just put your 

friends in there. 

 

The hon. member, you cannot have it both ways. And it seems 

to me that there is nothing more democratic and more fair than 

an open competition. And that’s the route we’ll be going on 

these positions. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you told me a few minutes ago 

there was no competition, that those positions were filled by 

appointment of the deputy minister with your concurrence. 

 

Let me ask you another question, Mr. Minister. My question is 

this: is it the intention of your department to re-employ Dr. 

Nicol in some other capacity? You’ve advised the Assembly 

that the position was abolished. Is it the intention of your 

department to re-employ Dr. Nicol? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First of all, I would want to correct 

the statement that you made about what we appointed. And you 

conveniently ignore an important fact. I don’t think you do it 

deliberately, but I think you conveniently have a case of 

selective amnesia. 

 

Yes, you’re quite right. The deputy, with my collaboration and 

approval, appointed those three positions. But in what capacity 

are they? In what capacity were those three appointments 

made? Were they permanent? And the answer is no. Were they 

acting? The answer is yes, yes, yes - every one of them. 

 

In my mind that makes a substantial difference to what we’re 

talking about here, because you can have acting positions, 

which is why you have acting positions and interim until you 

can go to competition, and be assured that the people of this 

province get the best candidate. 

 

And I don’t know what more I can say about the process, quite 

frankly. Insofar as what - the gentleman you referred to - what 

opportunities may be available, as I said before, I think the 

person has engaged a lawyer. But even having said that, and 

waiting to be fair to all - the public and to the 

individual - certainly the person to whom you refer is eligible to 

apply for any and various positions that he may feel qualified 

for, just as any other  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1408 

 

citizen might. 

 

And secondly, because that position was abolished - and I’m 

working a bit from memory here because this falls under the 

domain of the Public Service Commission . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s your area too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Which is as well my area, as you 

point out, but I perhaps could be more well-briefed on the 

specifics. The hon. member, the person to whom you refer, had 

the right to go on a re-employment list. And I perhaps ought not 

to comment further on that, given the nature of some of the 

discussions, the legal nature of them, that may be ongoing at 

this point in time. 

 

But I know, certainly, that was the case with the 150 or so 

position abolishments that we had, at least that was one of the 

options that we had, as I recall, in the down-sizing exercise that 

our government was engaged in. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — In all of that, Mr. Minister, am I to interpret 

correctly then that it is not the intention of your department to 

re-employ Dr. Nicol? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, that is clearly not what I said. 

And I will clearly say again: the person to whom you refer has 

the opportunity, as has every other citizen who feels he has the 

qualifications, to apply for any positions within the department, 

and for that matter within the government, perhaps, as it relates 

to his rights that may be his if he so desires. 

 

And I’m not clear on the finer points of law on this one, on the 

right of re-employment, so I want to be clear: he has the 

opportunity for the department and, you ought to be clear on 

this, an opportunity within the department to apply as any other 

person. As well, and this one’s perhaps in more the grey area, 

given I’m not sure of the legal nature of things, but certainly the 

re-employment list was an option for those in the down-sizing 

exercise. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, on May 12, when Dr. Nicol was 

advised of the abolition of his position, you advised this House 

in Hansard, on July 23, that Elizabeth Crosthwaite was the 

person who advised Dr. Nicol of the abolition of his position. Is 

she here today, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — So there should be no difficulty in 

understanding then the process of how that communication was 

conducted. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I am the minister responsible for the 

department. Certainly I have officials here, many officials, not 

the least of which is Liz Crosthwaite, to advise me. Any 

questions that you put, the responsibility for the answer will be 

mine. I’m happy to do it. But I mention again, as I did some 

several . . . half an hour or an hour ago, because I want to be up 

front with it, I told you about the fact that there has been a 

lawyer engaged here, and I do have some responsibilities to the 

government and to the people of this province relative to that 

fact. 

But I’ll give you all the answers, in terms of whatever questions 

you might wish to pose here, however relevant it may or may 

not be that Liz Crosthwaite is here - yes, she’s in the 

legislature. But the questions will be directed to me and me 

alone. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Very clearly, Mr. Minister, you’re the one 

who’s responsible. I simply wanted to make sure that the access 

to the information to the questions that I would ask is available 

to you, because you are responsible. And ultimately this 

Legislative Assembly holds you responsible, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you describe for this Assembly the process 

that was sued to communicate to Dr. Nicol that his position was 

being abolished? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The process was the same as it was 

for the others who had their positions abolished, the detail of 

which is, perhaps, more appropriately examined in Public 

Service Commission estimates. But the process was the same 

for the person to whom you refer as it was for the others. There 

was nothing different about it. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And would you describe to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, what that process was that was the 

same as it was for everyone else? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can more properly answer your 

questions in the estimates for the Public Service Commission, 

because the officials who were involved in the position 

abolishment, the entire down-sizing exercise, would be 

available to me then. And certainly an integral part of that was 

the consultants that we had the two firms. The one in this case 

that would be operational, I suspect, was Stevenson, Kellogg, 

Ernst and Whinney. 

 

And I’m not trying to put you off of finding the answers. As I 

said earlier, it’s probably more appropriate in Public Service 

because, although the immediate supervisor, which I referred to 

in this House on Thursday last, was Liz Crosthwaite, who did 

inform the person as such, that was only one small part of a 

process that we put in place to deal with this in a humane, 

reasonable, and responsible fashion. 

 

Those officials are not here to provide me with the information, 

the step by step procedure, if you like. And I would prefer to 

deal with that in Public Service Commission estimates. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, when Ms. Crosthwaite carried out 

this action with the principal of the Saskatchewan Technical 

Institute, was she acting on her own accord, or was she acting 

according to direction of someone else? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — She was acting in accordance with the 

process that was put together by a number of parties, not the 

least of which was, obviously the Department of Justice, as 

well as the Public Service Commission. And throughout that 

exercise, I suspect we involved a number of people insofar as 

how to do it in the  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1409 

 

best fashion, considering it’s a difficult task no matter when 

one engages in these sorts of processes. And we wanted to do 

right by our employees as . . . despite the fact that it was a 

difficult situation, as best we could. 

 

And there are some firms who have a very successful track 

record in this regard. And we drew on their expertise and they 

. . . A program was designed to deal with those at the 

management level, as there were for other levels. As I said 

earlier, I don’t have those officials here, and I would prefer to 

deal with the detail at a later time. 

 

Mr. Hagel; I can understand, Mr. Minister, why you might 

prefer to deal with it at a later time. But it’s before this 

Assembly now. 

 

Mr. Minister, I assume that when Ms. Crosthwaite advised Dr. 

Nicol that his position was abolished, that she was not . . . that 

was not a decision she had made on her own, that it was 

approved by someone superior to her. If so, whom? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, as I mentioned earlier, we made 

the decision that there . . . we would yield up two positions. STI 

was one of them. The Saskatoon Kelsey was the other one. 

We’ve been through . . . we’ve covered that ground in some fair 

detail prior to this. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, do you assume ultimate 

responsibility for this decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In terms of the . . .: In terms of the . . . 

Yes. I mean, I have (a) no difficulty defending the 

government’s exercise to reduce the size of the public service 

by 2,000. That doesn’t mean to say that it’s easy. But the fact of 

the matter is, quite simply, we had more government than we 

could afford. And as it relates to the specific business of 

eliminating two positions, because of the fairness and the 

balance that we want to have, yes, I was in total concurrence 

with that. 

 

I want to remind the hon. member, however, that if you’re of 

the view somehow that I sat there with some list of computer 

print-out, poring over it in terms of yes, no, maybe, okay - that 

is not the case. And any suggestion that such is the case would 

be an unfair one on your part and, as well, it would be wrong. 

And if you’re trying to suggest that somehow we enjoy making 

change and displacing people for enjoyment’s sake, we do not. 

 

But there is a larger responsibility here. The first is to the public 

of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers. And secondly, it’s to have an 

adult education system that’s consistent with the decades that 

are ahead of us. And that doesn’t mean that somehow what 

we’ve done in the past has failed us, as I’ve said before, 

because it does not. What it means is, I mean, we wouldn’t 

even be going through this debate here if we had not made the 

decision, a decision that you and your party agree with, and that 

is to give the technical institutes the autonomy that they should 

have; the flexibility that they should have; the right to eliminate 

course duplication that they should have; the right to make sure 

we’ve got the courses that are in tune with the needs of the 

business out there; the courses that are in tune with the need of 

the Northerners - to deliver more programming to more people 

in more places in Saskatchewan. 

I mean, surely you can’t have changed your tune. You must 

agree with the fact we needed a different form of governance. 

Even the New Democratic youth wing at your own convention 

this past summer had a resolution before your party, before 

your council, saying that we should have one institute. 

 

I would suggest that your youth are ahead of you insofar as 

sensing the needs of the future. And that makes some sense 

because these young people today are very, very shrewd. They 

have a very good understanding of the world around them. 

They don’t buy inflamed rhetoric on the other side. And what 

we’re doing is part and parcel of that. 

 

And the process for this person was no different in terms of the 

program that was put in place than it was for any other 

individual in that kind of capacity. And I want to assure you of 

that. And besides, you sitting in this legislature, I mean, I don’t 

see any sort of hard-hearted people around me who would not 

do the process in a right and proper fashion, given how difficult 

the job was. And I don’t think you should criticize them 

because, in fact, the program was done right and proper and in a 

humane and sensitive way. That doesn’t make it easy. It’s never 

easy to make change. But there has to be changes made on 

occasion in a system, and we’re prepared to tackle that. This is 

part of it. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you’ve told me that you assume 

responsibility for the abolition of the position. Do you assume 

responsibility for the process used to communicate that to Dr. 

Nicol? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And you’ve also advised this Assembly that it 

was a process that was similar to that employed to advise other 

employees in other parts of the government as well as within 

Department of Education, and you know this because you 

coincidentally are also minister responsible for the Public 

Service Commission, although I clearly understand that’s not 

the estimates that are under review here today. 

 

Will you advise then, Mr. Minister, in the process of this 

communication to Dr. Nicol, was he asked to turn in his keys to 

the building that day? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The process that was followed, as I 

mentioned earlier, whether it be for the person you referred to 

or others in that level in government, was the same for all, at 

least as close as possible. 

 

For the reasons I outlined earlier, and for the details of that 

process, I will defer any other answers that I could give you 

until we deal with Public Service Commission estimates, 

because I do not have those officials with me here today, and 

we are not examining Public Service Commission estimates. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, to the best of your information, 

was Dr. Nicol denied access on his own to the Saskatchewan 

Technical Institute on or after May 12? 

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1410 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The process was the same there as it 

was for others. I do not have those officials here. I would be 

happy to go through the process in detail with my Public 

Service Commission officials because I don’t know absolutely 

every step that they would go through. All I know is that they 

engaged the best advice they could find insofar as how one 

undertakes this difficult task. A difficult task certainly, but one 

not without its rewards at the end of the process in terms of a 

better and a more efficient government - $226 million saving, 

something in that order for the people of Saskatchewan, and we 

stand by that. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, did someone on May 12 supervise 

Dr. Nicol in the packing of his personal belongings to be 

removed from his office that day? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll defer those kinds of questions to 

Public Service Commission estimates, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Was there no one from the Department of 

Education present when Dr. Nicol was asked to turn in his key 

and when Dr. Nicol was advised that he was to pack his 

belongings from his office and remove them from there that 

day? Was there no one from the Department of Education 

present when that took place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I mentioned before, the process 

was one that we established for government globally, and I’ll 

be happy to answer those questions in Public Service 

Commission estimates. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, are you saying that you will 

describe that in detail when we get to Public Service estimates 

but that you refuse to comment on that part of the 

communication to Dr. Nicol on May 12? That you’re refusing 

to offer any other comment about that here today? Is that what 

you’re saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m saying I stand by the process. I’m 

saying that it’s never easy when you’re down-sizing 

government by 2,000. I stand by that decision. It was the right 

decision. And I stand by the fact that however difficult it may 

be, the process for the most part accomplished its goals of 

reducing the size of government by 2,000 in a humane, 

reasonable, sensitive, fair, understanding, and compassionate 

way. 

 

And the reason we want to be very clear on that course of 

action, Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, is for this reason: too 

often governments are criticized by their employees as being 

too impersonal. And I think the same criticism occasionally 

arises in corporations, larger corporations in particular, where 

you have several thousand employees. 

 

We do not view our employees as impersonal or inanimate 

objects. We do not view them as merely people with employee 

position numbers. But to us they are very real people with car 

payments, many of them, and house payments, and families, 

young families, not unlike those of us in this legislature. And 

that is why we undertook this decision with a great deal of 

thought, forethought, so that it would be done in their best 

interest, albeit that it’s a difficult task. And I stand by that. I 

stand by  

that. 

 

And that’s why we engaged the best firms we could to help us 

with that process. And that’s why there was in fact a fixed 

process - to be done and to be handled with dignity and 

compassion. And as it relates to the person that you mentioned 

particularly, I would suspect very much so that . . . (inaudible) 

. . . we’ve handled that unpleasant task with dignity and 

compassion and understanding and sincerity and genuineness. I 

have absolutely no reason to believe otherwise. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, are you saying that in the 

dismissal of Dr. Andrew Nicol, or the abolition of the position 

as you like to describe it, that the process that was used, to the 

best of your knowledge and in your opinion, I gather you to 

have said, as both the Minister of Education and as Minister of 

the Public Service Commission, that you fully endorse the 

process that was used by the consultants to dismiss professional 

public servants, including Dr. Andrew Nicol from the 

Saskatchewan Technical Institute? 

 

Is that what you’re telling this House, that it was carried out in 

a manner that was consistent with your objectives and in a 

manner about which you personally approve and endorse and 

consider to be most appropriate? Is that what you’re telling this 

Assembly, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, there will be many more 

interesting discussions on this topic. You can rest assured of 

that. And I’m sad to say that it is not the opinion of literally 

dozens, if not hundreds, of public servants in the province of 

Saskatchewan who lost their jobs without notice, and who were 

dealt with by the consultant firm employed by your government 

and given the infamous red box treatment. That is not a method 

that has been endorsed and considered to be humane and 

sensitive, as you’ve described it, by the civil servants in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and it’s not acceptable to the people 

of this province, as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well this is a point that we could 

debate at some length, and perhaps more appropriately in 

Public Service Commission estimates we can. 

 

And I can understand why the NDP, Mr. Chairman, would be 

upset with the Progressive Conservative government of our 

Premier. You would be upset that we would embark on a 

down-sizing exercise in the first place. And I can understand 

that because the NDP philosophy is clearly one of big 

government is good government; more government is good 

government; the more government, the better. Your philosophy 

is one of - and has always been one of - if it can be 

nationalized, let’s nationalize it. If we can turn it into a Crown 

corporations, let’s turn it into a Crown corporation. That is not 

our view. 

 

(1615) 

 

But it is our view that if we have to down-size, we will do  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1411 

 

it in a reasonable fashion. And that’s why we undertook the 

goal of a 2,000-position down-sizing. We undertook to do that 

as much as possible by voluntary means. Now what can be 

more reasonable and compassionate and genuine and humane 

and sensitive, than instead of us going around and passing out 

2,000 pink slips, we put in place a process that would allow 

individuals to choose themselves whether they would like to 

take early retirement. 

 

And when we embarked on that process, we were of the view 

that something in the order of 70 per cent of those eligible 

might undertake that. We exceeded that by something in the 

order - now I don’t have the specific numbers, but we can do it 

in Public Service - by something more than 10 per cent - even 

more than we expected. They recognized that it was a good 

program and a reasonable program, and they undertook that. 

 

At the end of the day, in meeting our goal of 2,000, two-thirds 

of those positions were eliminated, or two-thirds of that goal 

was reached by voluntary means, not, as you suggest, by 

handing out hundreds of thousands of pink slips, because that is 

not the way we operate. And we did not do it that way. We 

used early retirement. We used position abolishments. And we 

are controlling the hiring so that we don’t see government get 

out of control in terms of its size. 

 

Now I know that doesn’t sit well with you and your party. I 

know that doesn’t sit well. You’re interested in big government 

only. You’re interested in more government, because your view 

is that more government is better. Such is not the case. We 

don’t need a proliferation of Crown corporations to run the 

economy. And I know, and I see the hon. member there sitting 

beside you, that you would like to have hands-on control. The 

central planners of the NDP would like to control everything. 

Nationalizing banks - I mean it goes on and on and on. Run the 

oil companies. It never stops. 

 

And then when we try to turn the management of something 

back to the people - like technical institutes - when we try to 

give the authority back to the people, to give them the 

autonomy that they wanted, to give them governance, where is 

the NDP? Five months ago, six months ago, they were running 

around with surveys saying: we’ve got to change the institute 

governance structure. We’ve got to change it. 

 

And the hon. member from Saskatoon Riversdale, whistling 

away here as if there is no substance to what I say, and he 

knows that he is whistling in the dark. He knows that he’s out 

of touch with what’s going on in this province and where we 

ought to head with our education system. He knows that deep 

in his heart the technical institute in Saskatoon know that what 

we’re doing is right. They know that we should put in place a 

board of governors, not unlike the universities have had, and 

not unlike the community colleges have had. And the hon. 

member has made great to-do about this survey of the institute 

people and the students. They were so concerned that would the 

government make the right decision or would the government 

even entertain governance. 

Well I ask the members of this legislature: did the hon. 

members ever - the education, the advanced education critic, 

the member from Moose Jaw who had his name on the bottom 

of the survey along with the member, the education critic - did 

they once bring one scrap of paper forward to this government 

or this minister saying, we know you’re embarking on a new 

form of governance . . . we’re looking at some restructuring. 

Did you once come forward with some recommendations? Did 

you once bring forward the results of your survey? And I asked 

hon. members: why didn’t they bring the results of the survey 

forward? Why didn’t they bring the results forward of a survey 

that talked about a new form of governance? 

 

Well I’ll tell you why, because the people they surveyed told 

that the government was on the right track. And they were 

ashamed to bring this forward, Mr. Speaker, because it would 

just make our case that much stronger. And that’s why we 

haven’t seen one shred of paper from the NDP critics, MLA’s, 

or sitting MLA’s who live in those institute’s cities, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

There hasn’t been one shred of input, advice, or guidance, even 

if the survey showed something else which is equally as big a 

cry. If that survey said that, Mr. Minister, you are clearly going 

in the wrong direction, then it was incumbent on them to bring 

forth the right position in their minds, Mr. Chairman. And not 

one shred of paper did my office every receive - not one shred. 

 

And In fact when I read the press release and the press reports 

about the day the education critic and the advanced education 

critic then, when they held the press conference to announce 

this survey, I quite frankly agreed with everything they said in 

terms of why we ought to relook and rethink the institute 

structure, because there is duplication, and being an arm of the 

Department of Education doesn’t make sense. 

 

I think the hon. member, the education critic, talked about 

political interference, and this is exactly the line of questioning 

that I’ve been subjected to this afternoon. This is exactly why 

we ought to not have the institutes as an arm of the Department 

of Education so there could be absolutely no question, no 

question in so far as the autonomy of institutions of higher 

learning. 

 

But somehow this selective amnesia, somehow what they stood 

for four or five months ago, Mr. Chairman, somehow all of a 

sudden that is not important, or perhaps is important - they 

know we’re on the right track and they’re ashamed to back up 

by case by coming forth with their survey results, Mr. 

Chairman, ashamed because they know we’re on the right 

track. They know there was changes that needed to be made, 

and we are going to do them, as unpopular as some points of 

that change may be, Mr. Chairman, as unpopular as it may be, 

because change is always difficult. 

 

But, by golly, we are determined and are resolved to provide 

the best adult education, not only in this province but in this 

country and in North America, Mr. Chairman. And we stand by 

that goal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1412 

 

Mr. Hagel: — The minister goes on a wild and rambling 

oratorical excursion, back-pedalling faster and faster in vicious 

circles until, Mr. Minister, you will come face to face with 

yourself, and you will be as frightened as everybody in this 

province is of these plans for education that you purport to put 

forth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — The minister goes on a wild and rambling 

oratorical excursion because he doesn’t have the guts to come 

back to the issue before us in this Legislative Assembly. And 

that issue, plainly and simply, Mr. Minister, is this: you don’t 

have the guts to talk in this public Assembly about the conduct 

that the Government of Saskatchewan and the Department of 

Education has carried out with the infamous “red box” 

treatment of the civil servants of this province - people who 

have dedicated their careers to serving the people of 

Saskatchewan, who have been disciplined, in essence, in the 

process of being let go. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, you go on this wild and rambling oratorical 

excursion because you’re afraid to talk about the things that are 

concerning the people of Saskatchewan, and that is the conduct 

of you and your government and the insensitive treatment, not 

only of the people who formerly worked for this government, 

but the people of Saskatchewan. And you will pay the price, 

Mr. Minister, you will pay the price. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you obviously refuse to talk about 

this topic and it will come back to this legislature, and we’ll let 

it go at this point today. And I understand, and the people of 

Saskatchewan understand, why you don’t want to talk about the 

red box treatment that you gave professional civil servants in 

this province. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, you have said to this Assembly that there is a 

person sitting in here, one of your officials, who was involved 

in the process of communicating to Dr. Andrew Nicol. So let’s 

go back to that. Will you tell this Assembly, as best you are 

able, in the context of having been carried out by an official of 

your department, how was Dr. Nicol advised that his position 

was abolished? Will you explain to us the procedure, and as 

you refer to it, in detail? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The . . . as in other cases, the 

immediate supervisor advised this particular individual, and 

any others that were slated for lay-offs that day, of the position 

abolishment. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, did, as a matter of fact, Elizabeth 

Crosthwaite, acting with, as you have said here in this 

Assembly, your approval, hand a letter to Dr. Nicol advising 

him that his position was abolished? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I’ve said before, in terms of the 

details, the step by step process, I would defer those questions 

and answers to the Public Service Commission because, as the 

hon. member knows, this was rather a broad-based exercise 

where we relied on the expertise and advice of a couple of firms 

who have some particular  

expertise in the area because they’ve dealt with these kinds of 

situations before. We wanted to do best and to do right by our 

employees. 

 

And I know that’s a little difficult for some members opposite 

to understand, but that was our goal. And given that this is a 

difficult and tough exercise . . . It’s never easy; I want to 

underline that. But the reality is, given that it was a difficult 

exercise, it went as best as it probably can ever go, given the 

difficult circumstances that we find ourselves in. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you have neither confirmed nor 

denied that Dr. Nicol was given the famous, or the infamous, 

red box treatment in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Minister, for the interests of the people of Saskatchewan, let me 

just briefly describe this infamous red box treatment, because 

heaven only knows it’s been reported to too many elected 

members of this Assembly too many times. 

 

The process of this infamous red box treatment, Mr. Minister, 

was for people - sometimes with some from the department; 

sometimes not, I understand - to be advised, in the company of 

the consulting firm, of the Kellogg firm . . . You will know the 

exact name. I believe it’s the Stevenson Kellogg Ernst & 

Whinney firm, who are professional, professional 

terminators - that will be a term that will have a great deal of 

meaning to the Minister of Social Services - professional 

terminators who would walk into the office of a professional 

civil servant, in many cases someone who had dedicated more 

than 20 years to the carrying out of programs for the people of 

Saskatchewan under several different administrations, where 

these professional terminators would walk into the office of a 

professional civil servant and advise that person that effective 

immediately their job was finished. 

 

And at that minute would begin a process of terminating the 

person from their position. And what would it involve? 

Frequently it’s been reported, Mr. Minister, that it would 

involve bringing into the room literally a red box; boxes 

specially made for professional civil servants who had 

dedicated 20 and 30 and 35 years of their life to the people of 

Saskatchewan; boxes made for them while being supervised to 

open the drawers of their desks and take out their personal 

possessions while someone supervised that very act of cutting 

the tie from their job that they’d carried out with commitment 

for many, many years at that moment. 

 

And then, and then, Mr. Minister, the professional civil servant, 

many of these people having gotten their jobs because they 

qualified for them - they were the best qualified person by fair 

competitions through the Public Service Commission, which 

you also head up - then these public professional civil servants 

would be asked to turn in their key, to cut the tie, to close the 

door, to turn in their key, and then be personally escorted to the 

door of the - not only out the door of their office, but out, 

literally out the door of the office building in which they 

worked. That, Mr. Minister, does not strike this member of the 

Legislative Assembly as being the kind of humane and 

sensitive treatment that professional civil servants, you claim, 

were given when they were cut loose from their service to the 

people of Saskatchewan by you and your  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1413 

 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I find that process repulsive. Quite 

frankly, the people of Saskatchewan find that process repulsive 

as well. And I don’t know, I don’t know that that was the 

treatment given to Dr. Andrew Nicol on May 12. I do know 

you don’t want to talk about the way that he was dismissed 

from his position as the principal, having served - the principal 

of the Saskatchewan Technical Institute - for over six years, a 

period of time in which Dr. Nicol not only was the 

administrator of the Saskatchewan Technical Institute, but 

under your term of government, Mr. Minister, was responsible 

for introducing a co-op education program piloted at the 

Saskatchewan Technical Institute. I’m given to understand, and 

having been piloted, having proven to be successful beyond 

comparison, not only in every other province in this beautiful 

country of Canada, but internationally as well. 

 

(1630) 

 

After having committed six years or more to the excellence of 

post-secondary education and to the future of Saskatchewan’s 

young people, Dr. Nicol, on May 12, was dismissed by one of 

your officials under the supervision of the firm of Stevenson 

Kellogg Ernst & Whinney. And I don’t know what that process 

was, Mr. Minister. I hope, in many ways, it wasn’t what has 

been so typical for the way that the red box treatment was 

carried out with professional civil servants in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I come back, Mr. Minister, to you with a question about 

the conduct of your officials in dismissing Dr. Nicol from his 

position of principal of the Saskatchewan Technical Institute. 

 

And I ask you simply this: when Dr. Nicol was given the notice 

about the abolition of his position, did he ask whether he would 

be given permission to participate and carry out the graduation 

ceremonies at the Saskatchewan Technical Institute for 1987? 

The end of the academic year that was scheduled . . . the event 

that was scheduled to be carried out in Moose Jaw about two 

and a half weeks later. Was Dr. Nicol denied the opportunity to 

oversee the graduation ceremonies of the Saskatchewan 

Technical Institute in 1987; and was that communicated to him 

by your official on May 12? 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister, I ask you to listen very carefully 

to the question, and to answer very carefully that question . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I always do. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you do not “always do.” We’ve 

seen evidence of that earlier this afternoon. There are times that 

you have become confused. There are times that you have 

belaboured the point and found it difficult to get to the answer, 

Mr. Minister. I’m asking you a simple question today. And will 

you answer that question, Mr. Minister? 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m advised that no one has any 

recollection of him asking. And secondly, and probably for this 

reason, as I pointed out in this legislature on Thursday last, it is 

not the department that decides who comes and who does not 

come to the graduation. It’s something the students . . . the 

students’ union put on. 

 

In so far as the first part of your question, I object to your 

simplification, and in fact to the allegations that you would 

make in suggesting that Stevenson Kellogg, Ernst & Whinney 

are somehow terminators. I think little useful is served in that 

kind of characterization by a firm that has a good track record 

in terms of dealing with people in these tough situations. And, 

you know, it’s so typical of the NDP and/or, I suppose, of 

oppositions generally, to reduce complex issues to a simple 

duality. 

 

And I’ve said this in this legislature before, and I say it again. 

Here was a difficult and complex process. And you’re trying to 

suggest that this process was merely one of a red box. Now if 

that isn’t the kind of rhetoric and the kind of characterization 

that does nothing to give the people of this province a full 

characterization of the process, and unfairly, I might add . . . 

Because I say it, and I say it again now: I am quite prepared to 

talk about that process in this legislature under the appropriate 

estimates, which is Public Service Commission. 

 

And for you to stand here and talk about some red box and yet 

somehow with that selective amnesia, fail to acknowledge the 

fact that there was consultants there that day to help the people 

through this difficult time and to provide them with counselling 

and to help them find the jobs, wherever - whether it be in 

another government department or in the corporate world - and 

to provide office services and to provide counselling one on 

one or in groups. 

 

Now what about that part of the story? Why do you just try to 

scare the people of Saskatchewan with the typical NDP 

mentality of this infamous or famous red box? I will bring the 

details to this legislature, of that process, and in some detail. 

Because it is a process that, as I said before, was difficult. 

Given those difficult circumstances, I think it was handled in a 

professional manner. 

 

And to hear people referred to as terminators is absolutely 

nonsensical - absolutely nonsensical. And I would doubt that 

the hon. member would go outside this legislature and refer to 

Stevenson Kellogg Ernst & Whinney as professional 

terminators. I would doubt that he would do that. 

 

You know, I’ve stood in this Assembly, Mr. Chairman, for a 

couple of hours now, and I don’t object to answering the 

questions or the line of questioning. But somehow, either I am 

very wrong or the hon. member is very wrong in that we can 

stand here for some two hours now, and I don’t think I can 

count . . . I don’t think it would’ve . . . I could count on one 

hand or less, the number of times that the hon. member has 

mentioned the word student, education, educational excellence, 

quality of education, opportunities for the future, training for 

the jobs of the future, eliminating duplication, getting rid of 

out-of-date courses. He hasn’t talked about the implications for 

an educational system of the information age, the  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1414 

 

knowledge-based economy. 

 

No, none of those things apparently are important to the NDP. 

None of those things are important, you know. And that is so 

typical, Mr. Chairman, of what I find of the opposition to this. 

 

The NDP know that we are on the right track from a 

philosophical standpoint in terms of positioning our adult 

education system for the future decades. They know we’re on 

the right track. So what is their thrust always? They grope and 

probe away on points of process. We can always argue about 

whether we should have had one large board for the institutes 

or four boards. We can always argue about whether this should 

have been this position or that position. I mean, that is 

administrative . . . “administrivia” almost, if you like, in my 

mind. 

 

And the reason that they focus on those, Mr. Chairman, is for 

this reason: they know that we’re on the right track. They know 

that we’re on the right track. They’re getting pushed by their 

own people, their own supporters, Mr. Chairman. The New 

Democrats, the Saskatchewan Young New Democrats at their 

convention, most recently held by the NDP in this past June, 

had this resolution: 

 

Be it resolved that the New Democratic Party endorse and 

actively support the reorganization of technical institutes 

under an independent board similar in nature and structure 

to the university’s board of governors. 

 

They know where they want us to head. It’s just that their 

members in this legislature refuse to acknowledge what the 

NDP youth, and quite frankly, the other young people in this 

province, and the other adults in this province see as being 

needed to do for adult education in the future. So I have no 

difficulty with the process either. But we’re agreed on one 

thing, that where we are headed is right, and that makes me feel 

good. 

 

If you would just join us now in terms of getting the job done, 

getting this new institute up and running, the students will 

benefit by it, the staff and faculty of those institutes and 

community colleges will benefit by it, and the people of this 

province will benefit by it. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, it’s extremely clear in this 

Legislative Assembly, when the minister is scrambling, and 

when we are dealing with a point that is a sensitive issue with 

the minister, you simply turn on the switch, Mr. Minister, and 

go on these wild and rambling oratorical excursions like the 

one we’ve just heard from you now. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . I will gladly. I will gladly debate education with you. But 

we are here in this Assembly today to review the estimates of 

your department and you are the one who is required to defend 

the actions of your department. And that’s what we’re here for 

today, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, in response to my last question, 

you said, to the best of the recollection, if I  

understand you correctly, Dr. Nicol was not told that he would 

not be able to do the graduation ceremony at the STI graduation 

about two and one-half weeks after May 12. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you consult with your official - and I ask you 

to listen very carefully to this question - will you consult with 

your official and will you re-recollect whether Dr. Nicol, when 

he was dismissed, asked if he would be able to do the 

graduation ceremony, and was he told that he could not? Will 

you re-recollect that, Mr. Minister, and will you tell this 

Assembly straightforward, not in any wild and rambling 

off-the-topic discourse, but will you answer the question that’s 

before you now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — He didn’t raise it with us; we didn’t 

raise it with him. I’m advised that some time later the students’ 

council raised it with us. It was our view that it wasn’t our 

decision to make anyway. We don’t run the graduation. It was 

the student unions that puts it on, and that is what we have . . . 

that is what I have said all along, quite frankly. And this was 

the only new piece of information there as the students’ union 

raised it on his behalf, I suspect, or for him, or to see if in fact 

they could have him, and it was really none of our business. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, let me bring you back to July 23 

in Hansard, page 1369. In response to the question that I asked 

when I . . . let me quote from Hansard, Mr. Minister. I asked: 

 

Will you tell me why it was communicated to Dr. Nicol 

when the position was abolished on May 12 that we were 

not allowed to attend the STI graduation ceremonies 

scheduled to be held about two and a half weeks later? 

 

And in response, Mr. Minister, let me quote to you verbatim 

from Hansard. In speaking about the graduation ceremony, you 

said in answer: 

 

We had nothing to do with it. And if you’re trying to 

suggest that somehow this hard-hearted government didn’t 

allow this to happen, quite frankly, that inference is 

wrong - 100 per cent wrong. 

 

Mr. Minister, I do not suggest that the department didn’t allow 

it to happen. To say that statement is 100 per cent wrong is to 

say, as a matter of fact, that the government did allow it to 

happen, and I believe that you are being 100 per cent honest 

when you say that to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you know as well as I know, as 

well as all the staff and the students from the Saskatchewan 

Technical Institute and the people of Moose Jaw and beyond 

know, that Dr. Nicol was told that he was not allowed to 

participate in the carrying-out of the graduation ceremonies of 

the Saskatchewan Technical Institute after having dedicated 

over six years of his professional career to the academic 

leadership of  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1415 

 

one of the finest technical institutes in Canada. I might add, 

after having introduced the co-op education program to the 

Saskatchewan Technical Institute, which has had a 

commendable record of employment of graduates, not only in 

this province but commendable by comparison across the 

country and internationally; after having been given no notice 

of the abolition of his position; and the treatment by the 

Stevenson Kellogg consultant group that you employed to get 

rid of professional civil servants, Mr. Minister, it was the 

ultimate insult - it was the ultimate insult to not allow that 

professional educator to participate in the graduation at the end 

of the academic year. 

 

And quite frankly, quite frankly, Mr. Minister, I don’t know if 

there is any action that has been more characteristic of the 

moral conduct of your government. You talk about this 

fantastic blueprint for Saskatchewan that is going to make the 

future for our young people so much rosier, so much brighter, 

Mr. Minister. I share that hope for the young people of 

Saskatchewan with you, but believe me, I do not share the 

blueprint that you put forward, and I do not share the 

endorsement of the conduct that you have taken with the 

professional educators and the students of this province who are 

hoping to begin their studies on the first of September. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Minister, I think you are to be condemned for the conduct 

that you have carried out with the professional educators and 

the students of this province. And, Mr. Minister, we will come 

back to these issues again and again. And I conclude by saying 

to you that I find this whole exercise repulsive. Not only the 

conduct your department carried out in the dismissal of Dr. 

Nicol, but the lack of responsibility that you endorsed and 

carried out with the professional educators and the students of 

this province. And I think come the next election, the people of 

Saskatchewan will tell you they didn’t buy the blueprint and 

they didn’t buy the way that you attempted to carry it out in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, first and foremost, I would like 

to put on the record that I have absolutely no knowledge of the 

allegation and accusation that you are making towards myself 

and my department. In fact, I would go on to add that insofar as 

departmentally organized functions go, where we did have 

some say as to who was invited - the retirement banquet for the 

early retirees - that we had some say in terms of how we hosted 

it and who we hosted. 

 

We in fact invited Mr. Nicol. And I’m happy to say that he 

agreed and he came and we were very happy that he did to 

enable us to honour those who took early retirement. So I have 

absolutely no knowledge of your accusation and your allegation 

whatsoever. And I stand by my remarks in Hansard as you 

quoted them from, I think, Thursday night or Thursday 

afternoon last. I stand by those absolutely. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you 

may claim to have no knowledge of Dr. Nicol not  

being invited to his graduation, but your staff who report 

directly to you have full knowledge of that fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Because they told Mr. Nicol that he couldn’t 

go to his graduation. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you 

deny that they told him? I ask you that. Will you deny it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I am advised that it was not raised by 

him. It was not raised by us. And given the circumstances, at 

the moment, that seems to make a lot of sense. And secondly, 

as I pointed out before, we are not the ones who run the 

graduation ceremony. That’s a student union sponsored event. I 

suspect it has been for some good long time. 

 

And if you’re asking me if I deny it? Yes, I deny it because I 

. . . The answer to the question has been, as it’s been on several 

occasions here, albeit that the hon. member may not have been 

in attendance at the estimates, that the process was as I 

described it. We did not raise it, at least officials in attendance 

did not raise it, and he did not raise it. As to our recollection, 

I’m giving you the facts as we know them. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, in fact Dr. Nicol did raise 

it with your staff, and your staff ought to know that full well. 

 

I just want to conclude this section on Dr. Nicol, Mr. Chairman, 

by putting Dr. Nicol’s record of service to this province, his full 

record, on this public record. 

 

Not only did Dr. Nicol bring in the co-operative education 

program, he also brought in, at STI, the public administration 

program. He introduced the computer engineering program. He, 

in fact, brought in almost all of the 76-week programs that are 

not being sponsored by the federal government at STI. He 

introduced the automation robotics program. Dr. Nicol holds a 

doctorate in vocational education, a master’s degree in business 

administration. He was the second senior principal in the 

technical institute system in this province. And here’s a man 

who, by your government, was thrown out of his office by a 

management consultant on the very same day that he was fired. 

He was asked to leave. He was dismissed vindictively. 

 

I say, Mr. Minister, that the actions that your officials, that 

directly report to you, undertook in firing this man are symbolic 

of what has been happening throughout the technical institute 

system in this province. It’s a disgrace to your government, and 

all the people of Saskatchewan are ashamed of the kind of 

ill-treatment that you have given to Dr. Nicol and to many other 

people like him at STI, at Kelsey, and at Wascana. It’s a 

disgrace, Mr. Minister, and it’s a record that you can’t defend. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member in his question 

suggested that the person in question was thrown out of his 

office. And I know the hon. member as a reasonable, 

intelligent, and sensible person. In all sincerity, I question  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1416 

 

the hon. person’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it’s 

unfortunate the member from Regina Rosemont doesn’t agree 

with my observations. But I say that in all sincerity. And that’s 

why it surprises me when I hear the hon., member say that 

somehow we hoisted this person out on his petard, because 

quite frankly that’s untrue, and you know that’s not the case. 

You know, that’s an example of the typical NDP inflamed 

rhetoric, the typical example of NDP overstatement and 

exaggeration, and the twisting and warping of, in fact, facts. 

 

The hon. member knows that, and in all good conscience how 

can you say that? How can you say that? The process for the 

person in question, as I have explained in this House on several 

occasions, was as it was for the other 100 or 200 that were laid 

off that day. Not a happy time, certainly, but we tried to do it in 

the best possible way, given the circumstances, for those 

individuals. Not an easy situation, but we stand by the process. 

 

And as I said to one of your colleagues earlier, I know that 

you’re interested in maintaining a big government inefficiency, 

duplication, and out-of-date programming. You stand for all of 

those things; we do not. You stand for nationalization, central 

planning, more control by the government. But the people of 

Saskatchewan are telling us they wanted to get those institutes 

into a different form of governess. 

 

You have failed to table to this Assembly or forward, to my 

office, your plan. So what is your plan? Did it turn out to be the 

same thing that we’re doing and you’re afraid to give it to us? 

You’re afraid to show the people that we’re on the right track? I 

stand before you, hon. member, and say, bring forth your 

survey results. Are you afraid to table them? Are you afraid that 

they show that we are on the right track? The people of 

Saskatchewan know we are on the right track here. We can 

argue process, and who - position, this and that. But for the 

betterment of adult education, for the young people of this 

province, we will continue with this process. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, first of all, the members 

on this side of the House will be more than happy to table the 

results of our survey at Kelsey and at NIT with respect to 

autonomy - the two institutes at which we did them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — And, Mr. Minister, when we table them, 

you’ll be very interested to find that the results are that almost 

no one who responded to the survey that we undertook supports 

the folly of centralization of adult education in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, what there is support for is the 

idea of a local autonomy at the institutes affected. There is 

support, Mr. Minister, for a locally autonomous board at NIT. 

And there is support, Mr. Minister, for a locally autonomous 

board at Kelsey, with full representation from faculty, full 

representation from staff, full representation from students, full 

representation from local employers. That’s what there’s 

support for, Mr.  

Minister. 

 

What there is not support for is a model of centralization that 

your government has undertaken to centralize the 

decision-making process for the technical institute system here 

in Regina. Nothing is changing under your model, Mr. 

Minister, except that instead of you and your department 

officials running the technical institutes, a group of appointees, 

political appointees, your hacks, sitting here in Regina, are 

going to be running the technical institute system instead. 

That’s all that’s changed, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, we will be more than happy to 

table the results of our survey. They’ll be on the table tomorrow 

for you to look at, and for the news media to look at. 

 

Our position, Mr. Minister, is that you had, first of all, a 

responsibility to protect the public servants who were working 

for you. Your actions in firing 142 instructors at the technical 

institutes in this province was uncalled for. The courses that 

you claim were outdated, Mr. Minister, had a line-up three to 

four times the available entry positions for those courses, Mr. 

Minister. And we will take them course by course this evening. 

We will ask you to defend them cut by cut, Mr. Minister, 

because I don’t believe that you can defend them. I don’t 

believe that you can defend them, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to point to a couple of examples in 

closing before we begin again this evening, of the kind of 

out-of-date courses that you claim you needed to cut which we 

on this side of the House believe were necessary and essential 

to the young people of this province. Mr. Minister, first of all 

you decided to eliminate the dental therapist program at 

Wascana, and you cut back the dental assistant program; you 

eliminated it at Kelsey. And the only dental assistant program 

left in this province is now the one at Wascana. 

 

And we say, Mr. Minister, on this side of the House, that your 

only reason for eliminating the dental therapist program at 

Wascana, and your only reason for eliminating the dental 

assistant program at Kelsey, was that your government was 

committed to abolishing the children’s dental plan in this 

province as we knew it. Therefore you didn’t need to train 

dental therapists any more, and that’s the reason why those cuts 

have taken place - and that’s the only reason. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, you claim that the nurse’s 

assistant course at Kelsey was out of date, that there was no 

demand for it. Maybe you’ll be able to explain to this 

legislature, in the evening, why 150 people were waiting to get 

into the 54 places in that course. We say on this side of the 

House, Mr. Minister, that the only reason that you abolished 

that course was because you were consciously planning to cut 

back on nursing positions at Saskatchewan hospitals, because 

your government was consciously planning to reduce positions 

in home care in this province, therefore you didn’t need to 

graduate the  

  



 

July 27, 1987 

1417 

 

number of nursing assistants that were being graduated from 

Kelsey. That’s the reason those cuts took place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, we claim on this side of the 

House that it is your conscious attack on medicare, that we 

have seen all too clearly now in the past month, that is linked to 

the cuts that you have undertaken to education throughout this 

province, Mr. Minister. That’s the reason why we saw cuts in 

the health care education programs at Kelsey and Wascana, is 

because your government was committed to dismantling 

medicare in this province, and therefore committed to 

dismantling the training for medicare in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, another issue that we’ll be 

raising in the evening is, why it is that your government 

consciously undertook the elimination of technical institute 

programming courses that almost exclusively affected women. 

Five of the six programs that were completely eliminated by 

your government at Kelsey were programs in which almost 100 

per cent of the enrolment was female. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Your government is committed . . . Your 

government is committed to launching an attack on education 

that makes it more difficult for women to enter the work-force. 

And in the evening we will be asking you very specific 

questions about why it is that your government is dismantling 

education opportunities for women in this province. So tell 

your officials to get ready for those questions, Mr. Minister. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, we’ll be asking you questions this evening 

about why it is that your government is pursuing a conscious 

policy of privatizing adult education in this province; ensuring 

that instead of education being available as a public service 

through this province where students can undertake technical 

institute education and face tuition rates of only 450-$500, why 

it is that instead your government is embarked on a policy of 

paving the way for opening opportunities in the private sector 

where you close courses at places like Kelsey and Wascana to 

provide opportunities for your private business friends to open 

exactly the same courses in those . . . (inaudible) . . . That, Mr. 

Minister . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. Being 5 o’clock the 

committee is recessed till 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


