













































August 5, 1987 Hansard


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

August 5, 1987 

  

1543 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the 

members of the Assembly, Mr. Barry Morgan, who is seated in 

your gallery today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Morgan is a representative of the Lawyers for Equal 

Justice, and you will know, Mr. Speaker, that this is the group 

of lawyers who have come together just recently because of 

their concern for access to counsel in court for all Saskatchewan 

people, regardless of income, with a special concern about the 

deterrent fees being imposed on legal aid clients. 

 

I would ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming Mr. Barry Morgan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to call to your 

attention, and to the attention of members of the House, that we 

have a guest with us sitting behind the rail, the member of 

parliament for Regina West — the member of parliament for 

Regina West since 1968 — and I know all of us would want to 

welcome him to this Chamber. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Legal Aid Commission Fees 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Social Services. It deals with his attempts to deny responsibility 

for the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission’s new deterrent 

fees on poor people. 

 

Last Wednesday in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, he denied 

responsibility for those deterrent fees, even though the treasury 

board, which is a committee of cabinet ministers, had approved 

them. 

 

Is the minister now aware that by section 40 of The Legal Aid 

Act it is quite clear that it is the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, the cabinet, which sets all regulations with respect to 

who is eligible and who is not eligible for legal aid. 

 

Was the minister not aware of that law when he made that 

statement last week, or is this just the latest of his attempts to 

duck responsibility for these deterrent fees? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to advise the 

member opposite that cabinet has not changed the eligibility for 

legal aid. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A new  

question and the same minister. Mr. Minister, clearly the legal 

aid deterrent fees have been imposed because of the $500,000 

budget cut imposed on the Legal Aid Commission by your 

government. I want to simply ask, Mr. Minister, about yours 

and your government’s priorities — you support on the one 

hand the imposition of these deterrent fees on the working poor 

in Saskatchewan because of the $500,000 cut, and on the other 

hand your government spends $10 million a year on political 

aides to the Premier and cabinet ministers of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My question, Mr. Minister, to you very simply is this: what 

kinds of priorities of your government does it indicate when 

you make those kinds of choices? Will you please explain that 

to this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the 

member opposite gets this fictitious figure of $10 million as a 

cost of providing government in this province. But I could tell 

the member opposite that as far as I can calculate, with my two 

portfolios, the additional sum I receive as a cabinet minister is 

about $1,400 a month to be the minister in charge of Social 

Services. And I don’t think that’s an exorbitant amount of 

money. 

 

With respect to legal aid, I don’t know what else the members 

opposite want done with legal aid or how they want it operated. 

I believe that the members opposite are all chartered, 

card-carrying members of the “money grows on trees” society. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — It’s appalling, Mr. Speaker, that the minister 

tries to make a joke out of this very serious matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — We’ve been talking in this House for days 

and days and days about this being an unfair imposition on poor 

people who don’t have any money, and the minister simply 

refuses to recognize any responsibility for it. Mr. Speaker, there 

are a number of national and provincial organizations have 

spoken out against this policy of deterrent fees and some, 

including the Lawyers For Equal Justice, have taken the 

position that such fees are illegal, violate a number of laws, and 

violate the Canadian constitution. 

 

Will the minister take these sincere concerns into account and at 

least put this foolish plan on hold until these concerns have 

been dealt with? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know which plan 

in particular that he considers foolish or which plan should be 

put on hold, but I can tell you this, that it was not the 

government who told Legal Aid Commission to charge any 

form of fees. And I can tell you that had I direct control over the 

Legal Aid Commission, I may have went about reducing the 

cost in other ways. 

 

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1544 

 

I can tell you this, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 

indicate that they have spent days and days on this topic, and 

that is true. But what’s more important to this province is the 

position we are in with respect to tariffs on potash and possible 

tariff interference with uranium. That is more important that 

spending days and days . . . 

 

Variable Grain Freight Rates 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 

Minister of Agriculture, who I understand is down in Michigan 

for the second time in two weeks, my question is to the acting 

minister. 

 

On August 1 variable rates for the shipment of prairie grain 

went into effect because the Mulroney cabinet in Ottawa 

refused to overturn that decision of the CTC (Canadian 

Transport Commission) which approved these rates. The 

cabinet refused to overturn the variable rates decision in spite of 

formal appeals from the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, from other 

farm organizations, and individuals. 

 

My question is this: did the government of Saskatchewan file an 

appeal with the Mulroney cabinet asking it to prevent the 

introduction of variable grain freight rates? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if 

there’s much more I can add on this question of variable freight 

rates. I think, going back over the last four or five years, that 

every opportunity that this government has had to make an 

intervention over the issue of transportation, transportation 

freight rates, and particularly including variable freight rates, 

we have always made that intervention, and our position has 

been clear that we’re not opposed to lower rates for 

Saskatchewan farmers. What we’ve always argued for is that 

those lower rates be available to all Saskatchewan farmers, and 

I think that’s a position that Saskatchewan farmers agree with, 

if the results of the last election, at least, are any indication, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In answer to this question, a couple of weeks ago in the House 

we talked about more recent interventions by our Premier. To 

some degree now, I suppose, what has happened is past history. 

But we have always been clear on . . . and our government’s 

position has been clear there, and we’ve always made 

interventions and we’ve been there personally, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 

am astonished, I’m appalled that your government did not even 

submit an appeal to the Government of Canada, an appeal that 

could have overturned this decision, could have overturned a 

decision that will greatly alter the structure of Saskatchewan’s 

small towns and communities and the lives of rural people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — In all your consultations with the government, 

as you have just rhetorically stated, what  

formal position did you put forward on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan to the Mulroney government to stop the 

implementation of variable grain freight rates? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it was as I 

outlined earlier. 

 

Grain Price Deficiency Payments 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also 

to the Acting Minister of Agriculture, and the minister will 

know, the acting minister will know that we are now in a new 

crop year with a 20 per cent decrease in grain prices, and most 

farm leaders are saying that this is going to be a particularly 

tough and critical year for farmers. Obviously, a timely and 

generous deficiency payment, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely 

essential, and everyone agrees with that. 

 

I’m concerned about the arithmetic that has been used by the 

government in relation to the deficiency payment that 

everybody hopes will be coming toward the end of the year. 

 

Before the western premiers’ conference our Premier was 

talking in terms of $5 billion, I believe. At the western 

premiers’ conference the western premiers talked in terms of a 

range of 1.6 billion to 3 billion if I remember that correctly. 

And at the recent meeting . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I’m afraid the preamble 

of the hon. member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is getting 

somewhat long, and I ask him to get to his question. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. My point was simply that a 

number of figures have been used in relation to the arithmetic 

about deficiency payments, ranging from somewhere around $1 

billion up to as much as $5 billion, and I would like to know 

from the government specifically what is their number? 

 

What is the number in terms of a deficiency payment for the 

current year that this government would regard as satisfactory, 

and could the acting minister indicate what arithmetic was used 

to arrive at that calculation to meet the needs of Saskatchewan 

farmers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll give the hon. 

member my most recent understanding of some of the 

arithmetic that’s been used to come up with some several 

numbers, and the reason there has been more than one number 

is because there are a number of bases on which one might 

calculate a deficiency payment. 

 

For example, a simple calculation would suggest that if there’s 

a 20 per cent drop in initial prices, to get it to the same point as 

we were last year one could argue that we should have a 

deficiency payment 20 per cent larger. If one was to use the 

theory that the deficiency payment should match the like . . . 

deficiency payments of a similar nature in the United States for 

example, the number might end up at 3 billions of dollars. And 

I think if one was to use the European example, you could even 

get higher. 

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1545 

 

I think, once again, as I pointed out to the member, the NDP 

member from Humboldt, I think it was last week in this 

Assembly, the important thing is that we do have a deficiency 

payment. And I think our Premier has made great strides 

forward in this regard, in that he’s received unanimous approval 

at the most recent ministers of Agriculture meeting for a 

deficiency payment, and we expect one to be forthcoming. And 

I applaud our Premier, not only for the initiatives . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

I’m afraid we had a question there which was very, very long, 

which provoked debate. And that’s what we’re getting. So if 

you have a supplementary, please make it brief and to the point. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Yes, I will, Mr. Speaker. It is specifically the 

comment that came out of the Quebec City meeting of 

agriculture ministers that has concerned me, because it seemed 

to me that the arithmetic being discussed there was substantially 

lower than numbers we had heard before. And once again, I 

would ask the minister if he could indicate, very specifically, 

what is this government’s bottom line? What number do you 

regard as the figure that is your satisfactory target for a 

deficiency payment this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I’ve given the hon. member the 

best and most recent information that I have. 

 

And the other point that I would raise with him, Mr. Speaker, is 

this. On the one hand, we must deal with the question of 

deficiency payments and getting our farmers through this 

period, through this short term. But at the same time, we must 

not lose sight of the longer term and of the root cause as to 

what’s causing these problems. And that’s exactly why our 

Premier has been in Michigan and is back there again, because 

the real issue here, and the real question here, is not 

promulgating deficiency payments of whatever size and 

whatever arithmetic. The question is, Mr. Chairman, or Mr. 

Speaker, are the world leaders prepared to address the bizarre 

policies that have led to this situation across the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the minister has adequately answered 

the question. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately, I did 

not hear what the answer to my last question was, if there was 

one. And I can understand why the silence on this issue, as 

silence on many other issues facing Saskatchewan farmers, like 

nothing on . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Silence on the ending of the crop year; silence 

on the Farm Credit Corporation moratorium ending; silence on 

farm credit interest rates; and silence on this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the acting minister: why has your 

government . . . in light of all the silence you have given us, 

why have you not stood up for the family farms of this province 

on this and many other important issues facing them? And why 

have you, instead, stood up for the  

multinational corporations that are infiltrating our province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises a 

question of our government somehow being silent on the 

question of agriculture. And, Mr. Speaker, in reply to that 

whole issue of who has been silent as relates to the key issues, 

including agriculture, facing this province today, I would ask: 

where have the NDP been on the agriculture issues? Forty-three 

days into this legislature before we even had the question of 

agriculture raised. Where have the NDP been as it relates to the 

free trade debate where it is so important to agriculture? Where 

have they been on the potash issues? Where have they been on 

uranium, Mr. Speaker? And have they made one representation 

at the national or international level as it relates to agriculture 

subsidies? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite on July 29, 

when I tried to raise this question in the House, refused to even 

talk about it . . . on June 29. 

 

Mr. Acting Minister of Agriculture, it is obvious that you have 

failed the people of this province; you have failed to 

communicate to the Mulroney government the importance of 

variable rate issue. Does the minister not agree that variable 

rates are designed to assist multinational grain companies like 

Cargill at the expense of Saskatchewan-based grain companies 

like the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool? And do you not agree that 

variable rates will slowly drive business away from 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool elevators to the large main line 

terminals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I mean, I stated, in a shortened 

version obviously, what our briefs have been to the CTC and 

standing committees all along the way. We have no more desire 

than does the hon. member nor than anybody else in this 

province in seeing the railways, if you like, somehow control or 

determine the woof and the weave of rural Saskatchewan, and 

that has been our position from day one. If there is an 

opportunity for lower rates for everyone, we’re interested in 

that, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t know why we wouldn’t be. 

 

And as it relates to somehow the hon. member suggesting that 

we are somehow failing Saskatchewan farmers, and particularly 

as it relates to the deficiency payment, our Premier was working 

on that issue the day after the last cheques were in the mail, Mr. 

Speaker. And I have every confidence that he’ll deliver for us, 

not only in terms of the short term, in terms of dealing with 

deficiency payments to make up this shortfall income, but in 

terms of our Premier being the natural leader on the national 

and international stage, which is where this is ultimately going 

to be resolved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the 

Acting Minister of Agriculture. I don’t expect a lot of answers 

from him if his past performance is any  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1546 

 

indication. But, Mr. Minister, are you aware that the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has a network of hundreds of 

elevators throughout this province? And they have a network of 

elevators throughout this province because they have a 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan farm families and to the 

small communities in Saskatchewan. 

 

And this network of elevators established by the wheat pool 

was made possible because we had a freight rate structure that 

allowed it. And as of August 1, with variable rates, that 

structure of the network of the wheat pool elevators throughout 

all of the farming communities and small towns is going to be 

affected. 

 

I ask you: does the minister deny that variable freight rates will 

accelerate the closure of small- to medium-size elevators and 

branch lines throughout this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, certainly the potential 

for that to happen was the basis for the approach that we took in 

our briefs and submissions to the standing committees and the 

CTC all along. 

 

It seems to me, though, that the other dimension to this issue of 

what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan, or what could happen 

in rural Saskatchewan, it’s no longer good enough for us as 

legislators to thump just a single drum, and for that matter 

maybe even an old drum. There’s no sense rehashing historical 

problems. We’ve got to look to the future and what the 

solutions might be. 

 

And that’s part and parcel why our Premier, along with the 

other four western premiers, so warmly greeted yesterday’s 

diversification announcement for western Canada. Because 

that’s going to be . . . that’s very much going to be a part and 

parcel of designing and maintaining the woof and weave in 

rural Saskatchewan that we’ve come to appreciate and to know 

that it has to be maintained in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I will ask a supplement, and I 

would ask you to listen if the man answers it. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you aware of a specific example taking place 

in Saskatchewan, which was on the media, where a 

multinational corporation, the Cargill grain company in The 

Battlefords area are using the benefits of the variable rates; at 

the same time, in the same community, the wheat pool, a 

farmer-owned operating facility — Saskatchewan established 

— is unable to use the variable rates because it’s unable to dock 

the 18 car unit next to its elevator. I ask you: is not variable 

rates really a design of this Tory government to help your 

multinational corporation, the Cargill grains of this world? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I talked about members 

beating on old drums, and this is a classic example of the NDP 

. . . If it’s a corporation and it’s into food processing, as well as 

grain marketing, as well as farm supplies, it’s a multinational 

and it’s instantly bad in the eyes of the NDP. 

 

If he thinks for some moment that I’m condoning any practice 

which would somehow pit farmers against farmers, and 

somehow redesign rural Saskatchewan in favour of some 

corporation, he’s absolutely wrong. Every farmer in 

Saskatchewan knows he’s wrong, and his logic is simplistic at 

best, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — My final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I never 

thought I’d see the day when a cabinet minister stood up in this 

legislature and supported a multinational corporation against the 

wheat pool. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I gave him the specific example. I absolutely 

can’t believe that he stands up and supports Cargill over the 

farmer-owned wheat pool. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, is it not true that the Tory governments 

in Ottawa and Regina have, in fact conspired to introduce the 

variable rates in order to put, in fact, benefits to the 

multinational corporations, like Cargill, to give them an 

opportunity over and above the network that the wheat pool 

has? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, if one was to take the 

hon. member’s logic to its obvious conclusion, one might 

suggest then that because the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool bought 

part interest in Robin’s Donuts, now they too are a vertically 

integrated, multinational company, and somehow they are bad 

too. That’s where that logic takes you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What this question today indicates, Mr. Speaker . . . What this 

question today indicates is that the NDP do not have a food and 

farm policy in this province. They probe away and beat on old 

drums. They do not have a food and agriculture policy. It’s the 

same old stuff that’s come out of the NFU (National Farmers’ 

Union) handbook for the last 20 years, Mr. Speaker. And 

Saskatchewan farmers have had enough of it. They want to see 

some solutions put forward, not the same old haranguing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Lease of Space in Credit Union Central Building 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today is to 

the Minister of Tourism, Small Business and Co-operatives. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government claims constantly that we are in 

tough economic times and that every dollar counts. In light of 

that claim, can you explain to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

why your government has been paying more than $12,000 a 

month to lease the entire fifth floor of the Credit Union Central 

Building in downtown Regina for a grand total of three 

employees since June 1. How is that kind of expenditure wise 

and efficient use of taxpayers’ dollars? 

 

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1547 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly one realizes, 

and should be aware, that we have realigned the Department of 

Co-ops, and some of them are in the Department of Tourism 

and Small Business. The Co-op securities are in with the 

Securities Commission under the Minister of Justice. 

 

It may well be, and I will take notice of the question, that we 

are in a long-term lease. That’s logical. I think any member 

would realize that . . . the possibility that the lease may be of a 

longer duration, and we have to go to expiry. I don’t . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. I’m sorry, new 

question, Mr. Speaker. While the minister is taking notice and 

checking into this situation, I believe he will find that the 

government has a long-term lease to that property, and that 

property used to house 37 employees from the former 

Department of Co-ops. But when you did away with that 

department and moved all but three of the employees, you 

failed to find another use for that space, and that was more than 

two months ago; or out another way, more than $24,000 in rent 

ago. 

 

My question is: did you do absolutely no forward planning at all 

with respect to the closure of the Co-ops department? Did no 

one think about trying to find an alternative use for this space, 

or getting out of the lease altogether as of June 1? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Some hon. 

members are interfering once too often. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it seems logical to me that 

when we were down-sizing government, which we have done a 

considerable amount of, that there would be some excess space. 

There is excess space in places other than the credit union 

building, and certainly we are going to look at how we can best 

utilize that space. 

 

The member opposite asked a very interesting question. He 

said: did you not do any forward planning when you looked at 

down-sizing the Department of Co-ops? I want to tell you the 

forward planning that we did, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are going to put the co-op function in the business resource 

centres of this province, out there on the front line so that 

people coming in to see how you start a business in 

Saskatchewan can see that the co-op model is one model they 

can use, as well as a proprietorship, or a corporation, or what it 

may be. I believe the forward planning that was done in 

realigning the co-ops into the Department of Small Business 

and Tourism, where they should normally be, will be an 

enhancement to the co-ops in Saskatchewan, and that’s the type 

of forward planning that was done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we will 

debate what you’re doing with the Department of Co-ops 

another day. You know that what you’re saying is patently just 

not the way it — it’s not reality at all. 

 

But I understand, Mr. Minister, that Credit Union Central wants 

out of this space, and obviously the government wants out as 

well. But the question that taxpayers have a right to ask is: what 

is taking so long to get a relatively simple question resolved? 

Your little inefficiency or waste . . . It may be small to you, Mr. 

Minister, but by the end of this month it is going to represent 

more than the total budget that your government recently cut 

from the Voice of the Handicapped . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Does the member have a 

question? Let me hear the question, please. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When each month of 

delay means another $12,000 in lost rent for some phantom 

employees, why didn’t you work this problem out before you 

dismantled the department of co-ops? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, all I can indicate to 

the member opposite . . . And I realize that the other members 

of that government were government. The Leader of the 

Opposition understands the number of leases that a government 

is in. And as you down-size, it’s only logical that there’s going 

to be some excess space. 

 

As the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation, we are looking at this, and we’re 

going to have to get out of some leases that we’ve been in. But 

to suggest that you can just overnight change these sorts of 

things, is not as simple as it looks. 

 

And we are giving . . . I assure you, Mr. Speaker, and the 

people of this province, that we’re taking every sincere attempt 

to see how we can then utilize space in the city of Regina since 

the down-sizing of government. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Management 

Accountants Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise today and move second reading of The Management 

Accountants Amendment Act, 1987. 

 

The council for the Society of Management Accountants of 

Saskatchewan have requested this amendment. The present 

legislation limits to 10,000 the value of real property the society 

may hold. The council believes this limit is too restrictive in 

today’s complex business environment. The amendment will 

permit the society to consider lease versus purchase options for 

the real property and thereby take advance of the best business  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1548 

 

case decision. 

 

We are pleased to support the council for the Society of 

Management Accountants of Saskatchewan in their request. I 

am therefore pleased to move, seconded by the hon. member for 

Indian Head-Wolseley, that Bill No. 12, The Management 

Accountants Amendment Act, be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had an 

opportunity to study the Bill as it has been tabled in the House 

and which the minister has just now made reference to. 

 

On the outset, from the looking at the legislation as proposed 

here, I do not see that we would have any great concern with it. 

There are a number of consultations that we want to hold on it 

before we pass final judgement, Mr. Speaker, and before I make 

some further remarks. So at this time I beg leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend the Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, in March I indicated my 

economic and financial report that our province is faced with a 

new economic reality. It’s a reality that demands fiscally 

responsible action. But before we ask others to make sacrifices, 

we had to be realistic, but fair, in our efforts to control 

government expenditures. 

 

One of the major actions that this government has undertaken to 

further improve the financial management of our affairs is to 

reduce the size of the civil service by over 2,000 positions. This 

was not an easy task, Mr. Speaker, but a necessary one. By 

offering incentives for retirement we were able to make 

significant progress towards accomplishing our down-sizing 

objective. 

 

Through the early retirement program, 1,200 positions have 

been vacated, and 800 of these have been permanently deleted. 

The program was available to employees whose age and service 

totalled 75 years prior to December 31, 1987. Employees under 

the public service superannuation plan received an unreduced 

pension benefit based on salary and service to the date of 

retirement. Employees under the public employees 

superannuation plan receive an increase in their accumulated 

equity of 1 per cent of equity for each year retirement is, before 

age 65. All employees receive a bridge benefit of $300 per 

month to age 65, and a lump sum severance payment of one 

day’s pay per year of service. 

 

We feel this is a fair early retirement package, and we feel a 

program effectively met its objective. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 20, An Act to amend 

The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act, be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I would like to say a 

few words about Bill No. 20, Mr. Speaker, and make some 

reference in greater detail than I’m prepared to do  

this afternoon. But we have had in the last number of months an 

amazing performance by the government opposite with respect 

to how they treat civil servants. They have, in this Bill, 

provided an opportunity — and I quote “opportunity” — to 

civil servants to take early retirements. But what they have 

neglected to inform the public about, and of course other civil 

servants that are still working, is the great cost that is incurred 

. . . The great cost incurred by this Bill, not only to the large 

amount that will be underfunded in terms of the superannuation 

plan, but the great cost, the human cost, that the government is 

responsible for, in terms of these people who have many, many 

years left to contribute to the communities in which they live, 

that are being taken away by the government. 

 

And I think that this superannuation amendment and the actions 

of the government that they have taken with respect to denuding 

these people and taking their opportunities away is regrettable. 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the corporation capital tax is 

basically a tax on the wealth of the corporation. The tax applies 

only to large corporations operating in this province; 

corporations with taxable paid-up capital of less than $10 

million are not subject to the tax. As a result, fewer than 800 

companies pay the tax, and most of them have their head offices 

located outside of Saskatchewan. In 1987-88 the corporation 

capital tax will generate an estimated 51.9 million of dollars in 

revenue. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, increases the corporations capital tax 

rate for trust and loan corporations from 1.2 per cent to 3 per 

cent, and this rate is retroactive to January 1, 1987. The tax rate 

increase will result in trust and loan corporations paying the 

corporation capital tax at the same rate as is currently being 

paid by banks. We believe that this is only fair, as most trust 

and loans corporations are now beginning to provide the same 

services as banks and compete directly with them. 

 

Corporation capital tax rate increase will generate 

approximately 2.2 million in 1987-88. I move second reading of 

an Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Bill 17 is a Bill, in my 

view, that does not go far enough. The minister has indicated 

that the tax rate on corporations will be increased, that there 

will be less than 800 corporations in the province that will be 

affected by the Bill. He indicated as well that there were 

projections suggested in the estimates that will produce 

revenues to the province of $51,900,000. I suppose that figure 

would be an interesting figure if it was taken in isolation, but 

when you compare it with the actual funds raised — were in 

1985-86 less than $31 million — and you take with that, Mr. 

Speaker, the fact they estimated, not $31 million in revenue for 

the last fiscal year but nearly $56 million, yet they are now 

increasing the tax and only projecting  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1549 

 

less than 52 million. I think we have to be looking a little more 

closely at the statistics, and I’d be willing to raise these issues in 

more detail when we take a closer review of the bill. 

 

But in terms of second reading, Mr. Speaker, what we see here 

is an effort on the part of the government to take more money 

through the tax system to offset what they have been the author 

of. And what they have authored in this province is a record of 

fiscal mismanagement, a record of broken promises, and a 

record of indications to the people of this province that they will 

receive tax breaks — yet they are given tax increases. 

 

I have a great deal of things I’d like to say further to this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, and therefore I would beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — This Bill increases the tax on a package of 

25 cigarettes from $1.02 to $1.17 effective June 18, 1987; and 

the tax on one gram of fine-cut or pipe tobacco goes from $1.65 

to $1.90. The tax structure for cigars is also being modified. 

The tax increases from 13 to 15 cents for cigars retailing for 

less than 20 cents; the tax on cigars retailing in the 21 cent to 40 

cent category decreases from 33 to 30, and the tax on cigars 

retailing in the 41 to 60 cent category decreases from 60 to 45. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, the tax on those cigars that retail for 

more than 60 cents changes from 60 to 75 per cent of the retail 

selling price. This means that those individuals who can afford 

to purchase the more expensive will pay more tax as the price 

increases. These tax changes are expected to yield an additional 

$9 million in ‘87-88. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 

Tobacco Tax Act. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to just point out 

to the Speaker in the House, and the minister, that although a 

tobacco tax, if levied in a fair manner, is a responsible tax, what 

this government has done in the last year alone — actually since 

the first part of 1986 — has not increased just this last budget 

increase by 15 per cent the tobacco tax, but has in effect raised 

taxes on tobacco on a package of cigarettes in 18 short months 

by 52 per cent. 

 

And I think what that does, in terms of this government’s 

record, is clearly indicate again the total fiscal irresponsibility 

of the government. They are spending dollars far, far greater . . . 

in far greater numbers and quantities, Mr. Speaker, than they 

can manage. They cannot keep track of what they are doing, 

and therefore they are levying taxes at an unprecedented rate, 

not only in the corporation level, but at the E&H level and, of 

course, the tobacco tax as well. 

 

There’s a number of things I’d like to say as well on this Bill, 

and I’ll save those comments, Mr. Speaker, until a later date. 

So, therefore, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, when the opposition NDP are 

opposed to increases on tobacco, I know that they will be 

opposed to an increase in the sales tax. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I just 

listened to the hon. member from Regina North West. 

Obviously the member from Moose Jaw didn’t hear him. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, implements the increase in the sales tax 

rate to 7 per cent, which I announced in the budget speech. The 

increase in the sales tax rate will generate an additional $100 

million in 1987-88. The increase in the rate was required in 

order to help provide adequate funding for the services this 

people, or the people of Saskatchewan, desire. 

 

(1445) 

 

Even with this rate increase, Saskatchewan still has one of the 

lowest sales tax rates in Canada. We also, Mr. Speaker, have the 

broadest tax exemption base for individuals of those provinces 

which have a sales tax. Sales tax exemptions are provided for 

such essential foods . . . items as food, drugs, and medicines. 

Also included in the exemption base are clothing and footwear, 

and electricity for residences, farms, and recreational facilities, 

all of which were exempted by this government during our first 

term in office. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, farmers are exempt from sales tax on 

input costs such as farm machinery, fertilizer, pesticides, and 

weed control chemicals. Sales tax exemptions provide 

substantial tax savings to Saskatchewan residents. 

 

As part of the government’s cost reduction exercise, it has also 

been necessary to cancel the mobile home refund program, and 

section 4 of the Bill repeals this program. 

 

I move second reading of An Act to amend The Education and 

Health Tax Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, the Conservative government 

was elected on the basis of promises made to decrease taxes. 

And I’ll go through those in great detail in a few moments. 

 

But what they have done today, and through the budget, is 

introduce three tax Bills, in particular the E&H tax Bill, which 

are basically sticking it to ordinary and middle income people 

in terms of their consumption of products. It’s a consumption 

tax. It’s a highly unfair tax. 

 

It’s an increase, Mr. Speaker, of not 5 per cent or 10 per cent or 

15 per cent, but it’s an increase to the people of Saskatchewan 

of 40 per cent. That means that people who are now suffering 

because of the fact that a number of utility rates are increasing 

and goods and services are increasing, are now going to be 

faced with increased  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1550 

 

suffering because they’re going to have to pay a 40 per cent 

higher provincial tax on those items that are being taxed 

provincially. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government opposite has preached fiscal 

responsibility at every turn. And at every turn, they have 

practised unrestrained spending. They have . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — They always say to the people of 

Saskatchewan: do as we say, but not as we do. And what they 

have done, Mr. Speaker, is they have burdened the taxpayers of 

this province with a deficit that is the fastest-growing deficit, 

not only in Canada or western Canada, but the fastest-growing 

deficit in North America. That’s the legacy this government is 

leaving to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

They talk about . . . the party opposite, Mr. Speaker, talks about 

less government. They’re the party of less government, yet they 

practise, through their actions, more government. They talk 

about less political patronage when they were in opposition, yet 

when they’re in power, Mr. Speaker, they practise increased 

political patronage; unrestrained political patronage and 

nepotism. They provide jobs to their friends at rates that are 30 

and 40 and 50 and 80 per cent greater in terms of salaries, and 

of course the qualifications are either equal to or less than what 

the people who held those positions earlier were. They have 

doubled the number of political hacks in their operation to 183, 

and that’s costing the taxpayers of Saskatchewan almost $10 

million. 

 

The PCs opposite have preached less taxes. They have in 

previous election campaigns, Mr. Speaker — and I happen to 

have here some examples of what they have said in writing, and 

I’d like to share this with the House if I can — they have 

promised to eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax on clothing and 

utility bills, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

This measure will be the first phase of a new PC 

government’s commitment to the complete elimination of the 

sales tax in its first term of office and its commitment to ease 

the burden of inflation for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who said that? 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Well this was said in Mr. Grant Devine’s 

own pamphlets in the constituency . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I’m sorry, the Premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Okay. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — The Leader of the Conservative Party’s 

pamphlet in the constituency of Estevan, and he talked about 

the great things they were going to do. He promised tax 

reductions; he promised an elimination of the 5 per cent sales 

tax. In this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we don’t see the elimination of 

the sales tax, we see a 40 per cent increase which I find totally 

abominable and totally full of deceit  

and hypocrisy. 

 

I have another leaflet, Mr. Speaker — the member from 

Kelsey-Tisdale. And the name on the there is the MLA for the 

district, Mr. Neal Hardy. And he promises here in his leaflet 

that there will be a 10 per cent across-the-board cut in personal 

income taxes — 10 per cent cut. 

 

The 2 per cent flat tax, Mr. Speaker, is not a 1 per cent or a 5 

per cent or a 9 per cent increase on personal tax rates. The 2 per 

cent flat tax is, in effect, Mr. Speaker, roughly 14 to 15 per cent 

increase on the personal rate that we pay on our income tax 

forms. That is a 10 per cent cut? That again, Mr. Speaker, is a 

promise made by the members opposite, and a promise broken. 

 

The member from Kindersley, Mr. Bob Andrew. Vote Bob 

Andrew, it says here: 

 

Real Programs for Real People. Eliminate the 5 per cent 

sales tax on clothing and utility bills. This measure will be 

the first phase of a new PC government’s commitment to 

the complete elimination of the sales tax in its first term of 

office (Mr. Speaker) and its commitment to ease the 

burden of inflation for Saskatchewan (people). 

 

. . . the first term. 

 

We’re now well into the second term, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t 

seen . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. There’s a little bit too 

much interference from both sides of the House. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, the commitment was made to 

reduce the E&H tax, the sales tax — eliminate it in the first 

term. What we see here, Mr. Speaker, is, well into the second 

term, this government not decreasing the E&H tax but in fact 

increasing it by 40 per cent. 

 

And who does that hurt? Does it hurt the wealthy and the 

powerful friends of the members opposite? Not very much. 

Who it will hurt, Mr. Speaker, are the average Saskatchewan 

taxpayers of this province and the average Saskatchewan 

families and those that are of less economic status. They are 

going to be paying the increased charges, the increased 

consumption taxes to this province, not because there is a 

disaster like a tornado, creating a massive cost on government’s 

back. No, they’re responsible and are now going to be put on 

the hook for this massive tax increase because of pure fiscal 

mismanagement and political patronage that this government 

has authored in the last five years. 

 

What I believe, Mr. Speaker, will happen, is that the people of 

this province will view this latest tax grab, the culmination of 

tax bill amendments, as the largest tax grab in the history of this 

province. They view it as a betrayal of trust, a betrayal of 

promises made and promises that obviously were not made. 

And what they will do, Mr. Speaker, I maintain and I predict, is 

express in very clear terms at the next opportunity, that is the 

next by-election or the next general election, how they feel 

about this. 

 

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1551 

 

What this government has done is increase taxes for a family of 

four in this province by $2,000 a year in the last five years, Mr. 

Speaker. This budget alone will increase personal income taxes 

to a family of four alone of $1,000. They have doubled the big 

tax grab, the biggest tax grab in the history of our province, 

doubled it from one year to the next. 

 

And I think that is just totally unacceptable. I believe it is 

hypocrisy at its prime example and, Mr. Speaker, I maintain and 

I predict again that the people of this province will not stand for 

it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I have another member of the 

front benches, the member from Maple Creek, in one of her 

leaflets she promises again — the member is Joan Duncan — 

promises a 10 per cent across the board cut in personal income 

tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I am sure that 

the hon. member can find a vast array of quotes about all kinds 

of taxes that most governments have. However, we are dealing 

with The Education and Health Tax Act, and I would ask the 

member to restrict his comments to that tax, because if we start 

talking about other taxes, you can appreciate that there really is 

no limit. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the advice. I know 

that if I was to lave a little bit of leeway to speak about all of 

the tax increases that they have forced upon the people of 

Saskatchewan, I likely could be here for many hours, but I’ll 

take your advisement accordingly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another copy of a leaflet from the MLA 

from the constituency of Melfort, and I won’t talk about all the 

promises that they made and he made in his leaflet that he’s 

broken; I’ll talk about the one that’s pertinent to this Bill. 

 

He promises a Progressive Conservative government will phase 

out the sales tax. 

 

Maybe there’s a problem here, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the member 

from Melfort defines “phasing out” sales tax as increasing it by 

40 per cent. I’d ask the member from Melfort to please define 

what he means by phasing out? Does it mean a 40 per cent 

increase in sales tax, or does it mean the dictionary meaning, 

phasing out, that means “to eliminate”? 

 

And I’d ask him to . . . and certainly I’d even give him some 

time today to do that. But he’ll speak in this debate, I’m sure, 

and express some clarity at what he meant in his leaflet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another one here from the member from 

Melville. The member . . . another cabinet minister in this 

government. 

 

And as I’m reading these through, you’ll note, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re all cabinet members, not private members, who 

sometimes get carried away in their leaflets and will make some 

commitments that they are not authorized to make. 

These are commitments and promises, Mr. Speaker, that are 

made by the front-benchers, by the cabinet of this government 

opposite, and they’re breaking their promise with this Bill. 

 

And the member from Melville, Mr. Speaker: 

 

PC policies for good government. We will remove the 5 

per cent E&H tax. 

 

Well maybe there’s a different meaning in the dictionary. 

Maybe “remove” and “phase out” don’t really mean “to do 

away with” or “to terminate” or “to get rid of” — maybe they 

mean 40 per cent increase. 

 

And perhaps one of my colleagues, while I’m speaking on this 

Bill, could get the dictionary and just perhaps find the 

dictionary term for “remove” and “phase out” for me. I’d really 

appreciate that. 

 

And we could read that to the House and maybe compare it to 

the dictionary that the member from Melville and Melfort and 

Maple Creek and others have in their literature. 

 

And, of course, Mr. Speaker, we have . . . oop, another one 

here. This is from the member from . . . formerly from the 

Regina North, who is now from Regina South. He has run on a 

number of different opportunities here in different ridings, but 

he is now a cabinet member as well. 

 

And he goes on to talk about in a newsletter, about The Fuel 

Tax Act, and the renters’ property tax rebate, and all of the tax 

breaks that were supposed to be provided, but are in effect not 

being provided but are being eliminated and are being 

increased. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, another leaflet from a front-bencher, the 

Minister of Environment, the member from Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

And he says right here . . . Now maybe there’s another 

definition in a dictionary somewhere that has a different 

meaning of it than I understand, and members understand, but 

he says, and I quote: 

 

Eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax on clothing and utility 

bills. The commitment of a new PC government is to 

eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax on clothing and utility 

bills. 

 

Well, eliminate could mean something other than what it 

means, and I’d ask the member from Rosetown-Elrose to please 

inform us and educate us on this new meaning of this new 

dictionary they’ve found. 

 

Of course, I have another one. This one was provided by a PC 

candidate who is now a cabinet member, the member from 

Swift Current. She is a minister in this government as well. 

 

And she says, and I quote — in her literature, with her picture 

— and it says: 

 

Authorized by Swift Current Progressive  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1552 

 

Conservative Party. Is big government taxation taking 

more than a bite out of your pocketbook? (she says) A 

Progressive Conservative government is dedicated to 

phasing out provincial sales tax and reducing personal 

income tax by 10 per cent. 

 

I know I wasn’t going to talk about that, but it was in the quote, 

Mr. Speaker. And here we have a commitment and a statement 

and a question by a current member of this government saying 

that we’re going to eliminate this sales tax — do away with the 

5 per cent E&H tax. 

 

(1500) 

 

And she asked the question, “Is big government taxation taking 

more than a bite out of your pocket-book?” Well with the latest 

tax grab, with the total tax grab of a thousand people per family 

of four and as the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden 

indicated, it will be around $100 million increase just in the 

E&H tax alone. That’s $400 per family of four, the E&H tax 

increase alone. They, Mr. Speaker, they will be saying the same 

thing: is this big government taxation taking more than a bite 

out of our pocket-book? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the 

Minister of Finance, have not just taken a bite, but he has both 

of his hands up to his elbows in everybody’s pockets in this 

province. The tax man has come, and he’s taking more money 

out of the pockets of ordinary Saskatchewan people in one 

budget than the five previous Conservative budgets put 

together, which is amazing. And I think that the people of this 

province are going to be quite concerned about that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have here — I indicated that just to make 

it clear — the member from North East indicates, to make it 

clear we have here — let me just count them. One Premier; 

another cabinet member — that’s two; another cabinet member 

is three; the member from Maple Creek is four; member from 

Melfort is five; member from Melville is six; the member from 

Regina South is seven; and the member from Rosetown-Elrose 

is eight. So we have eight cabinet members, including the 

Premier, which is half of the cabinet of this government, who 

have made promises, in writing, that are here for everyone in 

this province to see and read — not just to hear, but to see and 

read — that they are going to eliminate the sales tax, or they’re 

going to phase it out . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Or remove it. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Or remove it. Now we have a dictionary here, 

Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to read out for the members — the 

member from Melfort who is here today, and other members 

that I’ve talked about in this little literature — what the 

definition of “eliminate” is. Now they’ve promised to eliminate, 

not in two terms but in their first term, the 5 per cent sales tax. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, eliminate . . . The dictionary that I have here 

is The Concise Oxford Dictionary. Eliminate — it means to 

remove, get rid of, expel, ignore, get rid of quantities, and so 

on. That’s what eliminate says, Mr. Speaker. Now I don’t see 

any word here that says increase  

by 40 per cent or by any kind of percentage increase. I don’t see 

any reference in this dictionary under the word “eliminate” to 

perhaps say the opposite of what it means. 

 

Now there is opposite words, and I think that’s what we are 

dealing with here. I also have “to phase out” . . . the word “to 

phase out” in this same dictionary, and what we have here is . . . 

now this is the word “phase,” but we all know the definition of 

“out.” Out is the opposite of in, so we’ll leave that. I’m sure 

they can understand that word and the definition of that word. 

But the word “phase,” which is the verb, is to carry out — to 

carry out in stages. That’s what the dictionary meaning of phase 

is. 

 

So if you promise to phase out the 5 per cent sales tax, it seems 

to me that in this dictionary, we should be experiencing in this 

province not an increase of 1 per cent or 20 per cent or 40 per 

cent as we see today, but in fact, Mr. Speaker, a decrease — 

that is a phasing out or a carrying out in stages. And now maybe 

the members can contradict this information. I’d sure like to get 

that from them. 

 

Of course, I also have the definition of the word “remove,” 

which is another word they’ve used in their commitments. Now 

“remove,” the verb, is to: 

 

take off or away from place occupied, (to) convey to 

another place, change situation of, get ride of, dismiss . . . 

 

Now maybe I’m not reading clearly. I don’t seem to read on this 

definition that remove means to increase. Perhaps it is, but I 

don’t see it here, and maybe there’s another dictionary. I’m 

told, Mr. Speaker, that there is another dictionary — it’s the 

Conservative dictionary. And it’s the Conservative dictionary of 

promises, a Conservative dictionary of commitments, and a 

Conservative dictionary of five-year plans. 

 

And of course, the dictionary that I’m referring to is the one that 

they have authored and they’ve put together very meticulously 

and very diligently, and they’ve packaged it in a 20 to $40 

million advertising campaign, and of course all it is, is smoke 

and mirrors. It’s there, but it’s not there. Whatever they say, 

they do the opposite. Whatever they promise, they break. 

Whatever they suggest, they deny. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, what we have here is, in this Bill, not 

a smoke and mirrors problem. We have a real, real problem — a 

$400 per family of four increase in the E&H consumption tax 

alone. And that, Mr. Speaker, is going to be a very severe 

hardship. Now I just wanted to preface my remarks to the real 

remarks I’d like to make later, the additional remarks, because 

I’d like to take some time to review closely what the Minister of 

Finance has said on this Bill. I also want to review other 

materials that I have, and I want to consult further — I have 

consulted with a number of individuals and businesses already 

— but I want to consult further with additional people and other 

businesses to provide, Mr. Speaker, a rounded argument, from 

our point of view, with respect to this Bill. 

 

In summary at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to say that 

the E&H tax increase of 7 per cent from 5 per cent is 

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1553 

 

 unfair. It’s unfair to the people of Saskatchewan who will be 

purchasing goods and services that are necessary to survive in 

this province. And believe me, it’s becoming more and more 

difficult to do so. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the increase is a direct result of the 

gross mismanagement of this government opposite, and I will 

be getting into that in more detail. And, Mr. Speaker, finally I 

think that it is an effort on their part to break promises that they 

made. And the effort, Mr. Speaker, I give them an A on. They 

have promised tax cuts. They have promised elimination, the 

phase-out of the 5 per cent E&H tax. And of course they’ve 

delivered, not a removal or a reduction or a phase-out, they 

have delivered in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, a 40 per cent increase 

in sales tax to the people of this province. And I want people of 

this province and in my constituency to understand that the 

promise they have made, that half of the cabinet, that I have in 

writing, and I’m sure the other half have indicated in writing as 

well, their commitment. They have made these commitments in 

writing, and they have broken these promises. 

 

It’s one thing, Mr. Speaker, for one member of the government 

opposite to stand up and say something in this House and 

phrase it around, turn it around and deny it next time. But it’s 

another thing, Mr. Speaker, when you go to the doorstep, and 

you go to the people in your constituency and you seek support 

from constituents on the basis of your program that is in 

writing, and you get elected, and you get that program — you 

don’t just ignore it, but in fact you do the opposite. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s a betrayal. I think and I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, and this is supported by thousands and thousands of 

letters and calls that we’ve had as opposition, that the people of 

this province are angry. They are indignant with the way this 

government is treating them. And I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that 

when the next election rolls around, this government will not be 

around any longer. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Chairman, I want to make some final points with respect to 

community colleges before leaving that subject and these 

estimates. And I want to note first of all, Mr. Chairman, that the 

Minister of Education simply failed to answer any of the 

questions I asked during the estimates last week. He made 

particularly no reference to why the amalgamation of technical 

institutes and community colleges is being hurried through in a 

matter of weeks  

resulting in a fundamental change in an adult education system 

that has evolved over the last 20 years. 

 

On the matter of personal enrichment courses and the 

government’s plan to eliminate personal enrichment courses in 

the community college system, I simply say to the Minister of 

Education that we obviously have a very different view of the 

value of personal enrichment courses to the education system. 

The New Democratic Party, Mr. Chairman, is very interested in 

planning changes for the future in education. But we want to do 

it, and will do it, in consultation with community groups, unlike 

the government who have rammed these changes through in a 

matter of weeks without consulting any of the community 

college boards affected. 

 

If the future, as the Minister of Education likes to say, Mr. 

Chairman, is going to resolve around having more leisure time, 

then we on this side of the House ask: why eliminate all leisure 

time educational programming in this province? The minister 

likes to joke about these personal enrichment courses, Mr. 

Chairman, and diminish them by constantly referring to courses 

of basket weaving and aerobics. It’s not the elimination of 

basket weaving and aerobics, Mr. Chairman, that is concerning 

members on this side of the House. It’s the elimination of a lot 

of courses in the arts and in practical home skills that’s of 

concern to us. 

 

And before leaving this subject, Mr. Chairman, I just want to 

give the minister a few examples of the courses that he’s 

eliminating. He’s eliminating painting, drawing, photography, 

film processing, pottery and ceramics, drama, set design. Does 

he not consider that those are useful and appropriate courses for 

the community college system to be offering? He obviously 

doesn’t. He’s eliminating other basic courses, Mr. Chairman, 

like cooking and woodworking and dance, which we consider 

to be of value even if the Minister of Education does not. 

 

Now the minister said in his reply to my remarks last week that 

these courses only make up 3 to 4 per cent of the community 

college system. They make up in many community colleges 3 to 

4 per cent of the budget, but not 3 to 4 per cent of the courses 

offered, Mr. Chairman. I say to the Minister of Education that 

in lots of rural colleges they make up 25 to 30 per cent of the 

programming. 

 

And I want to tell the minister what we on this side of the 

House consider to be the value of some of those programs. First 

of all, Mr. Chairman, the personal enrichment programming 

often opens the door for many people in communities who 

don’t have a lot of experience in the regular adult education 

system and begin by taking a personal enrichment course, and 

then go on to take university classes or adult upgrading. It’s a 

way essentially, in many cases, of reintroducing people to a 

positive experience with the educational system. 

 

We on this side of the House, Mr. Chairman, also think that 

those courses are an excellent way of enhancing rural life at 

little expense to the taxpayer. And I want, Mr. Chairman, to 

give the Minister of Education an example of what was 

happening in Prince Albert with respect to these courses. 

 

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1554 

 

Prince Albert offered 500 community interest classes in its 

college system — an average enrolment of 10 to 12 persons in a 

course, so that in fact approximately 6,000 people were taking 

these classes. It only cost the Prince Albert community college 

system $77,000 to put those classes on for 6,000 people — only 

4 per cent of the college budget. 

 

Much of that money, Mr. Chairman, was returned to the local 

community in the sense that people who were taking these 

courses purchased local materials — purchased materials 

locally that they needed to use in the courses. We maintain, Mr. 

Chairman, that there was no significant benefit to the taxpayers 

of this province to eliminate personal enrichment courses, but 

there was a significant educational value to the community in 

maintaining those classes. 

 

(1515) 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to move on to another aspect of the 

community college cuts and decisions that the minister has 

made, and focus for a minute on the loss of local autonomy that 

is coming about as a result of the changes that the Minister of 

Education is making to the community college system. 

 

The loss of the local community college boards, now in 

Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert — boards 

that you have chosen to eliminate, sir — means the loss of an 

advocacy group in each one of those communities on behalf of 

those communities to represent the needs of those communities. 

Instead, you’re choosing to run this system out of Regina, a 

system that was run out of the local communities. And that 

community-based decision making process was central to 

ensuring that community college programming would be 

responsive to local educational needs. 

 

A wide range of contact committees was set up as a result of 

that local-based decision making. And in many cases now that 

contact . . . that community contact system is being destroyed. 

Local autonomy, we maintain on this side of the House, meant 

flexibility for the local college system. As a result of having a 

local board, the board was able to deliver and adapt and adjust 

and change programs quickly and easily — something that will 

now not be possible with a central board run out of Regina. 

 

It’s our fear, on this side of the House, that the community 

college system in the four major urban centres will simply 

become extension divisions of the new institutes in each of 

those major urban centres. 

 

And I want to give, Mr. Chairman, another example to the 

minister of the value of local autonomy. Because local 

autonomy in the four major urban centres, through the 

community college boards that operated there, meant that the 

staff in those centres was accountable to a local board. And as a 

result of that, there was sharper and more immediate fiscal 

responsibility. 

 

And this can be seen clearly if you look at the result, Mr. 

Chairman, of the spending that has been brought down by the 

community college system. 

 

If you ask yourself the question, Mr. Chairman, did the 

community college system in the four major urban centres stay 

within its budget allocation each year, and you compare that 

with the question of did the Department of Education, the main 

line department based here in Regina, stay within its spending 

estimates each year; if you look at the Public Accounts and ask 

yourself that question, the answer is yes, the community college 

system always stayed within budget. And we maintain that that 

was because there was a local board ensuring fiscal 

responsibility and ensuring that the staff would stay within 

budget. 

 

And when you ask yourself the question, did the Department of 

Education here in Regina stay within budget, the answer is 

consistently no, it didn’t, because it became a large bureaucracy 

under a minister who didn’t have control of his department. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to move from the question of local 

autonomy with respect to community colleges to looking at the 

decision-making process with respect to the amalgamation, with 

respect to the minister’s decision to force community colleges 

and technical institutes to become one super institute. And I 

want to say to the Minister of Education that he cannot possibly 

justify a situation in which there was no involvement at all of 

the local community college boards that were going to be 

affected by this decision in the decision-making process. 

 

In fact, this decision was implemented before there was any 

democratic process involved at all, including an opportunity for 

debate in this Assembly. You, sir, have forced through the 

amalgamation of the colleges and the institutes in the four 

major urban centres without any effort to consult with the local 

community college affected. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, in the case of Prince Albert we saw an 

example of the government taking a system that had evolved 

over a period of 20 years and that was community-based, and 

eliminating that community-based control, and doing it within a 

matter of weeks. And at the same time we see, along with this 

amalgamation, Mr. Chairman, a decision by this government to 

dramatically alter the boundaries of the community college 

system, and to alter them in a ludicrous way. 

 

And I want again to focus on the example of Prince Albert with 

respect to these boundary changes. People now, Mr. Chairman, 

in Buckland, one kilometre north of Prince Albert, are going to 

have to arrange community college classes and contacts with 

the community college in Nipawin. They won’t be able to draw 

upon the resources of the community college in Prince Albert. 

In fact, Mr. Chairman, the residents of 52 towns and villages 

around Prince Albert will lose access to the programs being 

offered at the Prince Albert Regional Community College. 

 

And we think, Mr. Chairman, that that is just ludicrous. It is 

foolishness, Mr. Chairman, for people who live in the vicinity 

of the communities of Prince Albert and the communities of 

Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, and Regina not to  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1555 

 

be able to draw on the services of the community colleges in 

those four urban centres. 

 

And we say, Mr. Chairman, that the boundaries ought to be 

re-examined by this minister. And in the case of Prince Albert, 

you ought to reinstate, Mr. Chairman — the Minister of 

Education ought to ensure that people who lie in the boundaries 

originally served by the Prince Albert Regional Community 

College will still be able to draw on the services of that college, 

and I ask the Minister of Education to reverse his decision to 

essentially exclude those people from being able to draw on the 

services of the Prince Albert Regional Community College. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to focus specifically, in closing my 

remarks on community colleges, on the Prince Albert situation. 

And the Minister of Education has claimed, Mr. Chairman, that 

in his remarks, as I’ve been speaking, that no, it’s not true, 

people in the Prince Albert area will be able to be services by 

the Prince Albert Regional Community College. 

 

He can then perhaps explain to members of this Assembly why 

it is that one of the board members of the Prince Albert 

Regional Community College, who recently resigned, gave as 

one of her reasons for the resignation, and I quote: 

 

As soon as this legislation (meaning the legislation to 

amalgamate institutes and colleges) is passed, I will no 

longer reside in the Prince Albert Regional Community 

College area, even though I live only 25 miles from here. 

This I find unacceptable and very impractical. 

 

And that’s a quote from Irene Kustiak, who was one of the 

board members. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I want to read a couple of other direct 

quotes to the minister from the Prince Albert board, in terms of 

what they think of the decision making process that he has 

implemented with respect to the elimination of local autonomy 

for the community college system throughout the major urban 

centres, and particularly in Prince Albert. 

 

I want to quote, in fact, from one of the members of his own 

party, Graham Boyd, from Prince Albert. He served on the 

board, and he’s been an active member of the Progressive 

Conservative Party for some time. Mr. Boyd says: 

 

I cannot remain a part of a great organization (referring to 

the Prince Albert Regional Community College) and 

continue to try to reason with a deaf, dumb, and blind 

government bent on a misguided course of destruction of 

an important aspect of our post-secondary education 

system. 

 

And that’s a direct quote from Mr. Boyd. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I’d like to read the Minister of Education 

another quote, and I’m sure all members of the Assembly will 

be interested in this one. And this is from Ernie Stefanuk, also a 

member of the Prince Albert Regional Community College 

board who resigned. He says, Mr.  

Chairman, with respect to the decision making process and the 

lack of consultation that the Minister of Education 

implemented: 

 

We found out, despite what we were led to believe, that 

the plans for the amalgamation were laid out, the whole 

thing was orchestrated, an we were expected to participate 

in this transition, but merely as rubber-stampers. We 

couldn’t agree to that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, these are just a few examples of why the 

members of the board of the Prince Albert Regional 

Community College felt that they needed to resign. 

 

And I want to conclude my remarks with respect to community 

colleges by focusing on this situation, Mr. Chairman, because 

the Prince Albert board claimed, at the public meeting that they 

sponsored, in explaining to their membership — to the people 

that they’re accountable to — why they were resigning, that 

ultimately what broke the camel’s back for the Prince Albert 

board was that the amalgamation team that was set up to 

amalgamate the Prince Albert Regional Community College 

with the Northern Institute of Technology; that that 

amalgamation team refused to place senior administrators from 

the Prince Albert Regional Community College into top 

administrative positions in the new institute. 

 

None of the people from the Prince Albert Regional 

Community College were going to be in senior positions where 

they could make decisions, and I say, sir, that that decision was 

undertaken consciously by your government to keep those 

people from being influential in the new system that you 

wanted to set up, and that you wanted to have complete control 

of. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to conclude by asking the minister 

a very specific question. The Minister of Education, I might say 

for those listening for the first time, hasn’t managed to answer a 

single question that I’ve asked him in estimates to date. Every 

time I ask him a question, he goes on a one-half-hour to 

one-hour ramble that has nothing to do with the question asked. 

So this time, Mr. Chairman, I’m going to ask a very, very 

specific question. 

 

The Prince Albert Regional Community College board, which 

resigned three weeks ago, was fighting for three things, sir. First 

of all, it was fighting for local control and for governance of 

adult education programs that were going to be offered in the 

Prince Albert area. The Prince Albert Regional Community 

College board rightly rejected the notion that you offered of 

simply becoming an advisory board. They wanted to have real 

power. They wanted to be assured of local governance. We on 

this side of the House support their request for local 

governance, and we ask you, will you support their request for 

local governance? 

 

The second thing they were fighting for, I say to the Minister of 

Education, is that they wanted to be assured that the rural area 

around Prince Albert was going to be included in any plans for 

a newly amalgamated institute and community college. You 

denied them that request.  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1556 

 

My question to you is: will you change your position and grant 

their request that the rural areas around Prince Albert will be 

included in the newly amalgamated institution? 

 

And third, the third thing that they were fighting for was job 

security for the staff of the community college in Prince Albert, 

which you once again refused to give a commitment on. 

 

And my question to you is: will you agree to each of their 

requests? — local governance, the inclusion of the rural area 

around Prince Albert in the new institute that will service Prince 

Albert, and job security for the community college staff 

involved. Will you agree to these three requests from the Prince 

Albert Regional Community College Board, and further, sir, 

will you ask that board to reconsider their resignation and to 

take over responsibilities for local governance of the newly 

amalgamated institute and college that you are setting up in 

Prince Albert? Will you agree to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, in reply 

to the question that had the 20-minute preamble, I will do my 

best to be as precise and concise as possible. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’ll time you — 3:30. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Okay. The hon. member from 

Saskatoon South says he’ll time me. Okay, the little hand is just 

between 3 and 4 and the big one’s at 6. Will that help you? 

 

The hon. member has somehow suggested, that when it comes 

to Prince Albert Regional Community College Board, that we 

did not consult with them and that we did not recognize the 

uniqueness — because they have had some unique features in 

the way they’ve run their system up there. I acknowledged that 

when I met with them. I acknowledged the fact that they have 

the longest history in terms of community colleges in this 

province. I acknowledged the fact that they, unlike other 

community colleges, have some members appointed and some 

elected. I also acknowledged the concern that they had, and a 

very real one as you raised here, relative to if you live a mile 

out of Prince Albert, you know, that somehow we would drive 

you away from the city of Prince Albert and the courses there 

— I acknowledged that concern. And I acknowledged any other 

concerns they raised in this way. 

 

(1530) 

 

And in fact, although the hon. member quotes from the Prince 

Albert Daily Herald, at least I presume that’s where he’s 

quoting from because I have seen some of those same clippings, 

he failed to tell the whole story. He failed to talk about those 

clippings in the Prince Albert Daily Herald, for example, this 

one in June, early June, 5 June ’87, where the lead paragraph 

says: 

 

The Saskatchewan Department of Education has moved a 

long ways from its original position on amalgamation of 

technical institute and . . . community colleges. 

 

Because in fact we did recognize that there was some 

legitimacy to their concerns as there were to some others in the 

system. And the point the hon. member fails to recognize is: 

how come, if the situation is so bad in Prince Albert, why is it 

that that process that somehow to him seems so bad in Prince 

Albert has worked very well, for the most part, in Moose Jaw, 

in Regina, and in Saskatoon. How does he explain that, Mr. 

Chairman, how does he explain that? 

 

But just to show you that we have nothing to hide and, in fact, 

that we did meet, consult, and look at their options in good faith 

. . . Mr. Chairman, if I could have a page please, I’d like to send 

a copy of a letter I sent to Murdine McCreath, the chairperson 

of the Prince Albert Regional Community College Board on 

June 4 of ’87, and I will send a copy over to the Advanced 

Education critic. And I want to refer to some parts of this letter 

to show how inaccurate the hon. member is in his assessment. 

 

I would doubt that he has even met with the board; I would 

doubt that; I would absolutely doubt that. I would like to know 

if the hon. member has met with the board, and if so, tell us. 

And I’ll tell you why I asked that, is because the other day I 

asked you to table the survey they did on governments at 

technical institutes. Have we seen it, Mr. Chairman; have we 

seen it? The answer is no; the answer is no. They’re afraid to 

bring it out, Mr. Chairman; they’re afraid to bring it out. 

They’ve never brought one constructive idea forward yet, and I 

would look to and welcome constructive ideas. 

 

But to back up what I said, and what the Prince Albert Daily 

Herald reported in that we were prepared to go some distance to 

meet the unique features of Prince Albert, here is what we 

offered in this letter; here is what we offered, Mr. Chairman. 

Here is what we offered because we recognized the need for 

community input. Here is what we offered, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First, I proposed that the current board of the community 

college remain in place for a period of up to 18 months to 

provide for continuity of programming in Prince Albert while 

the new institute becomes operational. Now does that sound 

like we’re somehow trying to force the board members, force 

them to resign as he has somehow suggested? Allow them to 

remain in place for 18 months, we said. 

 

Once the 18 month phase-in period is completed, I 

propose that we establish a Regional Advisory Board for 

Prince Albert and region. Membership will include present 

members of the college board, plus regional 

representatives. The Board will have the following 

powers: 

 

It will advise the Board of Directors of the new institute on 

the appropriate array of programs and services to be 

provided in Prince Albert region. 

 

It will offer guidance and community input to the Institute 

board with respect to local concerns and interest. 

 

Now it seems to me any fair-minded person would say,  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1557 

 

that sounds reasonable; the community interest will be met; 

continuity will be met; programming concerns of an ongoing 

nature will be addressed. 

 

And further, Mr. Chairman: 

 

A member of the Regional Advisory Board will be 

appointed to the Board of Directors of the Institute to 

represent directly the interests of Prince Albert and region. 

 

So what we’re saying there, Mr. Speaker, so that community 

interest is met, not only can they have a regional advisory 

board, not only can they stay in place for 18 months, but one of 

them can sit on the new institute board to represent Prince 

Albert and area. But the hon. member somehow suggests that 

this wasn’t good enough, that we didn’t consult, that we didn’t 

try to walk the extra mile. I say we did when it comes to 

community and community representation. 

 

But we went further than that, Mr. Speaker. Because there was 

a unique situation there of elected representation along with 

appointed representatives, I further added in my letter: 

 

The practice of electing community representatives to the 

college board will be continued for the advisory board if 

this is desired. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, is that not fair? We said to them, you’ve had 

elected members in the past, and if you wish, you can have 

elected members in the future. 

 

And he talked about the issue of jobs and job security for the 

employees there. And what did I say? And in fact I had made 

previous reference to this issue in a previous letter. And I 

picked it up in this letter again by saying: 

 

. . . every effort will be made to find jobs for as many as 

possible. 

 

I expect most of the instructors to be offered jobs, and a good 

number of the administrative staff as well. 

 

In fact, Mr. Chairman, this is one of the reasons why we have 

worked very hard, walked the extra mile with that board, 

because from the outset we had two important and vital 

concerns. Number one is, we wanted to do what was right by 

the students and young adults in that area. And number two, we 

wanted to do right by the staff that was there. And as things 

were progressing in other centres, by the foot dragging that was 

going on, opportunities were being lost that might have been 

available to those staff if such had been the case. 

 

And I’m happy to report that as it relates to the issue of job 

security, almost all of the staff will be given jobs at the new 

institute. And secondly, executive staff have been offered 

management positions at the same salary in the new institute. 

 

Now I ask you, would any fair-minded, rational person not 

agree that we (a) met and consulted with them on many 

occasions — myself on one occasion with the full board; on 

another occasion with some members of the  

board. My officials were there weekly, if not more than weekly. 

 

I can tell you this much, Mr. Chairman, I myself did not meet 

with any of the other boards at all to the degree that I had to 

meet with this board. And I met with them because I wanted to 

do this in good faith. We wanted to make sure we were doing 

right by that community and right by their staff and right for the 

students. 

 

And that’s why we offered up all of these things, whether it 

relates to job security, community input, ongoing course 

programming, the straight geography, as if you live a mile 

outside of town, it doesn’t make any sense for you to drive 50 

miles when you’ve always driven a mile in. That just makes 

good common sense. 

 

But the added advantage for that person who now drives in a 

mile, to use the hon. member’s example, is that when he walks 

into that institute today he doesn’t have access merely to the 

Prince Albert community college programming, he has access 

to the entire system. And what a tremendous advantage that is. 

What a tremendous step forward. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Chairman, I’ll go on to say further that I will 

bet you that when this legislation comes forward, when this 

legislation comes forward — the day that we give it final 

approval and royal assent in this House — that is going to be a 

landmark day in the history of education in this province. And I 

fully expect, I fully expect that the opposition, once they’ve 

examined the very positive nature of these changes, that they 

will vote with us on this. 

 

Because I think the hon. member form Saskatoon University, I 

think down the road when James Andrew, his young son, is 

going to be going to college or to technical institutes or taking 

programming, he’ll stand there proudly and he’ll be able to 

recount to his son that yes, James, I was a member of the 

legislature, and I voted for that legislation to set up this kind of 

programming. 

 

And we’re already starting to see, we’re already starting to see, 

Mr. Chairman, the results of the kinds of thrust that we would 

like to see in this province and what people told us they wanted 

to see. And I refer to today’s Leader-Post, today’s Leader-Post 

on page A3. The headline goes, “Courses beamed across 

province,” and it talks about: 

 

Students in 15 Saskatchewan communities, including 

Regina, will be able to take history and English courses 

from the University of Saskatchewan without ever setting 

foot on campus. 

 

(Courses that are going to) be beamed by satellite to 

Regina, Estevan, La Ronge, Kindersley, Lloydminster, 

Meadow Lake, North Battleford, Moose Jaw, Prince 

Albert, Swift Current, Tisdale, Weyburn and Yorkton, as 

well as Saskatoon. 

 

Now I say, what a step forward! This is what we’re talking 

about as over the years we see unfolding the ability to offer, not 

just in Regina and Saskatoon or Moose Jaw and Prince Albert 

— when it comes to the institute — but  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1558 

 

across this province, through this distance education, through 

the wonders of satellite technology and fibre optic technology, 

courses right in the communities. 

 

And the hon. members make a great to-do about communities. 

Well what better way to keep a community together than to 

offer programming right in to it, so they don’t have to drive 2 

and 300 miles and spend $6,000 on room and board. We’re 

already seeing the fruits of effort. 

 

And I applaud the University of Saskatchewan board of 

governors and the extension department there, Bob Brack and 

others who have been involved in STELLA, the pilot project. 

And I look to more of this as we put our distance education 

initiatives together, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I want to pick up on the hon. member’s comments about . . . 

that somehow because there’s a new structure in Prince Albert 

the programming won’t be there. And what does the Prince 

Albert Daily Herald, July 24, say? Headline, “Few changes in 

program when NIT/PARCC (which is the community college) 

merge”. 

 

So why is the hon. member trying to tell the member of the 

legislature, Mr. Chairman, that there’s somehow going to be 

massive changes when the Prince Albert Daily Herald — 

correctly reporting, I might add — suggest that there will be 

few changes in terms of the programming. 

 

Now this selection perusal of the newspapers of the day, to 

make your case in point, is a fine political sort of gambit, if you 

like, Mr. Chairman, but it’s inaccurate — quite simply, 

inaccurate. 

 

The only changes, Mr. Chairman, are going to be these, and 

we’re not ashamed of them because they’re what the 

community college trustees association, they are what the 

community college chairmen, they are what the community 

college executive offices have been telling us. 

 

You darn right, some of the hobby courses are going to be gone. 

They are going to be gone from the institute programming. But 

they are not going to be gone from the community, because I 

have more faith than the hon. member does in the people of 

Prince Albert and area — and more faith in the people of 

Moose Jaw and area, and Saskatoon, and Regina — because I 

know that if the community interest is there to have courses in 

photography or aerobic dancing or basket weaving or whatever 

it is, that the local community will meet the need, just as they 

did in my other’s day and before her and my grandmother’s 

day. 

 

And I’ll tell you why we’re moving out of those programs, 

because once again the hon. member was inaccurate. There 

might be 500 programs at Prince Albert as it relates to hobby 

courses, but you are wrong when you suggest that somehow the 

hours exceeds more than 4 per cent, because it does not. There 

may be 100 courses, but when you look at how many hours are 

being taken, you still come up with 4 per cent. And I know 10 

years ago it was quite different. 

 

But times now are different and people have said, yes,  

hobby courses are useful, but more importantly we want to have 

access to the more sophisticated programming like institutes 

courses and like university courses. So the member is clearly 

wrong on that fact, Mr. Deputy Chairman, clearly wrong. 

 

The people have told us loud and clear we ought to get away 

from the hobby courses — they are like an albatross around our 

neck — and get into more university, more institute, and more 

adult basic education. And, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that’s 

exactly what we’re going to do, because the people want it. 

 

And he’s talks about us not having consulted. I ask him, other 

than this survey that yet remains a mystery to us all, did he go 

out across the province this past winter and meet with 550 

associations, groups, and individuals? I say, no, Mr. Chairman. 

And he flashed a couple of letters in here from Prince Albert 

and area people. 

 

And I had many, I will admit, suggesting that somehow this 

amalgamation was wrong. And I had a chance to send them our 

blueprint for the future and respond. But he suggests that’s the 

only kind of letters that came in. He doesn’t talk about the 

letters like this one that I got in May of this year whose name I 

won’t refer to. It’s a simply two-sentence letter: 

 

I do not (and he underlines it, Mr. Deputy Chairman) I do not 

support the Prince Albert Regional Community College in 

their effort to resist amalgamation. I support your 

government in your efforts at improving adult education. 

 

So once again the hon. member, for a political motive — and I 

accept that, this is a political arena — has only got one side of 

the story. It’s been filled quite simply, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 

with inaccuracies. And I know the hon. member is an 

honourable man, and he doesn’t mean to be inaccurate, he 

simply doesn’t have all the facts. 

 

And the facts, Mr. Speaker, are, as this amalgamation proceeds 

as it does, that the people of Prince Albert and area will be 

better served than they were before. And that doesn’t mean to 

say that they weren’t served well. But the reality is, as I’ve said 

in this place time and time again, the world is changing. 

 

(1545) 

 

And to put that in perspective for the hon. member . . . and I 

feel sorry for the NDP party that they want to cling to the past, 

Mr. Deputy Chairman. They are afraid to look to the future, and 

that’s unfortunate. Because to not make some changes would be 

to ignore reports like this one — a research report called 

Innovation and Jobs, prepared by the Economic Council of 

Canada. And what did it say, Mr. Deputy Chairman? Well it 

talked in this article, and it was published in the Leader-Post, 

Friday, July 17, and if we look down the road to 1995: 

 

Ten per cent or more people working in fishing, hunting, 

oil, coal, retail, finance, education, accommodation, and 

food services will be re-employed in other areas. 

 

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1559 

 

Re-employed in other areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, I ask you: what implications does that 

have for our educational system? How are we going to make 

sure that these people can be re-employed in other areas? Have 

we got an adult education system tooled up to meet that kind of 

demand? 

 

Twenty-five per cent of those in metal fabricating and 

machinery industries will have to retrain; 

 

They will have to retrain — 25 per cent. How do you ignore . . . 

how does the hon. member propose to deal with hard, cold facts 

like this from a very prestigious organization? I mean, you can’t 

put your blinkers on and say no, I don’t want to accept any 

change; I must pursue the same blind path; that I must attach 

myself to the same old, blind, ideologic rhetoric. 

 

Or what about this fact in that same report: 

 

Eleven per cent of those in finance, insurance, and real 

estate will be displaced; 

 

He offers no solutions about these realities that face us. He 

wants to cling to the past. Or this fact: 

 

The number of operating robots will rise from virtually 

none to tens of thousands. 

 

In this article it makes one very compelling . . . there is one very 

compelling phrase, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that says it all. And 

it goes like this: 

 

It also urges Canadians to get educated. 

 

End of quotation, Mr. Deputy Chairman. And you really can’t 

put it any better or any simpler than that. It urges Canadians to 

get educated. 

 

It further goes on to say, though, and this is the important, I 

suppose, light at the end of the tunnel because a lot of these job 

losses are displacement and need for retraining sound like we’re 

faced with a doomsday scenario, Mr. Deputy Chairman. But 

what it goes on to say is this, and this is why we are positioning 

ourselves and restructuring our adult education system: 

 

. . . the report does predict that economic growth will 

continue to provide new job opportunities. 

 

And that’s what we’re talking about, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is 

making sure that we’ve got the training and the retraining and 

the skill upgrading and the skill training programs for these new 

job opportunities that are going to arise. We’ve got to be ready, 

Mr. Chairman, for what’s going to happen between now and 

1995. We cannot sit idly by and pretend that it isn’t going to 

happen. We can’t cloak ourselves and draw erroneous 

conclusions from inaccurate, factual, or, in fact, not having all 

the facts. You cannot . . . That’s not the responsible course. 

 

And I have said, and I say again: we know, based on every 

measure, and I’ve talked about all the reports that other 

jurisdictions have undertaken — whether it be the University of 

Saskatchewan or SCCTA (Saskatchewan  

Community College Trustees Association). I mean, the hon. 

member talks in his hobby courses about how we’re going to 

threaten the communities, and that somehow I decided this 

unilaterally. I mean, I ask him: how does he ignore the 105 

recommendations of the Saskatchewan Community College 

Trustees Association report? I mean, he talks about I didn’t 

consult with the system. I mean, to not make these changes 

would be to ignore their report and their recommendations. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and to the hon. member: it 

is he who is out of touch; it is he who has failed to consult; it is 

he who fails to realize the implications of a changing world 

economy and what it means to Saskatchewan, and what it must 

mean in terms of us tooling up our education system. 

 

And I say to him, and I say this in all sincerity: I am quite 

prepared to, when this legislation comes forward, to debate it 

and to listen to constructive criticisms or constructive options 

that he might put forward. But if we’re going to continue debate 

that we should cling to the past versus move forward, we’re 

going to get nowhere. I am quite prepared to debate how we 

move forward, whether we should go this way or that way, or 

use this process or this process. I think that’s what this forum is 

all about. 

 

And I extend to you, hon. member, and to all your colleagues, 

that I am a reasonable and fair person; that we were prepared to 

listen to options from the Prince Albert area as we were from 

the community college trustees association. The same offer 

goes to you. If you have some constructive proposals that you 

would like us to examine, even at this late date, I am prepared 

to look at them. I am prepared to look at your survey and see 

what it says. 

 

I am prepared to look at and give consideration to constructive 

proposals that you have to deal with a changing world 

economy. But until you recognize that the world is changing, 

little is going to be accomplished in this forum. Little is going 

to be accomplished. And I say, come with us. I think we can use 

this to be a constructive time. In fact, I would look forward to 

that. 

 

And as it relates to the Prince Albert Community college 

specifically, I’ve given you the letter that laid out, very 

explicitly, my offer to them. I think any fair-minded person 

would recognize that we walked the extra mile. We met; we 

consulted; my officials met. 

 

And I guess the question I would ask you is: why is it that a 

process that works so well in Moose Jaw and Saskatoon and 

Regina somehow didn’t work so well in Prince Albert? And I 

don’t think we should accept the blame for that, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, as the hon. member has tried to suggest. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to say to the 

minister: I’ve read carefully the letter; I thank him for sending 

the letter across. The letter, Mr. Chairman, does not offer local 

governance to the Prince Albert Regional Community College 

Board, which is what we on this side of the House want, and 

what that board wants. 

 

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1560 

 

What it offers that board is basically two things: first of all it 

offers them essentially an advisory role in the system to the new 

super-institute board; and secondly it says that they can have 

one member on that new super-institute board. 

 

And we say, on this side of the House, after a board has spent 

20 years building an adult education system in Prince Albert 

with a large amount of community input, it’s an insult for you 

to come along, sir, and to turn around to that board and, first of 

all, without consulting them at all, tell them . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Just wait . . . without consulting them at all, tell 

them that it’s all over — tell them that amalgamation is a 

foregone conclusion, and then afterwards, Mr. Chairman, then 

in the face of massive opposition from the community of Prince 

Albert, to modify your suggestion a bit, and suggest to them 

that instead of the amalgamation going through without them 

having any say in it at all, that they can form an advisory board 

and that they can have one member on the new super-institute 

structure. 

 

And we say, on this side of the House, that that is totally 

inappropriate. No wonder they resigned. We say to you, sir, 

very simply, that you should have said to them that local 

governance, in the case of Prince Albert, has historically 

worked for the last 20 years, that it can work into the future, and 

you should have asked them to take responsibility for the newly 

amalgamated institute and community college in Prince Albert. 

That’s the bottom line, on this side of the House, that we 

support. That’s the position that you should have supported. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 

didn’t ask you a question. You talked for more than half an 

hour, sir. We’ve had enough of your remarks in this Assembly. 

We’ll go on to technical institutes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I want to turn the subject to 

technical institutes. And I want to say to the minister, by way of 

opening, that yes, the New Democratic Party is interested in 

planning for the year 2000. Mr. Chairman, we believe that 

many of the courses in the technical institutes that you have 

chosen to cut are needed now, will be needed in the year 1990, 

will be needed in the year 2000. 

 

You have launched an unprecedented attack, first of all, on 

many of the training programs in the health sciences in our 

technical institutes. We on this side of the House say that you 

have launched that attack because you are planning, now and as 

long as you are in government, to consistently erode the health 

care system of Saskatchewan, to launch an unprecedented 

attack on medicare in this province. That’s why the training 

spaces in the health sciences in our technical institutes are being 

cut back. 

 

We, sir, on this side of the House are interested in having a 

health care system that will need our needs now, and that will 

meet our needs in the year 2000, and it is you that  

are out of touch with the people of Saskatchewan and not us, 

sir. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, in terms of some more general remarks on 

the technical institute system, I want to say to the minister that 

he has tried to claim that the cuts to technical institute 

programming are not budget driven. He’s made that claim a 

number of times in this House, and I’m sure all members have 

heard it. And, Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe that claim, and I 

don’t think any members on this side of the House believe it. 

 

I think, Mr. Chairman, that your cuts are budget driven and that 

you are making the instructors in the technical institutes of 

Saskatchewan pay for your deficit with their jobs. That’s what 

you’re doing, sir. You’re making the instructors in the technical 

institutes of Saskatchewan pay for your budget deficit with their 

jobs. 

 

Now we say, Mr. Chairman, that if the government’s cuts are 

not budget driven, then they’re even more foolish and unfair, 

Mr. Chairman. I say that only an insane general would lead his 

army to the slaughter in a way equivalent to the manner in 

which the Minister of Education has decimated the technical 

institutes in Saskatchewan. 

 

We say, Mr. Chairman, that your decisions with respect to 

technical institutes were undertaken again, as they were with 

community colleges, through a major lack of consultation with 

instructors, with students, and with trade advisory groups. And 

the Minister of Education asked me earlier whether I met with 

members of the community college board and staff in the city of 

Prince Albert. And the answer to him is yes, I did meet with 

many members of the board and many members of the staff in 

Prince Albert. In the same way, I have undertaken a tour of the 

technical institute system in this province and met with many of 

the instructors who were fired, many of the instructors who will 

continue to work in our technical institute system. And without 

exception, Mr. Chairman, those instructors have told me that 

these cuts were undertaken without any consultation with the 

program heads affected or the instructors who were going to be 

impacted, and I say, Mr. Chairman, that it’s a disgrace that the 

Minister of Education has undertaken cuts in this manner. 

 

And I say to the minister, why has the minister refused to 

appear before the students in the faculty at each institute to 

account for what he’s done? Why didn’t he have the courage, 

Mr. Chairman, to go to the students and the faculty at Wascana 

and at STI and at Kelsey and tell them face to face why he was 

eliminating their jobs and why he was eliminating student 

positions in each of those institutes? He didn’t have the courage 

to do it. He left it to the local principals, many of whom he was 

planning to either retire or fire in the next few days to deliver 

the bad news instead. 

 

Now we say on this side of the House, Mr. Chairman, that the 

minister has claimed that he is building new centres of 

excellence at the technical institutes — new centres of 

excellence. We say on this side of the House, Mr. Chairman, 

that the centres of  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1561 

 

excellence that the Minister of Education claims that he’s 

establishing aren’t centres of excellence at all. 

 

For example, Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Education says that 

Wascana is going to be the centre of excellence for the health 

sciences. But I say to the minister that he is not expanding any 

seats in the health sciences on the Wascana campus. All that he 

is doing is cutting back health sciences programs at Kelsey 

Institute, keeping most of the ones at Wascana at the same level 

that they were last year, and then falsely claiming that he’s 

creating a new centre of excellence for health sciences at 

Wascana Institute. 

 

At STI, Mr. chairman, the minister is claiming that he is 

creating a centre of excellence in business administration. Yet 

when you look carefully at what’s happening, all that is 

essentially happening is that office education programs at 

Kelsey and at Wascana are being cut back, and there is no 

expansion, essentially, of business administration programs at 

STI whatsoever other than to accommodate some of the 

students that are being forced to transfer to Wascana to take 

their second year at STI. 

 

So, sir, first of all we on this side of the House say that your 

claim that you are establishing centres of excellence at our 

technical institutes is a false claim. What you are in effect doing 

is, at a single institute which you claim a centre of excellence is 

being established, you are retaining the programs that existed 

there last year while you slash the programs in that same field 

of study at each of the other institutes. 

 

(1600) 

 

And we say, sir, that your cuts in technical institutes in the 

health sciences programs, as I mentioned earlier, are directly 

related to your cuts to medicare. You eliminated the dental 

therapist program at Wascana because you were eliminating the 

school-based children’s dental care plan. 

 

You have eliminated certified nursing assistants at Kelsey 

because you are undertaking cut-backs in home care and cuts to 

rehabilitation services in this province. And you have cut back 

80 spaces, 80 student spaces, from the diploma nursing program 

at Kelsey because you are implementing and undertaking 

already substantial cuts to the hiring of nurses in the hospital 

system in this province. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we on this side of the Assembly say that what 

the government has essentially done with these cut-backs is 

destroy the morale of faculty and staff at each of the technical 

institutes in the province of Saskatchewan. You, Mr. Chairman, 

are “preparing for the year 2000” by firing or laying off at least 

one-third of the staff at Kelsey, and that’s the kind of 

preparation that the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister of 

Education, can do without. 

 

The cuts, Mr. Chairman, that you have chosen to implement in 

the Department of Education all came out of teaching staff on 

the front lines who are working with students. You didn’t cut 

anybody in your bureaucracy based here in Regina — not that 

we were looking for that. Mr. Chairman, not more than 20 

positions came out of the  

bureaucracy in Regina. 

 

Mr. Chairman, 142 position, 142 front-line positions came out 

of the technical institutes in this province. And that, Mr. 

Chairman, has resulted in reduced access for . . . a reduction, a 

total reduction of 1,100 student spaces, with many other 

students being forced to travel and relocate in order to take their 

second year of study in a new centre since you’ve cut their 

program in the centre where they were studying. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to make one more general remarks about 

the cuts in technical institutes before asking the minister some 

specific questions. And that is, I want to make the point from an 

educational point of view, that the combination of lay-offs and 

early retirements in the technical institute system means the loss 

of many of the very best teaching staff that the institutes had. 

 

The early retirements at places like Kelsey and Wascana have 

cost each of those institutes some of their most experienced 

instructors. The people who were forced to take early retirement 

by your government were generally the people who had the 

most teaching experience in the institutes. And then you 

combined that . . . the government combined that with a series 

of lay-offs that eliminated most of the people in the technical 

institute system with recent industry experience, with recent 

industry experience. 

 

So what we saw as a result of the actions of this government is 

a combination of the loss of the most experienced teachers in 

the system, and the loss of instructors with the most recent 

industry experience. 

 

And I want to give an example of what the impact of the early 

retirements alone meant at Kelsey, in terms of teaching 

experience. At the June 10, 1987 retirement luncheon held at 

Kelsey, Kelsey lost 1,008 years of teaching and administrative 

experience in a single blow as a result of your early retirement 

program at Kelsey; 1,008 years of teaching and administrative 

experience was lost at Kelsey in one month as a result of the 

actions of your government, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Now I want to ask the minister in light of these general 

comments, some specific questions with respect to cuts in the 

health sciences. I want to focus on three program cuts in the 

institute system to begin with. The cuts, sir, that you chose to 

make through the elimination of the certified nursing assistant 

program at Kelsey; the cuts that you chose to make in the dental 

therapy program at Wascana; and the cuts that you chose to 

make in the dental assistant program at Kelsey. 

 

You’ve eliminated the dental assistant program at Kelsey, 

you’ve eliminated the dental therapist program at Wascana, and 

you have also chosen to eliminate the certified nursing assistant 

program at Kelsey. Three cuts, sir, that we maintain that are 

directly tied to your cuts to medicare. And I want to focus on 

each of those and ask you some specific questions about them. 

 

First of all, your elimination of the certified dental assistant 

program at Kelsey. This was a program, Mr. Minister, that 

graduated . . . this was a program, Mr.  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1562 

 

Chairman, in which 85 per cent of the people who graduated 

last year got jobs — 85 per cent got jobs. There were 237 

people who had applied for the fall of 1987 to get into this 

program, Mr. Chairman — 237 applicants for approximately 40 

positions. So there was lots of demand for the program. It was a 

good job record in terms of graduates of the program. 

 

Now Doug Hildebrand of the advisory committee to this 

program has pointed out to your government that as a result of 

the cuts that you’ve undertaken to the dental assistant program, 

only 40 to 45 students a year will now be graduating as dental 

assistants in the province of Saskatchewan. They’ll all be 

graduating out of the program that continues to exist at 

Wascana. The need for dental assistants is at least 75 dental 

assistants a year, so we’ll be 30 dental assistants short. 

 

My first question to the minister, then, is where those other 

dental assistants will come from. He has in effect, Mr. 

Chairman . . . what the government has chosen to do is take a 

program with an excellent job record where graduates did well, 

and he has chosen to cut that program at a time when there are 

frequent shortages for certified dental assistants in this 

province, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. That program cost 

only $200,000 a year to operate. 

 

And my simple question to the minister is this: in light of the 

fact that this program had an excellent job record, a long 

waiting list of entrants to get in, and in light of the fact that it 

had an excellent record in terms of graduating students, can you 

explain to me, sir, why you chose to completely eliminate the 

dental assistant program at Kelsey Institute? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, going back to the very 

beginning of the hon. member’s remarks and some of his 

observations, and to make sure that we’re all working with the 

correct information, and I know the hon. member doesn’t like 

me to give the answers and the facts . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . He suggested that I should sit down. And I can understand 

why they don’t like to hear these answers, because in fact they 

are very rational and reasonable and fair and do make sense, 

and do acknowledge what’s happening in a changing world. 

 

He clearly wanted to restate the NDP’s position as it relates to 

governance. That’s in the fact of still yet not tabling this 

so-called survey. And I have said all along that I would be 

prepared to look at and give that survey consideration if we 

could only see it. 

 

But let’s look at what he’s really saying, Mr. Chairman. He’s 

saying that a system that we use at the University of 

Saskatchewan — the board of governors that represents the 

entire province, the entire province, Mr. Chairman — is 

somehow not going to work as it relates to the Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology. He is trying to 

suggest, Mr. Chairman, that the way the board of governors 

operates our universities isn’t in the best interests of the entire 

province. I say it is, and I say their decision to offer distance 

education programming in 14 centres across this province is 

exactly consistent with the best interests of this entire province. 

 

Why is it that one board of governors can represent our 

universities and do a good job in terms of representing the 

interests of the entire province, but yet somehow a single board 

of governors can’t represent the entire province when it comes 

to our institute? His logic falls me there, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

And I would suggest it’s an insult to the board of governors to 

suggest that they can’t somehow represent all corners of this 

province. And it’s an insult to the people from each of the four 

regions where we have a campus to suggest that they somehow 

can’t adequately represent the interests of their area on this new 

board of governors. 

 

So I ask the hon. member why is it that the University of 

Saskatchewan board of governors model is okay, yet somehow 

that same model when applied to the Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Sciences and Technology is not okay? Could he tell the 

public and me, quite frankly, why it cannot work in both 

instances? Would he explain that logic that I can’t comprehend 

to me. 

 

As it relates to whether we had regional advisory boards, or 

what form of extra regional representation, the reality is this, 

the facts are these, Mr. Speaker. The Prince Albert college 

camp up with an option. SCCTA came up with an option, and I 

believe there was one or two other options that were put 

forward by various community colleges. When I met with the 

community college in Prince Albert, that board, I said, I will 

look at your option; I give you no guarantees. You will know of 

course, because they were members of SCCTA, that they have 

put forth an option. 

 

And I said, now if I accept an option other than yours, then I 

don’t want this to be a case of sour grapes. And maybe because 

we didn’t accept their option, and we took more the SCCTA 

model, that perhaps sour grapes was to some degree behind the 

resignations. Certainly, as I said earlier in the letter I tabled in 

this legislature, we walked the extra mile. We have put in place 

an option to ensure representation. So I think that lays to rest 

the Prince Albert board question, if you like, and the whole 

issue of governance. And that . . . and those, Mr. Chairman, are 

the facts tabled in this legislature. 

 

Now he further went on to suggest, in reply to my suggestion, 

that the NDP does have a blueprint when it comes to 

post-second education. Well we’ve seen that blueprint, Mr. 

Chairman, we sure have, in the form of a memo from the NDP 

premier of the day, Allan Blakeney, to the then advanced 

education minister of the day, Doug McArthur. 

 

And what did that blueprint say, Mr. Deputy Chairman? Well it 

said, Doug, my buddy, show me how you’re going to cut 

funding the universities because we know enrolments are going 

to go down, and how are we going to deal with the 

resource-based economy? 

 

When the reality of the day is enrolments were going up, the 

knowledge-based economy is on us, and in fact what we needed 

to do was not starve universities as the NDP did, but in fact put 

more funds into them, and that’s exactly what we’ve done. 

 

He said that I . . . the one thing he was correct on . . . or  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1563 

 

incorrect rather, is that this blueprint that we come up with was 

not budget driven, he says . . . or he says it was budget driven, 

rather. 

 

He says that somehow all of what we have done, the meetings 

that we held, the consultation that we held, what we heard from 

the universities, what we heard from the community colleges, 

what we heard from people across the province, in all of this we 

had some ulterior motive. All what it was designed to do was 

slash budgets and slash staffing and slash programming. 

 

Well I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, I want to tell the 

members of this Assembly, and I want to tell the public in this 

province that nothing could be further from the truth — 

absolutely nothing. And I challenge the hon. member if he’s got 

some specifics, to back up that accusation to lay them before 

the people of this province and this legislature. 

 

Because I will say it again — I will say it again, as I’ve said 

when I had the press conference and met with the system, if you 

like, the day we announced and released the new blueprint, it 

wouldn’t have mattered — it wouldn’t have mattered if we 

were going to get a budget increase this year of 300 per cent. It 

wouldn’t have mattered if we were going to get a budget 

increase of 25 per cent, or 5 per cent, or 125 per cent. These 

changes had to be made if we were going to acknowledge the 

future. And I say that absolutely sincerely. 

 

And I also say absolutely sincerely that when it comes to 

education, you can always use more money. What we’re talking 

about here is using the money we’ve got, better. And I’m proud 

of what we could do with three-quarters of a billion dollars in 

this province. I’ll tell you — and the people that are trustees 

across this province, and boards of governors, and faculty and 

staff, and teachers — they’re proud too. 

 

(1615) 

 

So I repeat again, it wouldn’t matter what the budget number 

was, these changes were predicated on what we heard across 

this province, plus the hard realities that we face, and are going 

to face in the future. 

 

And I know what your blueprint is, and I know what your 

party’s blueprint is. It’s a blueprint that says: starve universities; 

don’t acknowledge change; don’t put the programming and 

retraining needs in place for the future; carry on with the past. 

You guys are homesick for the past. My sense is, the people out 

there are homesick for the future, and we’re going to provide 

that for them. 

 

He further went on to say that what we had done in terms of our 

cuts, to use a typical example . . . And even the hon. member, 

because he’s a good guy — I say that; he is a good guy — 

doesn’t even believe his own rhetoric. I mean, how can you 

stand before the public of Saskatchewan and say that somehow, 

because we’re spending three-quarters of a billion dollars on 

education, that we’re going to decimate the system? I mean, 

you don’t even believe that, and yet you use those words. 

 

If you wouldn’t overstate the case, your positions might  

have some more credibility. You’re inaccurate. I mean, by any 

measure, is decimation . . . I mean, it’s nonsensical to use that 

term, and you know it. 

 

He says we’ve decimated, he says we’ve decimated, Mr. 

Chairman, decimated the technical institute side. Okay. Well 

how does he say we’ve decimated the system when . . . And I 

repeat some of these facts again. How can you say you’ve 

decimated the system when in the last five years we’ve seen a 

28 per cent increase in training seats, Mr. Chairman? A 28 per 

cent increase. A new campus in Prince Albert. Now how does 

that square with decimating the system? 

 

Did they build a new campus in Prince Albert, particularly for 

the Northerners? No. Did they, Mr. Chairman, offer a system, 

an education extension system where we could deliver institute 

programming into rural Saskatchewan? No, there was not a 

formal extension program run from the institutes when their 

government was in power — there was not. 

 

What about funding? We’ve increased the funding over the last 

five years, Mr. Chairman, by 52 per cent to our technical 

institutes. Now how does the hon. member — honourable, 

reasonable, sincere member, prone to flights of fantasy when it 

comes to his rhetoric once in a while — how does he square 

that with the term “decimation”? How does he square that, Mr. 

Chairman? Or, if you look at the K to 12 system, the same 

number is 60 per cent increase. And I could give you a similar 

number for the university system. How does he square that with 

the term “decimation”? 

 

And he referred specifically to STI. Well what’s happening at 

STI for the year ‘87-88? He pooh-poohed my suggestion on the 

approach we’re using there, which is to set up centres of 

excellence, instead of every campus trying to be all things to all 

people, and in fact, diluting quality — not every campus being 

able to afford the latest in equipment and that kind of thing. 

We’re going to have them concentrate on areas of expertise. 

 

He says, somehow this is another figment of our imagination, 

that there are no new programs. Well what are the new 

programs, Mr. Chairman, and members of the legislature, for 

‘87-88 at STI? Well what have we got? WE got upgrading and 

updating courses in various areas as requested by the 

apprenticeship branch industrial clients, etc. We’ve got 

carpentry updating; scaffolding; cement finish updating; 

fireproofing steel; electrical updating, including basic 

electronics, code updating, and programmable controllers; gas 

instrument technician courses, first and second level; upgrading 

the journeyman cook; electronic trouble-shooting course; power 

engineering; compulsory inspection for total-loss vehicles; 

industrial welding, including several sophisticated forms of 

welding. 

 

But it doesn’t stop here, Mr. Chairman. We’ve got computer 

software packages courses; microprocessor trouble-shooting 

program, an area of high growth I’m led to believe; driver 

instructor preparatory programs; industrial instrumentation 

technology. I’m having trouble with some of these words, Mr. 

Chairman, because these are the jobs of the future, and they 

don’t roll off our lips  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1564 

 

like making buggy whips, which is where the hon. members are 

still — in that generation. We’ve got industrial instrumentation 

mechanic apprenticeship program. 

 

But it doesn’t stop there, Mr. Chairman, because in the future 

this is where we are going to go as well — Modicom personal 

computer training, full meal preparation course; computer 

assisted design programs for industry, certificate evening 

programs, and office administration, accounting, data 

processing and administration. To recognize that those people 

who have got jobs in the daytime want to get upgrading at 

night, and that’s particularly relevant when it comes to the 

females in the job sector — particularly relevant, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

We’ve got summer programs in recreational areas — computer 

camp, etc., designed for elementary and high school students. 

Does that not sound like an exciting future? Computer camps 

for our students, summer programs in recreational areas. 

 

I can see James Andrew, down the road, saying, dad, I’ll tell 

you, that course you put in place there 20 years ago, that 

computer camp for high school students, that was a good deal. 

I’m glad you supported that in the legislature. Because this is 

what we’re talking about down the road. This is what we’re 

talking about — opportunities for our young people. 

 

I haven’t even finished the list as it relates to STI, and I haven’t 

started on the new programs for Wascana or NIT or Kelsey 

because the list goes on and on and on. And yet you say that 

this is nothing but rhetoric; there’s nothing to back it up. And I 

say you’re wrong again. You’re inaccurate and you lack 

information, and more than that you don’t have any faith as we 

do in guiding and directing the future and in working with the 

system to realize that there has to be these new courses. 

 

I mean, you can cling to the past for all you want. And you 

mentioned the issue of health sciences specifically. 

 

Oh, but first of all, before I leave STI, you said there’s nothing 

new been added. I forgot to tell you — an additional 42 seats in 

accounting. An additional 42 seats in accounting . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Exactly. And your party was saying all along 

that the students that were taking accounting wouldn’t have a 

course and a space, and all the rest of it. I’ll tell you what, you 

were fear mongering and that’s the worst kind because you are 

spreading misinformation. That’s the record, that’s the facts — 

42 spaces. 

 

And then there’s the case of the instructors that you rightfully 

raise. And I’ll tell you what, and I’ll say it again, if you think 

that laying off people, or even making changes of any sort is 

ever easy, you’re wrong again. But I’ll tell you what, making 

change may not be popular, but if it’s right, this province is 

going to continue to do it. And this is right. 

 

And as it relates to the instructors, to show you that we aren’t 

some callous, hard-hearted Tory government that doesn’t try to 

accommodate its people, because we recognize it as the heart 

and soul of the system, what is the  

story on those instructors that were laid off? What are the facts? 

Well these are the facts. And now the member from Moose Jaw 

North, I want you to hear this as well. The hon. member from 

Moose Jaw North and the member from Saskatoon University 

who asked the question. I want you to hear the answer. I want 

you to hear this answer. 

 

The question was: you know, you fired all these instructors — 

which is untrue, because they were lay-offs, not firings — and 

you have no regard for them. Well what’s the story on these 

instructors that were laid off, Mr. Chairman? What is the facts? 

 

Well the facts are these: that every one of these instructors who 

was laid off and who wanted to be re-employed is re-employed 

with only one exception. And my officials tell me that they’re 

hopeful that they can be successful on that one as well. Now 

how’s that for a record of fairness, reasonableness, and 

compassion, and recognizing, more importantly, that those 

instructors do have a place, albeit with different courses, and 

accommodating them. 

 

And I am proud to stand here and tell you that fact. And I hope 

that puts to rest this bogy man about somehow decimating, to 

use your rhetoric again, the system. That is another fact that you 

can file in your research notes there, Mr. hon. Member. 

 

And let’s pick up now the issue of the health sciences which 

you raised. Let’s pick up the issues of the health sciences. Well 

what do we have there for facts, Mr. Chairman? Here are the 

facts; here are the facts, Mr. Chairman. In some cases, 60 per 

cent or even 75 per cent of the graduates were not getting 

full-time jobs in their specialties. 

 

Now is that fair or reasonable to those students to say, open the 

floodgates; come on in. It doesn’t matter what the course is in 

health sciences; come on in, it doesn’t matter whether there’s 

three-quarters of you may not get a job in that area; come on in 

anyways. Spend your $10,000 a year getting an education and 

then, whoops! when you’re done, no jobs in that area. No jobs 

because some of the jobs of the future are as I pointed out 

earlier. 

 

Now are you doing those students a favour? Now you want to 

cling to the past and suggest that all is well and that there are 

jobs there. But the reality is, hon. member, there are no jobs in 

some of those areas. 

 

But don’t take my word for it, member for Saskatoon 

University. What did the Saskatchewan Nursing Assistants 

Association report, page 79, and I believe this report was put 

together in 1986, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Saskatchewan Nursing Assistants’ Association released the 

report on utilization of certified nursing assistants in 

Saskatchewan, which advocated that overall institute 

admissions to nursing assistant programs be, and I quote now, 

Mr. Chairman, from the report, be “. . . sharply curtailed to 

bring supply back into reasonable balance with demand.” End 

of quotation from their report. 

 

Now the hon. member is trying to suggest that he knows 

something more than the Saskatchewan Nursing Assistants’ 

Association. The Saskatchewan Nursing  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1565 

 

Assistants’ Association own report said that admission should 

be “. . . sharply curtailed to bring supply back into reasonable 

balance with demand.” What they’re saying is there’s no sense 

feeding in 500 people if there’s only jobs for 100. That’s what 

they’re saying, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Now he doesn’t want to acknowledge that fact. He just want to 

cry, cut-backs. Well I don’t suggest for a minute, Mr. 

Chairman, that we haven’t reduced program seats in some 

areas, but for good reasons. For good reasons. Who are we 

doing a favour if there are no jobs? Or in some instances, the 

people themselves saw that, I’ve read into the record here 

before, examples of courses where we had 14 spaces and only 

five took it. Well what was the sense of having 14 spaces tied 

up and there’s only five wanting to take it? 

 

The question that they should be asking, Mr. Chairman, is this: 

what are you doing to provide the training spaces and the 

training opportunities for the jobs of the future? That should be 

the question in this legislature, not, well why are you cutting 

these? I know there’s no jobs there, but why are you cutting 

them anyways? They’re clinging to the past, Mr. Chairman, 

absolutely and unequivocally clinging to the past. 

 

And I’m not happy for those nursing assistants who go through 

the system, spend maybe 10 or $20,000 a year and end up with 

no jobs. I’m not happy about that. 

 

And the hon. member raises from his seat about the dental 

assistants. Well what is the issue as it relates to dental 

assistants? Well the issue as it relates to dental assistants, Mr. 

Chairman, is this. The program is not somehow disappearing, as 

the hon. member might lead people to believe. It’s being 

consolidated at Wascana Institute, and rightfully, yes, the 

Kelsey program is being closed. So is there going to be a 

program? Yes, there is going to be a program. 

 

The dental assistant program at Kelsey is being closed and 

consolidated at Wascana Institute for some very good reasons I 

might add. One, Wascana trains both dental assistants and 

dental hygienists, and is the centre for excellence for health, 

including dental sciences training. 

 

Secondly, and importantly once again for a reason that 

recognizes the make-up of society today, that these professions 

very often have many women in them, and we want to 

accommodate the life-style today of the modern woman. 

 

And so Wascana’s curriculum permits flexibility for part-time 

enrolment to complete the training over two years, particularly 

to try and acknowledge those students who have heavy family 

responsibilities. And yet, if you recall in this House, Mr. 

Chairman, during this estimates, he’s trying to suggest 

somehow these changes are anti-woman. Well, I’m telling you 

that we have, in fact, acknowledged the women in society and 

not just given it lip-service like those people did when they 

were in government. We’ve acknowledged it. That’s why we’ve 

got evening training programs, and that’s why we’ve 

consolidated this programming at Wascana. 

 

And I want to give you another reason, Mr. Chairman, that 

Wascana’s facility and equipment are considered among the 

best in Canada for training dental auxiliaries. 

 

He wants to have duplication. We want to have it consolidated 

where there is the best program whether we’ve got a curriculum 

that meets the modern times and the modern needs, particularly 

of women, and women with family, Mr. Chairman. And I think 

if one was to go further, we would probably find a report along 

the way of an advisory body that said, as well, it should be 

consolidated. 

 

And the hon. member can argue with me whether we should 

consolidate at Saskatoon or consolidate at Regina, but for these 

reasons, Mr. Chairman, we’ve consolidated it, and we’ve 

consolidated it in Regina. 

 

I stand by these changes, Mr. Chairman, because they make 

sense. They’re in the best interests of the individuals. They’re in 

the best interests of the young adults that are in these programs. 

 

(1630) 

 

And I have every reason to believe that the health sciences, 

including dental assistants, will serve our province well in the 

future, Mr. Chairman. I have absolutely no reason to believe 

otherwise. 

 

And one other point I would like to lay on the record, because 

in all this talk of cut-backs the hon. members have almost, I 

think, left the impression, certainly with some in the media, that 

there are no health science courses going to be offered, and no 

seats available across Saskatchewan. 

 

Well what is the record, Mr. Chairman? Yes, there have been 

cut-backs for the reasons I talked about — no jobs down the 

road. But what are we really talking about? Well the reality is, 

in ’87-88 nearly 1,000 training spaces will still be in place in 

this province, Mr. Chairman — nearly 1,000. And yes, you’re 

right, last year the similar number was 1,082. 

 

Now how does he square that with his talk of decimation? You 

can’t. His comments are incredible; they’re inaccurate; there is 

misinformation in them; he doesn’t have the fully story. And 

the reality is, Mr. Chairman, it’s my job to provide the full 

story. I grant you that. And these are the facts, these are the 

facts on whether you’re talking about making sure we have the 

courses of the future, looking after our staff, making sure we 

have health sciences covered off. I think the hon. member will 

agree the government deserves full marks in every area. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just like to 

say that the rhetoric coming from the other side of the House is 

really inaccurate when it comes to the reinstating instructors. 

It’s a good example of the double talk and the inaccuracies 

flowing from the government side of the House these days. 

 

But I would like to address my question to the minister, and my 

question is with regards to the Alvin Buckwold Centre in 

Saskatoon. Can you minister tell me how the  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1566 

 

interaction preschool program was funded in the past, and can 

you tell me in general terms, briefly, the function carried out by 

interaction preschool at the Alvin Buckwold Centre? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As relates to the preschool programs 

. . . and I think the hon. member already mentioned specifically 

the Alvin Buckwold School, and there may have been I think 

three others that fell in the same category. The funding there in 

the past . . . And just for everyone’s information, what we’re 

talking about here is some individuals aged perhaps 3, 4, 5, who 

might not be able to sort of pick up the traces along with other 

ones when they enter grade one, some special programming for 

them to make sure that, or to perhaps enable them to slip into 

the grade one, into the regular system with ease. In the past the 

funding there was on a special basis if you like, or a pilot 

project basis, in a direct-line basis from the department for 

those children. 

 

For this year I’m advised that the funding now will come from 

out of the school board’s funding, if you like, or the division’s 

funding, as it would for other operating other programs. So it’s 

the usual kind of avenue now as opposed to the pilot project 

special funding basis previously. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Yes. Can the Minister tell me, will that change 

in the funding process, as you mentioned it did go from the 

board of education through Alvin Buckwold Centre in 

Saskatoon to the interaction preschool, will the change in the 

process of the funding now going through the local school 

board facilitate any changes in the staff in the interaction 

preschool program at Alvin Buckwold Centre in Saskatoon? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We don’t expect any changes in 

staffing. But as the hon. member can appreciate, I think we 

don’t control the division and how they organize their affairs. 

But if the enrolments are there, and all things being equal, I 

would think that staffing would be unaffected. But I can’t speak 

unequivocally for them. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — In this program, they have children with 

special needs — and your age category is out a little bit; it’s 

running from three months to 20 months or thereabouts . . . 

teaching basic skills. They now have employed developmental 

therapists, they’re classed as, with special training into giving 

these children the necessary training to — anywhere from toilet 

training to sitting properly, just the basic life skills. 

 

Now I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, because the funding is now 

going to go through the local school board, will the people 

involved in that teaching, in that interaction preschool, have to 

have a teaching certificate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I must admit to the 

hon. member that I am not conversant with what the 

certification requirements are now. But all I can say to you, 

once again, is that we don’t anticipate any particular changes. 

But then again, you know, we’re not . . . local school boards, as 

you can expect and appreciate and respect, and as they would 

expect, have local autonomy and we don’t try to tell them how 

to run their affairs. And I wouldn’t pretend to do so in this 

instance, but we don’t  

anticipate any great changes, whether it be in staffing or in the 

certification required by that staffing. But I say that with the 

caveat that I’ve attached. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Well I think there is a potential problem 

because we have people employed who have special training 

and combined years of experience of 20 years managing this 

program. And I think with the system already overloaded, a 

four to five months backlog, unless it’s a special case, you can 

appreciate that the children in this program need the experience 

and they need the training that the present developmental 

therapist can give them. 

 

Now I would like you, through your people over on that side, to 

assure me and to assure other parents of special-needs children 

that the training . . . the people involved in training, the 

developmental therapists involved in the interaction preschool 

. . . Now you can stand there and say, well, you’re not sure. 

 

But the point is, if there is a technical requirement for those 

people to hold teaching certificates thereby replacing the 

present staff, then you can appreciate the fact that we will be 

put back many, many years in the development of this program 

— a pioneering program in Saskatoon and in this province. 

They are teaching basic skills; they are setting up home 

programs, home visits. As I said before, they provide follow-up 

consultation with children going into preschool programs or day 

care programs. 

 

I would like you, Mr. Minister, to assure the people and the 

children involved in these programs, that those developmental 

therapists, with all their expertise and all the knowledge they 

have to give these children, will be maintained in that position 

regardless of whether the school board is managing the funds or 

whether it comes from the Department of Education to the 

Alvin Buckwold Centre, as it did in the past. Can you assure 

that those therapists will not be replaced by people simply 

because they need teaching certificates, and set this program 

back 20 years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member has asked me 

to do something over which I have no control. And if I was to 

sort of come down with a heavy hand and say, I’m from Regina 

and I’m in the legislature here and I know best; local school 

board, here’s the line and here’s how I want you to tow it; and 

the hon. member would have criticized me for interfering in 

local autonomy. I mean, that’s the reality of what he’s 

suggesting. 

 

What I am saying to him, and what I will say to again, is, as I 

understand it, by every measure the pilot program — and I 

think it was undertaken in four locations — was a success. I 

have every reason to believe that those school boards, too, view 

that pilot project as a success. And hence, I have every reason to 

believe that their good judgement, and because of that, will lead 

them to deliver the program, all things being equal, in a matter 

not dissimilar from years past. And to give the hon. member 

more assurance that that, I cannot. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, in that case, if the case presents 

itself that the people with the expertise, through  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1567 

 

some decision by the school board, are replaced — let’s say that 

the school board, because of some technicality that . . . which I 

think there may be, that they may have to have a teaching 

certificate. If those people are replaced, can you assure me that 

the Department of Education will then go back and fund the 

interaction preschool as it was funded in the past, to ensure that 

those people with the expertise remain there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I will give the hon. member this 

commitment and this assurance, because I think we can strike a 

reasonable balance here relative to his inquiry and yet respect 

the local autonomy. If you sense a deterioration in quality, then 

you raise that with me and I will have my officials look into it, 

and we can make appropriate representations and draw that to 

the local official’s attention, you know, given that we would not 

make an unfair assessment. 

 

Similarly, I have instructed my officials if they sense in their 

daily goings on and through special education, etc., etc., if they 

sense in their own minds a deterioration in quality, they have 

assured me and I have in fact instructed them that I would want 

them to make some assessments and make some determinations 

of whether that is the case or it is not. And I think it’s in no 

one’s best interest to see deterioration into quality, and clearly 

that’s the case. 

 

At the same time I’m not going to judge someone guilty when 

we know them to be guilty of nothing. I don’t think that would 

be fair. As I said before, I’ve got a fair amount of faith in the 

reasonableness and sensitivity of that local board and . . . I 

mean, I have no reason to suspect that they won’t maintain it 

much as it’s been maintained in the past. But if you, along the 

way over the course of this next year sense otherwise, or my 

officials, then I’ll have it investigated. I think that would be fair 

ball. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Minister, I think that would be. 

 

I just have one final question. Would you say that replacing 

present staff with new staff with teaching certificates would be 

. . . would you consider that a deterioration of the service? 

Would you personally, and your staff, consider that a 

deterioration of service? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, it’s 

difficult for me to make a judgement based on a hypothetical 

situation because I think what everybody is interested in in the 

end of the day is that the same kind of quality that we enjoyed 

in the pilot project continue. And I suspect there’s a number of 

factors that if you alter this one or change that one or move this 

one or whatever, that could, ultimately, have some effect. Same 

might be positive, some might be negative, and the end result 

may well be that the quality is the same. 

 

I guess we’re interested in the output. And, as I said earlier, I 

have every . . . I’ve got a fair amount of faith in the judgement 

of that board, and I guess . . . 

 

If I’m missing something in your questioning, that perhaps you 

could raise with me, either here or privately if you like, and if 

you have some reason to suspect or to question  

the judgement there . . . Has there been something to lead you 

to that conclusion? Am I missing something, I guess, is what I 

am saying. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — I just have — I just am looking into the future, 

and I’m worried that changing the procedure by which funding 

is given could, through some technicality, mean that the people 

that are already there will be replaced. And I just want to say 

that I will be monitoring the situation. 

 

The people there, at the Alvin Buckwold Centre, are very 

uncertain as to what’s happening these days, and I think they 

need some reassurances, as do the people involved with 

children with special needs. 

 

So I’ll take your assessment of monitoring the situation at face 

value. And I can assure you that if there’s any change in staff, 

that you will never hear the end of this to me unless it’s a 

significant improvement, and you would have to be going a 

long way to find better people than you have there right now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t disagree with his observations. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to ask for your comments on your 

government’s understanding of the Saskatoon Board of 

Education’s request for funding for seven new schools in 

Saskatoon within the next five years, and how you see that 

unfolding in terms of government commitment to 

neighbourhood schools and funding for them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The first comment I would like to 

make just to reassure you and school boards, I suppose, across 

the province is our commitment to neighbourhood schools 

remains unchanged. In fact, the whole process of priorizing and 

determining which project should be build first, second, that 

kind of thing, remains unchanged as well. I think it’s a system 

that for the most part has worked well for some several years in 

this province. 

 

The decision making is left up to neutral groups, if you like, not 

disinterested parties, but neutral teams that go around and 

evaluate every request. And I know at the end of the day there’s 

some . . . I mean whether a project is number 29 or number 30, 

perhaps there’s some subjectivity in their evaluations, but I 

know they try to be as objective as possible, as do the officials 

in the department. 

 

And I know, too, that in any given year we receive probably 

something in the order of 200 requests for projects of which we 

can never build them all, but we do as well as we can with the 

amount of dollars we have. 

 

One thing that we are toying with — and this isn’t policy yet 

but it’s something that we are toying with — is trying to look to 

a greater degree than we have in the past of some kind of 

five-year planning process — approval in principles, perhaps; 

something along that line so that everyone can plan better, they 

and us included. 

 

And I know that’s not without its pitfalls either, but it’s  

  



 

August 5, 1987 

1568 

 

something that I’m prepared to give some fair consideration 

too. And you may want to pass that along to school boards if 

you, in fact, meet with them. And it may well be that in the next 

six months we’ve got that nailed down in some more detail than 

we have this day. I think it addresses in part, you know, your 

question’s relative the planning process in general. 

 

So I would say these two things, generally. Number one is: the 

commitment to neighbourhood schools is unchanged, the 

priorization process is unchanged. But, yes, we are looking at 

using a five-year planning window and some twists and some 

variations on that. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m aware of the 

uncertainties of the funding process. I’m also aware that the 

public school board has, as I understand it, a five-year plan. 

 

And I guess my concern is for the Erindale area of Sutherland 

— five of the seven schools proposed in this five-year plan are 

for Erindale. They had hoped to commence construction this 

summer on a new school for Erindale. And are you aware that 

that now means that some 300 children will have to be bused 

this school year to other schools in Saskatoon? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well we’re . . . we’re aware of the 

situation as it relates to Erindale, and we’re making all possible 

resources available in terms of accommodating the needs there, 

whether it be portables or whatever, or transportation 

allowances in terms of busing — that kind of things that we 

have in terms of policy and programming already in place. 

 

But of course I suppose the preferred solution would be to . . . 

as I’m sure you would agree, is to be — have construction 

under way on the $3.8 million project. And that’s not an 

inconsiderable sum, as you can well appreciate, 3.8 millions of 

dollars. 

 

I, too, wish we were building that and, I suppose, many others, 

because the list is endless, I think is a fair observation I could 

make after being in this job for six or eight months now. 

 

I don’t want to raise expectations unnecessarily or, you know, 

put false hopes in place, and I can tell you this much, that 

Erindale project is a very high priority. 

 

I can’t say much more than that because I might be raising false 

hopes. It’s not an insignificant sum. 

 

We recognize the demographics and the pressures that 

Saskatoon is facing. In some ways, I suppose, it’s an enviable 

position. There are a lot of cities across Canada that wish they 

were growing and had the dynamics that Saskatoon does have. 

They do not. 

 

But certainly it places pressure on our system and I’m advised 

that it will be dealt with and school will go on. At this point in 

time you and I can’t stand here and announce the preferred 

solution, I suppose, but the schooling needs will be met, I can 

tell you that. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — I guess my question, Mr. Minister, is how  

the schooling needs will be met? I don’t have any question as to 

whether they will be met, but how they will be met, I think, is 

the concern for the people at Erindale. And I think that the need 

is transparent at this point. It’s projected by the public school 

board that by next fall, by September of 1988, there’ll be some 

700 children needing busing. 

 

And a school obviously can’t be in place now that it hasn’t been 

approved for construction this year. It can’t be in place by 

September of ‘88. Then the concern is compounded in the fact 

that that whole north-eastern section of the city is projected to 

grow by some 50,000 people in the next decade. Therein lies 

the need for five elementary schools, a high school or a 

collegiate as well. 

 

And so I think it behoves us as individuals responsible for the 

funding of these schools not to have the false economies of 

busing children when we know that the needs are going to be 

there. They’re just transparently there. And I’m wondering what 

guarantees you can give us that we aren’t just talking about one 

school for Erindale, but in fact that the public school board’s 

plans for the Hindmarsh school, for the Broad Acres school, for 

a third and possibly a fourth elementary school, and for a start 

on a collegiate will begin before the end of this decade. It’s not 

just one school that we’re talking about, given the growth that is 

not just projected for that north-eastern part of the city, but is 

actually taking place there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I guess I can say again that I too wish 

that, I suppose, all 200 projects that we get every year we could 

approve. That probably wouldn’t be responsible government. I 

suppose it might make every community happy, but the reality 

is on close assessment by our evaluation teams that sometimes 

those interests haven’t always been evaluated in the best 

long-term view. How we are going to address this — and sure it 

may well be second best, and I don’t disacknowledge that — is 

through the use of relocatables and portables and busing. And, 

yes, we too recognize that that’s the second best and it’s most 

expensive in the long haul. 

 

But just to keep the entire Saskatoon picture in perspective, the 

hon. member will know that the Forest Grove elementary 

project, well over 3 million again, is going ahead. And once 

again, I don’t want to raise false hopes and expectations that I 

can’t deliver on. But your assumptions about what might not be 

or what might be built by ‘88 is predicated on the basis that 

there may be no alterations on the program array over the next 

six or eight months. And past history has proven that sometimes 

some school divisions, even when they get approvals, change 

their minds, and that sometimes frees up money elsewhere. 

 

Now I don’t know whether this year will prove to be that way 

or not, and that’s why I’m being very careful and guarded in my 

comments. But all I can tell you is we recognize the dynamics 

and the demographics of Saskatoon. We have approved the 

major project, and the schooling needs will be met. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 


