













































September 1, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 1, 1987 

 

2191 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Reorganization Study 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

for the Deputy Premier, but in his absence, to the Premier, and 

it deals with the massive and expensive government 

reorganization study that is now being conducted by the 

Coopers & Lybrand Consulting Group. That study was 

announced by you on January 30 of this year. I wonder if the 

Premier can tell us how many consultants you have hired to 

undertake this study; when do you expect the work to be 

completed; and what do you think that the budget will be for 

this consulting study? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have all those 

details. I’ll take notice of the question. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. While the 

Premier is taking notice . . . I am told that the final cost of this 

massive consulting study is now projected to be about $3 

million, and that’s nearly half the budget for the children’s 

dental program. While the Premier is taking notice, perhaps he 

could provide some justification for spending that kind of 

money on a consultant’s report when, at the same time, your 

government is raising taxes and cutting public services. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of 

the question. I have no indication at all that the member’s 

figures are accurate, but I will get the appropriate figures when 

we have the opportunity. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — New question to the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker. You know that this consulting study is largely a 

vehicle for your government to dole out patronage to a former 

cabinet minister, one Tim Embury. And I wonder . . . While 

you’re taking notice, you might tell us how much of this study 

is being undertaken by this defeated PC cabinet minister or his 

companies, and how much of that $3 million is ending up in his 

pockets? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, those are unfair allegations 

and, frankly, irresponsible. I have taken notice of the question, 

and I’ll provide the answers when I have the first opportunity. 

 

Sale of Dental Equipment 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the Minister of Health. 

And this is a very sad day for Saskatchewan families, because it 

marks the official end of the best children’s dental plan in North 

America and a replacement of that plan with the government’s 

privatized inferior version. 

 

Mr. Minister, you are so ashamed of what you’re doing that you 

don’t even have the courage to hold a public auction of all of 

the dental plan’s equipment. 

Can the minister tell us the estimated value your department has 

put on the dental plan equipment that you now have up for 

secret auction? And have you been advised to expect a return of 

10 cents on the dollar, 50 cents on the dollar – what’s the 

estimate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of things, Mr. Speaker, as it 

relates to the member’s preamble related to the new dental plan 

which comes into effect as of today. A couple of things that we 

had said as it relates to that dental plan, and that there would be 

more dental services provided in rural Saskatchewan in 

communities where there is not now dental service for the 

public at large, including children. 

 

Communities like Strasbourg, Radville, St. Walburg, Edam, 

Paradise Hill, Turtleford, Outlook, Hafford, Cut Knife – all of 

those communities will now have dental services down on their 

Main Street that they have not had heretofore. That’s already 

there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And as it relates to the specifics, Mr. 

Speaker, as it relates to the specifics of the value of equipment, 

the minister responsible for the Property Management 

Corporation and his department is responsible for the disposal 

of that equipment. We have had . . . The preliminaries are under 

way in terms of dentists in the province having a look at the 

equipment and putting in bids for that equipment. 

 

And I would submit to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members of 

the House and to the public, that’s a reasonable approach to 

take, given that this is highly specialized equipment and it is not 

something that the public at large will be clamouring for to put 

into their basement, let’s say. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, for your 

information there used to be 570 locations in this province 

where people could go and get their children’s teeth fixed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — But, Mr. Minister, this reminds me of the 

highway auction sale that your government undertook a few 

years ago, except in this case you’re holding the auction in 

secret because you know the public’s so outraged by your 

decision to do in this excellent preventive health program. Can 

you tell Saskatchewan taxpayers why this sell-off of dental plan 

equipment is being staged as an exclusive, invitational tenders 

sale, only for dentists; can you give us that information? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, I said very 

clearly that it’s the preliminary and the very first step, and that 

could be a very natural step where any thinking person would 

think that the dentists would be interested.  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2192 

 

And the dentists will be there and they’re putting in their bids. 

After that there will be an opportunity for others in the field, or 

whoever would like to buy equipment; there’s no question 

about that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the member makes reference as well to the 

whole philosophy of whether or not certain equipment, or 

whatever, that it’s owned by the government regardless of what 

field it is in, and the selling of that equipment and how that goes 

about. 

 

I was very much involved, as you will know, Mr. Speaker, and 

that member may know, in the sale of the other equipment. 

She’s speaking of highway equipment and I know . . . in what 

she said. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, some of that equipment was 

backed into the bush in their former boondoggled DNS 

(department of northern Saskatchewan) and sat there for as long 

as two or three years without ever having been used, and we 

sold it, and they condemned the sale. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, isn’t it a fact that you’re in a 

real hurry to sell off this equipment because you want to make 

it more difficult for the next Government of Saskatchewan to 

reintroduce a school-based dental program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And I can tell the people of Saskatchewan, 

and I can tell you, that this isn’t going to work because our 

government will reintroduce a school-based program once 

we’re elected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — But I return to the question of a secret 

auction of what is in essence public equipment. How do you 

justify a secret, invitation-only sale of equipment Saskatchewan 

taxpayers have bought and paid for; and why isn’t the sale open 

equally to all members of the public? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: —, I have outlined the way and the terms 

of the details of how the sale will be conducted. My colleague, 

the minister responsible for the property management 

corporation, can answer those details. 

 

As it relates to the position of the member stating on behalf of 

the New Democratic Party, she says her government, when and 

if it’s ever re-elected, would reinstate the dental plan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, is that member speaking for this leadership 

candidate or that leadership candidate, or which faction of the 

party, because I want you to take note of this fact, which is true. 

The member for Saskatoon Sutherland one day in this House 

said: their government, if re-elected, would reinstate the drug 

plan as it was constituted. I heard him say that. That member 

from Saskatoon Nutana in the media just one week ago said, 

when asked the question, would you reinstate the drug plan, no, 

I don’t say that we’d reinstate the drug plan as it once was; I 

wouldn’t say that . . . 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I think what we see here is a 

situation where we’re getting into debate, not question period. 

And therefore I would ask members to ask their questions in 

such a way as to not provoke debate; on the other hand, I would 

ask ministers to stick to the question being asked. 

 

Commissioned Collection Agents for SPC 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 

absence of the minister responsible for SPC, I’ll direct my 

question to the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, September 1 also marks the day on which SPC 

ends its long-standing arrangement with Saskatchewan drug 

stores and small businesses by which customers could pay their 

monthly SPC bills at these small businesses. This was an 

important convenience for SPC customers, Mr. Speaker, 

especially for seniors, and an important source of revenue and 

extra business for Saskatchewan small businesses. What I 

would like to know is whether the PC government has 

reconsidered this anti-small-business decision, and whether they 

will allow Saskatchewan small businesses and drug stores to 

continue as commissioned collection agents in this regard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that I can 

recall that the Deputy Premier and the minister responsible for 

Sask Power said that the new policy would provide a savings in 

excess of $200,000 a year to the potash corporation . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Power corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — . . . or the power corporation, which 

obviously can be applied to the general consuming public 

across the province. And if you want to manage and provide 

those savings at a retail basis, then obviously people can pay 

their bills; they can send them in; they can go to the credit 

union; they can go to financial institutions, and at the same time 

Sask Power can save $200,000 a year. It seems to me that that’s 

the kind of thing that the general public would be interested in. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. The Premier 

talks about saving $200,000. He talks about saving $200,000, 

and I remind him once again that that’s about equal to the salary 

of George Hill, the SPC patronage appointment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — And if restraint is your goal, Mr. Premier, why 

don’t you privatize George Hill or cut his salary in half, which 

is nearly, I understand, two and a half times that of his 

predecessor for the same job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can just say to the 

hon. member, once she gets into personalities, and it must give 

us a little bit of leeway to question the whole line of questioning 

here in the legislature today. 

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2193 

 

People across Saskatchewan and certainly across Canada are 

very interested in the U.S. farm Bill, and international potash 

interests, and the opposition here is more concerned about the 

salary of a particular individual than they are in hundreds of 

thousands of dollars, and tens of thousands of people that are 

working across the country, and they don’t even know it’s 

relevant. 

 

I hope the national media hits them up again on the fact that 

they’re more concerned about raising a couple of names than 

they are, generally, of the interests of the people of the 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier is obviously not 

aware . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier is 

obviously not aware of what’s been going on in this House in 

the last few days. Doesn’t the Premier understand, Mr. Speaker, 

doesn’t the Premier understand that more than the commission 

for these small businesses is at stake? But that when 100 or 

more SPC customers go into a small business, that there’s a lot 

of spin-off business to that small-business person? Doesn’t the 

Premier understand that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And I want to know why his government refused to consult 

with these small businesses about the effect it would have on 

them before they gave notice of the change – something like 

less than one month’s notice – and transferred the business to 

banks and trust companies? Why didn’t your government 

consult, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, to be fair to the hon. 

member, if she’s concerned about small business, she could ask 

very clearly what would be the consequences of the potash 

legislation just introduced by the United States and the 

preliminary hearing closing all the mines in Saskatchewan on 

3,600 employees and all the small businesses in all the towns 

across the province. And she hasn’t even got the intelligence to 

raise the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

Order, please. Order, please! Order, please! 

 

Lay-Offs from the Saskatchewan Forest Products 

Corporation 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. My 

question is to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Forest Products Corporation. Last Friday, Mr. Minister, your 

government laid off 31 in-scope employees at the wood treating 

plant in Prince Albert. What you’ve done, Mr. Minister, is 

you’ve thrown 31 people out of work, and 31 more families are 

looking for pay cheques. My question, Mr. Minister, is: I want 

to know the reason why you’ve ordered these people to be  

laid off? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the hon. 

member’s outlined, there were some lay-off notices given to 

people at the treatment plant in Prince Albert last Friday, I 

believe. 

 

As it relates to this, Mr. Speaker, people should remember what 

that treatment plant does. The treatment plant is there to treat – 

and has been for a good number of years – and it treats power 

poles. Okay. The major part of their work has been treating 

power poles and some outdoor wood. Mr. Speaker, there has 

been an initiative by this government, which has widespread, 

excellent benefit for rural Saskatchewan, to bury power lines. 

And for a good number of years prior to that, telephone lines 

have been buried in Saskatchewan. That’s a fact. 

 

The treatment plant, as a consequence of that, is suffering some 

problems in terms of the markets, and some of these people will 

be there. But there’s no question that we’re concerned about the 

individual 31 people and if they can be . . . The member will 

also know – I know he opposed the forest industry development 

that went on in Prince Albert, the very same location last year, 

as it relates to the development of a paper mill . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Some of 

the answers are getting too long. Some of the heckling in this 

Chamber is getting out of hand this afternoon, and therefore I 

would just like to ask for the co-operation of all members so we 

get through this question period in a reasonable manner. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary to the same minister. Mr. 

Minister, I’m not sure if you’re familiar about the goings-on 

and what’s really happening with that treating plant up there, 

because you wouldn’t be just talking about power poles. Are 

you aware, Mr. Minister, that that particular corporation has 

turned away sales because of lack of stock? And because of 

your government’s inability to perform, the way you treat 

Crown corporations, there are 31 families out of work. And I 

want to know, Mr. Minister, if you’re aware that they’ve been 

turning away business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation, under the administration of this 

government, in the last several years has made some money. 

Now that’s something that they can’t claim for a good long time 

before, and they even claimed and they even talked about it 

being a social agency almost, to keep people working for what 

benefit. What I’m saying to . . . We’re concerned about the 31 

people, but I will say that the Saskatchewan Forest Products 

Corporation now, under the jurisdiction of this government, is 

operating on a profitable basis, and that’s the way the people of 

Saskatchewan expect their corporations to operate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I heard  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2194 

 

an answer, I heard a response, but I never heard an answer to 

the question that I asked. And I’m asking you again: are you 

aware that that corporation’s been turning away business 

because of lack of stock? That was the question, Mr. Minister. 

Answer me that question, would you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that that 

corporation has been turning away business, Mr. Speaker. I will 

reiterate again, that corporation is operating on a profitable 

basis. That’s something that that administration when they 

operated Sask Forest Products did not do – did not do – and 

that’s something that this administration has done and will 

continue to do. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Final supplementary, Mr. Minister, my 

question to you is this: is the Saskatchewan Forest Products 

Corporation up for sale? Are you now in the midst of turning 

this corporation over to some more of your friends, like you’ve 

done with the other privatization of the Crown corporations in 

this province? 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to know: are these lay offs the first step in 

giving away that corporation, a valuable asset of the people of 

this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ve said on other occasions, Mr. 

Speaker, that this forum is probably not the appropriate one for 

negotiation to take place, but would the hon. member like to 

buy it? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Proposed Government Action in Potash Industry 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Minister of Energy and Mines, and has to do with the very 

serious crisis in our potash industry in Saskatchewan. The 

government, of course, is proposing to take action very shortly. 

I wonder if the minister could give us her assurance that in that 

proposed action she has very clearly in mind the potential 

impact upon jobs and employment in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and could she give us her estimate as to what the 

impact of her proposed action will be in relation to jobs in the 

potash industry in Saskatchewan for the remainder of this year 

and through 1988? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I can inform the member 

that first reading of the Bill will be tabled today. The member 

will have an opportunity to look at the details of it and judge for 

himself some of the implications that will be within it. 

 

I can tell him that the intent of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, is to 

in fact save jobs. Without any kind of government action at all, 

it would be our guess that you would see severe job loss. We’ve 

already lost over 1,000 jobs over the last several years, and in 

fact without any government action, Mr. Speaker, we would be 

closing down mines and losing our production. 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, the job loss situation, both in the 

short term and in the long term, is a very serious concern for all 

Saskatchewan people. I wonder if the minister would indicate if 

she anticipates any job loss in Saskatchewan, not as a 

consequence of the long-term problem that’s been created by 

the United States, but directly as a consequence of the 

legislation to be introduced later this day. Would she anticipate 

jobs directly lost even in the short term as a consequence of that 

legislation; and if she does, does she or the government have 

specific plans in . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, it would be premature to 

speculate as to what may happen without the member having a 

first opportunity to look at the Bill and then debate the Bill. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary on this 

same matter. In making the proposals that she will make to the 

House later this afternoon, I wonder if the minister has specific 

assurances that potash supply from other countries, or from 

other provinces in Canada, will not replace Saskatchewan 

potash in United States markets. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, let me re-emphasize what I 

said to his first question. The intent of this legislation was in 

fact to protect the industry and the jobs that come with it. 

 

I’m sorry, the second question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 

can give this House the assurance, and the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, that it is our full intent to exercise a 

leadership role, given the fact that we are one of the largest, if 

not the largest potash producer in the free world. For the 

member’s benefit, we are also the world’s largest exporter. 

With this legislation it is not our intent to give up that 

leadership role nor our market share. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Uninsured Saskatchewan Depositors in Principal Group 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Consumer Affairs, and I hope she will have the 

courtesy to answer my question because people continue to be 

concerned about your government’s negligence in the collapse 

of the Principal Savings and Trust and the two Principal Group 

investment contract companies. Can the minister finally tell us 

exactly how many Saskatchewan people had uninsured deposits 

in Principal Savings and Trust, and the value of those uninsured 

deposits? 

 

And secondly, can she now tell us how many Saskatchewan 

people had investment contracts with Associated Investors of 

Canada and First Investors Corporation, and the value of those 

investment contracts? You’ve had many weeks to get these 

details, and can you give us these figures now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we have not yet obtained that 

information. As I indicated to the hon. member, that when we 

had it we would advise the Assembly as to that  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2195 

 

information. We have not yet been able to obtain it. 

 

Lawyer Representing Province of Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, new question. You’ve had several 

weeks to get that information. It reflects your negligence, your 

incompetence, and your indifference which continues to amaze 

me . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — . . . I’ll ask the Minister of Consumer Affairs 

this question. A number of weeks ago the government said that 

it was going to appoint a lawyer to represent the province of 

Saskatchewan’s interests during the investigations in Alberta. 

Has that lawyer been appointed? If so, who is it, and what are 

that person’s terms of reference? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, as we indicated some time 

ago, and obviously, I suppose, if there’s a negligence it’s that 

the hon. member doesn’t bother reading the information that 

does come out from the government, Mr. Speaker. It would 

certainly save the hon. member wasting the time of the 

Assembly, as we’ve indicated that Mr. Joseph Brumlik from the 

province of Alberta has some significant securities background, 

is the lawyer retained by the province of Saskatchewan to 

monitor proceedings in the province of Alberta and to represent 

the government in those proceedings as necessary. In other 

words, counsel has full rein to participate, subject, of course, to 

the limitations imposed by the courts of the province of Alberta. 

As I indicated, Mr. Speaker, that announcement was made some 

time ago. Obviously the hon. member wasn’t paying attention. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I want to know if 

the Minister of Finance will table this lawyer’s reports so that 

Saskatchewan people who lost money in the collapse of the 

companies will know the full facts and can make use of this 

information in any legal actions. Will you at least do that much 

for these people whom you’ve so badly let down? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t give the assurance that 

all information would be forthcoming because, as the hon. 

member may have forgotten, the province of Saskatchewan 

Department of Justice did request the commercial crime section 

of the RCM Police to do an investigation, and historically in 

this province that information has not been made public. 

 

With regard to the information obtained by counsel in the 

province of Alberta, obviously we would hope to have full 

disclosure. It would depend on the circumstances, whether it’s 

privileged information or not, but our hope would be to give as 

much information to the Saskatchewan depositors and investors 

as possible to help them, in any case. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 36 – An Act respecting the Potash Resources of 

Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I move first reading of a Bill, The Potash 

Resources Act, be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

would seek leave of the Assembly to move a number of motions 

here, five of them, with respect to some assorted businesses of 

the various standing committees. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 

think that we would deny leave, but we have not seen these 

resolutions. Perhaps the minister could explain to us what they 

purport to do, and then we can decide whether to grant leave or 

not. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Okay, that’s fair enough. Would the minister 

please do that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. These 

motions simply refer to the various standing committees such as 

the committee on Crown Corporations, Communications, and 

Public Accounts, various businesses that were incomplete, that 

were not finished at the various Crown Corporations meetings; 

they refer them to the committees. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of Annual Reports and Financial Statements to the 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I move, seconded by the member from 

Melville, that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the annual reports and financial statements of the 

various Crown corporations and related agencies as were 

tabled at the Fifth Session of the 20th Legislature, and not 

reported upon by the Crown Corporations Committee 

during that session, and the annual reports and financial 

statements as tabled in the present session, be referred to 

the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Report to Standing Committee on 

Communications 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Melville, that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the annual report of the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Library, tabled this session, be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Communication. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Public Accounts to Standing Committee on 

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2196 

 

Public Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Melville, that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan, 

tabled as sessional paper number 41, during the Fifth 

Session of the 20th Legislative Assembly, and the Public 

Accounts for the fiscal year 1985-86, as tabled this session, 

be referred to the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Report of Provincial Auditor to the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Melville, that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the report of the Provincial Auditor, tabled as 

sessional paper number 20, during the Fifth Session of the 

20th Legislative Assembly, and reports tabled this session, 

be referred to the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Recommendations to the Standing Committee 

on Communications 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Melville, that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the recommendations of the public documents 

committee, under The Archives Act, respecting the 

disposal of certain public documents contained in 

sessional paper number 132 tabled during the fifth session 

of the 20th Legislative Assembly and any such 

recommendations tabled this session be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Communication. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before the 

orders of the day, I rise to lay on the table the results of a 

municipal finance survey conduced by the New Democratic 

Party caucus this year. 

 

I would commend its perusal to the Minister of Urban Affairs 

for his edification. As I resume my seat, Mr. Speaker, I express 

the hope that he will be equally forthcoming with information 

that he has access to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 29 – Changes to Children’s Dental Care 

Program 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks, 

I will move the motion which basically is to condemn the 

Saskatchewan government for the destruction of the 

Saskatchewan children’s dental plan as we have come to know 

it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the dental plan arose as a result of a real need for 

dental services in Saskatchewan. This was demonstrated by a 

number of different studies that were done . . . surveys, for 

example, were made in 1968 in Regina and Saskatoon that 

showed that the dental health in Saskatchewan was poor. 

Surveys also showed the there was a chronic shortage of 

dentists in rural areas, and this led to the pilot project at Oxbow, 

Saskatchewan, because Oxbow was in a rural area and there 

was a chronic shortage of dentists in rural areas, as there is 

today, Mr. Speaker. The plan was available for children three to 

12 years old and the purpose was to provide dental health 

education, to provide treatment for children, and to provide 

preventative services. And there’s absolutely no question, Mr. 

Speaker, absolutely no question that the Oxbow project was 

successful. 

 

So in 1974 the government implemented a province-wide, 

school-based dental program to provide comprehensive dental 

care to children between three and 12 years. It was a 

school-based program, Mr. Speaker. There were dental clinics 

in the schools, and dental therapists were trained and put into 

the schools to deal with the children’s dental health. 

 

The dental therapists were established under appropriate 

legislation which set standards and set up a dental therapist 

profession, and in that way they acquired the necessary skills to 

perform the responsibilities. And the dental plan evolved into a 

plan that delivered services to children in a personal, a 

competent, and a convenient manner, Mr. Speaker – a very 

personal and convenient manner, as well as a competent 

manner. And all of this contributed to its great success and 

popularity in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But in the face of that obvious success of the dental plan, in the 

face of the obvious success, Mr. Speaker, the government 

proceeded with its bull-headed policy of privatizing the dental 

care of our children. And like a bull in a china shop, the 

Minister of Health undermined the dental health plan. 

 

The utilization of the dental health plan in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, was very high, something like 20 per cent higher than 

in the three other universal dental plans in Canada that were 

privatized – and I’m referring specifically to Newfoundland, 

Nova Scotia and Quebec. These other programs were 

fee-for-service programs, Mr. Speaker, and they practised the 

private delivery model which we will now be using as of 

September 1 in Saskatchewan. And the utilization in those 

privatized dental programs was something like 20 per cent less 

than it was in Saskatchewan; unlike the Prince Edward Island 

program, which is yet another dental program in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, which used salaried dental personnel in school clinics, 

the utilization of the PEI program, Mr. Speaker, was higher than 

those privatized programs. 

 

And there were a number of studies done on the dental  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2197 

 

health plan. I have one with me here today, Mr. Speaker, that 

sets out some of the criteria and the successes of the 

Saskatchewan dental health plan. And I think it’s important that 

we refer to this study. And it was done by D.W. Lewis, in 

February 1981, on the performance of the Saskatchewan health 

dental plan, and it reviewed the dental plan from ’74 to ’80. 

And on page 3 of that report, Mr. Lewis says that: 

 

A very high proportion of all Saskatchewan children were 

receiving complete dental care, for example, 73 per cent in 

1979 to ’80. When those children, partially treated under 

the Saskatchewan health dental plan, and partially or 

completely treated in private offices outside the plan are 

added, the level of dental care utilization by children in 

Saskatchewan, which speculatively might reach 90 per 

cent, is probably higher than in any other large geographic 

area in North America. 

 

On page 4, Mr. Lewis goes on to highlight some of the aspects 

of the plan. He says: 

 

About one-quarter of all services rendered each year are 

preventative in nature. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

The average number of fillings per enrollee has dropped 

by about one-half over the six years. The average number 

of pulp treatments and extractions per enrollee has 

declined each year. And it is especially important to note 

that about one-third of the extractions were for orthodontic 

purposes. 

 

On page 5 of the same study, he says: 

 

The most striking finding is that the cost per enrolled child 

have dropped dramatically from $163.05 to $68. 

Importantly, these economies of scale in per capita costs 

were not accomplished at the expense of lower quality, as 

the service utilization and care completion data amply 

demonstrates. 

 

And then Mr. Lewis says, on page 6: 

 

The cost per enrolled child were compared to those of 

Canada’s four other universal children’s denticare plans, 

operating over the same time period. It was concluded that 

the Saskatchewan health dental plan appears now to be 

performing with better, or at least equal, cost. And 

although the ultimate test of the Saskatchewan health 

dental plan will be how it influences the oral health status 

of the people of Saskatchewan in the long run, the 

performance to date gives early indications of the likely 

achievement of this long-term goal. 

 

Now that’s a very telling study, Mr. Speaker. And I just will 

summarize the points that Mr. Lewis makes once again. He says 

there was very high utilization of the plan and, of course, 

ultimately that leads to better dental health. He said the 

utilization was higher than privatized  

plans in Canada. He said one-quarter of the services were 

preventative; fillings dropped; extractions dropped. He said the 

cost per enrolled child dropped by more than 50 per cent, yet 

the quality of service remained. And he said that the cost was 

no more – no more than privatized dental health care plans, and 

probably less. 

 

But the PC government has made a claim to the people of this 

province that it will save 5 million or $5.5 million. And I say to 

you, Mr. Speaker, that that’s not accurate; that’s not true, unless 

the PC government and the Minister of Health is counting on 

lack of accessibility to the plan and the reduction of the 

utilization of the dental health plan. 

 

And I believe that that’s what this government has set out to do. 

It has set out to remove the dental health clinics, and it has done 

that, from the schools, which will reduce the utilization of the 

plan and ultimately affect the dental health of Saskatchewan 

people. It has also made it very difficult for children in rural 

areas to receive dental care because now they will have to drive 

into town, if there even is a dentist in town. 

 

There’s also the fact, Mr. Speaker, that many parents don’t take 

the time to take their children to dentists until there’s a crisis, 

until someone has a toothache, or until there’s some dental 

health problem. Then they will take their child to the dentist. 

That’s the case in some families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the preventative treatment, the preventative treatment that 

was there with the school-based dental health plan, will no 

longer be there. So by attacking the very foundation of the 

Saskatchewan dental health plan – by attacking the very 

foundation – the foundation of accessibility in school-based 

clinics, the government hopes to save money. 

 

(1445) 

 

And it’s prepared, therefore, to sacrifice the dental health of 

farm and city children in the hope of saving some money to pay 

off its $3.4 billion deficit that occurred as a result of its 

mismanagement and incompetence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we, the New Democratic MLAs, predict that in the long run 

they will not save money. In fact it will end up costing us more, 

with poorer results, poorer dental health in Saskatchewan. It 

will cost us more per child, and studies can already establish 

that privatized care in other jurisdictions has cost more per 

enrolled child. 

 

The government has launched itself on this wrong-headed 

course already, Mr. Speaker. It has removed the dental clinics 

from schools. It’s reduced accessibility by rural children. And 

it’s selling off the dental equipment in secret auctions – in 

secret auctions, Mr. Speaker. And I wonder why. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s giving it away. 

 

Ms. Simard: — It’s giving it away, someone said. And I 

suspect that’s why the auctions are secret. 

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2198 

 

And on September 1, this is a Tory day of celebration, 

September 1. It’s the first day of their new PC privatized 

denticare for Saskatchewan children. It’s a Tory day of 

celebration, but it’s a sad day for the children in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, a sad day for the children because it tolls the 

death-knell of a first-class dental plan that produced dramatic 

improvements – dramatic improvements – to the dental health 

care of our children at a cost less per enrolled child than 

privatized dental programs across Canada. 

 

The Saskatchewan plan had dedicated, competent dental nurses 

and therapists. The legislation sets the standards for them. And 

these men and women worked hard, and they were dedicated, 

Mr. Speaker. They didn’t just treat children for dental problems; 

they also attempted to instil an attitude in our children of caring 

for their dental health, an attitude that they would carry with 

them for the rest of their lives, and ultimately improve the 

dental health of Saskatchewan adults. 

 

There were some 578 permanent dental clinics in schools in 

Saskatchewan, and the Minister of Health will refer to seven, or 

eight, or nine rural communities that he says now have dental 

care down the main street, but there were 578 permanent clinics 

in schools across Saskatchewan. That’s a far cry, Mr. Speaker, 

from the ones the Minister of Health refers to. It’s a far cry. 

 

Dental clinics were situated in school because there were a 

number of advantages to doing that – many, many advantages. 

There was better co-ordination with school activities; there were 

familiar surroundings for the children. Because when children 

go to dentists – and you can recall your own personal 

experience, Mr. Speaker, when you were a child – it’s a 

frightening situation, going to the dentist, particularly for that 

first or second time. But in the school situation, when the 

teacher could take them there, or the parents, and they’re in a 

familiar surrounding, it lessened the impact with respect to 

young children being frightened about going to receiving dental 

care. 

 

There was a minimal class disruption, Mr. Speaker, minimal 

class disruption in our schools, and there was minimal working 

time lost – minimal working time lost by dental teams, because 

there were fewer missed opportunities . . . missed appointments 

rather, and because they didn’t have to transport the patients 

down town to receive their dental care, they were right there in 

the school, so there were fewer missed appointments. 

 

And the dental therapists worked hard to make sure that all 

children participated. They make sure . . . they worked hard to 

make sure the children participated, and I wonder whether the 

dentists of this province will be doing that, Mr. Speaker. And I 

speak from personal example, because I had the dental therapist 

phone me personally to ask me if I wish to enrol my child, and 

that was followed up with a couple phone calls. They took a 

real personal interest in your child. But dentists who are very, 

very busy, Mr. Speaker – they’re very busy, they’ve got very 

busy businesses – will they be taking the time to phone all the 

children in the schools to make sure that they use and take 

advantage of the dental health program? Has the Minister of 

Health written that in, that they have a  

responsibility to phone the parents to make sure the children 

go? I think not, Mr. Speaker. I think not. But the therapists 

notified parents, they took the medical history of the child, and 

they gave full clinical examinations. 

 

And a bridging program was established, Mr. Speaker, to 

encourage . . . you know, for older adolescents, 14 to 17, to 

encourage them to continue to look after their dental health. But 

I understand that that bridging program, Mr. Speaker, is not 

there any longer. There was a real education component – a real 

education component. 

 

The dental therapists and the dental staff, Mr. Speaker, 

participated in community and school association meetings. 

They participated in pre-natal classes; they participated in 

career days, school open house, shopping mall displays, health 

fairs, dental health instructions in class-rooms. And I ask you, 

Mr. Speaker: will our busy dentists be able to participate in all 

those things? Will our busy dentists be able to do that? 

 

The education and preventive component, Mr. Speaker, is 

crucial to the effectiveness of the dental health plan – the 

education and preventive component. And I believe that it’s fair 

to say, Mr. Speaker, that those two components will not always 

be there in this privatized dental plan. 

 

In 1983, a periodontal survey showed early stages of gum 

disease in Saskatchewan children, Mr. Speaker – early stages of 

gum disease in Saskatchewan adolescents, I should say, not in 

children. And that’s very important, Mr. Speaker, because what 

that says is that it’s absolutely imperative for us in 

Saskatchewan to have an education program and a preventive 

program, a dental health program, that embodies the education 

and preventive component. And this new PC privatized 

program, Mr. Speaker, to my knowledge, does not have that 

component or those components. 

 

In fact the health minister in the PC government is counting on 

parents not using the plan. They’re hoping that parents will not 

take their children to dentists and use this plan, in order to save 

money and meet their $5.5 million saving that they allege they 

will save, and that we suggest they will not save. 

 

In effect, Mr. Speaker, the PC government does not have our 

children at heart. They do not care about children’s dental care. 

One newspaper article said that the plan would save at the most 

$500,000 — $500,000, Mr. Speaker – a far cry from the 5.5 

million that the Minister of Health says he will save. 

 

So let’s assume it’s saving $500,000, and I believe that that 

article was fairly accurate in the way it set out what the costs 

were with the privatized plan and what the cost is in the present 

dental health plan. So for $500,000 this government has fired 

some 400 dental therapists, and it’s reduced the effectiveness of 

a plan that was a first-class plan, the best plan in Canada, and 

some say the best in North America. So they’re prepared for 

$500,000 to fire 400 people and reduce dental health in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, they have lots of money for 

political appointments – lots of money for  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2199 

 

appointments like George Hill, who I understand earns that 

$500,000 in two and a half short years. But there’s 400 dental 

therapists out of work and unemployed. 

 

Some say, Mr. Speaker, that the PC government should 

privatize George Hill instead of our children’s dental program. 

But the firing of 400 dental workers, Mr. Speaker, is a real 

human tragedy – that’s a real human tragedy, Mr. Speaker. 

Their jobs are lost, and their profession is wiped out, and there 

is no way that the PC government has demonstrated that they 

are justified in having put those people on the unemployment 

rolls and wiped out their profession. The figures just do not 

justify it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it’s another example of backward PC thinking – just 

another example. They privatize a successful program that 

benefits all children in Saskatchewan. They put some 400 

people out of work, and instead they give the work to a group in 

society that already has plenty of income. They reduce the 

utilization of the plan so that less children benefit, and they call 

it progress. Progress for whom, Mr. Speaker? They call this 

progress, as opposed to what the NDP would do, which is to 

provide universal good dental health to all children, create 

employment for some 400 dental workers – hard working dental 

therapists – all at a cost less per enrolled child than a privatized 

plan will achieve, than the PC’s will ever hope to achieve in 

their privatized dental program. It’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker, 

the people of Saskatchewan were shocked and appalled when 

this announcement was forthcoming. 

 

The PC government campaigned on a pro-medical care platform 

during the last election, and we’ve seen ads to that effect in this 

House during question period in the last two or three months. 

But as soon as they were elected, they broke their promise. 

They destroyed the dental health program as we came to know 

it. 

 

And the Minister of Health says the new system encourages 

dentists to live in rural areas, but that’s not good enough, Mr. 

Speaker. What about the interim? What about the two or three 

or six or seven or eight years we spend encouraging dentists to 

live in rural areas? What are those children going to do in the 

interim? And besides, I question the argument that they will . . . 

or I question their ability to get dentists to live in rural areas. 

 

The medical profession has been attempting to get doctors, 

more and more doctors into rural areas, and with a great deal of 

difficulty, I might say, Mr. Speaker – with a great deal of 

difficulty. Now how does this PC government think that it is 

better than the medical profession, which has been striving 

diligently to get more doctors into rural areas? How does the PC 

government feel that they can do a better job and get dentists to 

live in rural areas? I seriously question their ability to achieve 

that goal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the people of Saskatchewan were shocked and appalled, Mr. 

Speaker. They were shocked and appalled at this 

announcement, and that was evidenced by some 15,000 

signatures, I believe, that were put to a petition and filed in this 

House. But that didn’t make any difference to the PCs. They 

continued to arrogantly ignore the 15,000 names of people from 

more than 200  

communities in Saskatchewan who had expressed grave 

concern over the destruction of the dental health plan and who 

had requested its reinstatement. They ignored those individuals, 

Mr. Speaker, even though that message was a strong message. 

 

But the PCs don’t care. They don’t care about the dental health 

of all children in Saskatchewan. They don’t care whether 

children don’t have accessibility to the dental health program. 

In fact, they hope that they don’t utilize it so they can save 

costs. 

 

And this government does that, or feels that way, Mr. Speaker, 

because it is not a government for the people; it has become a 

government for the PC party and its friends. And it’s so bent on 

privatizing essential, effective government programs in an 

attempt to justify its existence to right-wing extremists like the 

Fraser Institute, the puppeteers of the Saskatchewan PC 

government, that it’s prepared to renege on election promises 

and jeopardize hundreds of people’s jobs and the dental health 

of our children. It’s prepared to lead 400 dental workers and our 

children as sacrificial lambs to the altar of privatization without 

any believable benefit to the people of Saskatchewan – without 

any believable benefit to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And for this reason, I wish to move the following 

motion. 

 

(1500) 

 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 

Saskatchewan for its decision to gut the Saskatchewan 

children’s dental care program, thereby increasing the cost 

of dental care for Saskatchewan families, and undermining 

what was commonly agreed to be the best program of its 

kind in all of Canada. 

 

And this is seconded, Mr. Speaker, by the member from Prince 

Albert. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to 

second the motion put forth by my colleague from Regina 

Lakeview. I want to spend some time just indicating the reasons 

of why I’m so pleased to second that motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this time of year every teacher walks into the 

classroom, and the first thing he sees are the children. Now 

what I really liked about the dental plan was when I walked in 

and saw the children coming into schools was the smiles that I 

saw. Children were pleased about coming back to school and 

were not shy, were not shy at all about smiling about it. 

 

At the beginning of the year, you want children to come into 

schools having a good attitude; you want them to be talkative 

and friendly and talk with their class-mates and with their 

teachers. And that was happening. And it was happening. And it 

was happening, Mr. Chairman, largely because of the school 

dental program – what should be happening right now, Mr. 

Speaker, in the Saskatchewan schools. 

 

Last year at this time there were dental therapists who were 

busy checking their records. They were looking at  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2200 

 

the histories of the students and the children whose dental work 

they had been put in charge of. They were checking to see 

which students were ready for a check-up, which ones needed 

work done, which ones needed to have referrals. 

 

These care-givers knew the students by name – they’d worked 

with them over the last two, three, four years, depending on 

how long each one was on the job. And the parents felt 

comfortable that this particular job, the dental care of their 

children, was taken care of. They knew that sometimes they 

may be contacted by the therapists and said, well, we advise 

you to go and take your children to the dentist. And they also 

knew that they had an option, that if they preferred, they could 

go directly to a dentist. One of their options has now been 

removed. They only have one option: now they have to choose 

a dentist. 

 

It’s not only the dental program itself and the care of the teeth 

and the actual dental work that was done, but the . . . as my 

colleague mentioned, it was a preventative work. 

 

And you know, one of the things that is very much emphasized 

in schools now is the working towards an attitude of the 

students not getting into the habit of smoking. And it’s 

surprising how, to what a great extent, the dental therapists 

helped in this. They were looked at by the children as 

authorities in this respect. And they were not only authoritarian, 

but they also – generally most of them had practised good 

dental hygiene themselves, and as a result, would not smoke – 

and they would inculcate into the minds of the children that, 

you know, if you smoke, your teeth tend not to look quite as 

good as they do if you get the habit of smoking. And so it 

served a twofold purpose there: not only the dental health of the 

student, but their physical health in total. 

 

My colleague, the member from Regina Lakeview, has 

indicated what a successful program this dental program was, 

and some of it is borne out by statistics, Mr. Speaker. The 

enrolment in the dental program in 1974-75 started with 14,000. 

This was only six-year-olds when they started. But then by ’79 

and ’80, it grew to 142,000, and that included 14- to 

13-year-olds. 

 

It grew in stages, and that growth from 14,000 enrolled to 

142,000 children enrolled showed the popularity of the 

program. In fact, the utilization rate, when it was checked in 

1980, showed an 83 per cent utilization rate. A higher 

utilization rate, actually a 20 per cent higher utilization rate, 

than in Newfoundland or Nova Scotia or in the province of 

Quebec. When you would add to the school dental program all 

of the dental programs that were done under the work 

sponsorships of companies or employers, and add to that the 

visits to the private dentists, it was suggested, and I would tend 

to believe, that Saskatchewan has the highest utilization rate of 

dental programs in total of anywhere in North America. 

 

And the result of that, and again I say largely because of the 

dental therapist program, the result of that was that the children 

had good attitudes towards dentists and towards dental care. 

The attitudes were translated into good hygiene practice and, of 

course, what I as a teacher definitely enjoyed was the smiles on 

the faces of the children. 

I remember very well as a youth in going to school, a one-room 

school in the North Battleford school unit – it was called a unit 

then before they changed the name to districts – and our school 

had perhaps 15 students at the time, and I was in grade 7. There 

was a little fellow in about grade 2 – and I will call him Brian; it 

isn’t his name, but I will call him Brian – who would come in. 

And Brian was always teased by his . . . would often be teased 

at the school and by his peers other places. Why? He was teased 

because he had bad teeth, not because Brian was a bad boy, but 

that was a visible physical feature of Brian. 

 

It wasn’t his fault, and actually it was a result of, I think, a 

combination of maybe some of the diet that Brian . . . some of 

Brian’s dietary habits, and his parents really were unable to take 

him the 30 miles needed to go to a dentist and pay for the dental 

care. And it affected Brian’s social life for not only the grade 1 

and 2 and 3 that he was in, but it affected him for about six or 

seven years thereafter. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, when something like that affects a child’s 

social life for that long, it also affects his ability, or her ability, 

to profit to the fullest extent from an education. And I think, if 

you think about it for a minute, there’s probably a Brian . . . 

there probably was a Brian in every one of the classes in the late 

’50s and early ’60s. 

 

And one thing we liked about this plan is that now when you go 

to a school it is very, very rare that you will find a Brian with 

bad teeth in grades 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 – very rare. And I’m afraid, 

Mr. Speaker, that with the abandonment of this plan those gaps 

are going to start again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the parents particularly liked the dental program. 

They liked it because it stopped . . . it helped them in that they 

didn’t have to take time out to travel. They found it very much a 

convenience. You’re saving travelling time, and of course 

you’re saving money, because these students were taken care of 

right in the schools. They were confident that good work was 

being done. If they wanted to double check, of course, they 

always had a double-check by going to a dentist. But they knew 

that it was going to be done. It wasn’t something that they had 

to feel guilty about, or me as a parent would have to feel guilty 

about. Gee, next week I’m going to have to remember to take 

my daughter or my son to the dentist. 

 

And the people who appreciated it the most, Mr. Speaker, were 

the people in the rural areas of Saskatchewan, because they 

were the ones that have to travel the farthest, and now will have 

to travel the farthest. In this case, the dentist came to them. 

They didn’t have to go to the dental therapist. We know very 

well that our students in our elementary schools already spend 

enough time travelling on the bus to and from school. Now 

what’s going to happen, they’ll have to spend more time out of 

school and more time travelling. 

 

Let’s contrast, then, the scene of what was happening in the 

schools last year with what is happening, going to be happening 

today, and over the next years, two years with this new, 

so-called plan. Right now we have an advertisement. Here’s one 

out of August 26 Leader Post.  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2201 

 

“The Children’s Dental Program Begins September 1st.” As if 

we’ve got a new revelation all of a sudden. And it talks about 

the dental plan here where it says: 

 

. . . children born from 1974 through to and including 

1982 will be eligible to register . . . 

 

That means five to 14-year olds. It doesn’t says that. It doesn’t 

say that the plan is being cut. It’s advertising that those from 

’74 to ’82 . . . and what was the ages? It says here from five to 

14-year olds. We used to have four-year olds in it, and up to 

17-year olds. So we’ve pulled the 15-, the 16-, and the 17-year 

olds. It furthermore goes on to say that: 

 

Under the new program Saskatchewan dentists will 

provide comprehensive dental care services . . . 

 

Well, Saskatchewan dentists have always provided 

comprehensive dental care service. I think that would be an 

insult to a dentist to say that all of a sudden they’re going to be 

providing comprehensive dental care service because the 

government has authorized them to do so. 

 

What else is happening, Mr. Speaker? There’s a sale of dental 

equipment going on. This dental equipment, and I have a list 

here, includes things like dental chairs with lights, portable 

dental chairs with lights, x-ray units, some technical equipment 

here – chemiclaves and amalgamators, which will make sense 

to those that are knowledgeable in the field, furniture like stools 

and carts, air compressors, dental welders, scalers, command 

lights, trimmers. 

 

This equipment, Mr. Speaker, was first purchased in 1973. 

Much of it has been updated. The government members have 

not given us an exact value of what the value of the equipment 

is. The estimated value, according to a newscast I saw last 

night, was $6 million. What is the estimated recovery? Will it 

be $1 million, or will it be 10 cents on the dollar? Will it be 10 

cents on the dollar like they got for the highway equipment, 

where the government auctioned $40 million worth of 

equipment and get approximately $3 million for it, less than 10 

cents on the dollar? 

 

The problem – when I dealt with earlier, Mr. Speaker, about the 

problem of travelling – and I want to give you a concrete 

example about the travelling situation. If you go along the 

southernmost part of Saskatchewan, and you consider going 

west, either from Estevan or Weyburn all the way to the Alberta 

border, go the 400 kilometres. How many dentists will you find 

in those 400 kilometres? I think you will find a dentist only in 

two locations. Or if you take the area north and west of Prince 

Albert in towards Shellbrook, Big River, and Canwood, there 

are people in the Big River and Canwood areas that will have to 

travel 50 to 60 miles or more to get to a dentist. And that could 

take well into half a day. 

 

I had talked very briefly, Mr. Speaker, about the program 

teaching, and being used as a teaching tool, and teaching 

attitudes, good attitudes towards dental hygiene. I want to quote 

what the chairman of the Prince Albert Public School Board has 

said about the dental program. He  

makes the point, and I would like to quote two sentences. He 

said: 

 

The dental plan deletion is seen to us (that’s by the school 

board) to make poor educational sense in an area where 

prevention and education naturally and successfully went 

hand in hand. 

 

Then he goes on to say that: 

 

The recent core curriculum directions endorsed by your 

government stress meeting the needs of the whole child so 

that education can successfully proceed. We submit that to 

cut the dental plan, therefore, makes it difficult to achieve 

that goal. 

 

(1515) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been asking the question of why the 

government would be making this move. Obviously, a 

successful program, a program which got top marks in surveys 

as long as 10 years ago. Here’s a survey from the Star-Phoenix 

of July 30, 1987, and the headline says, “Study ten years ago 

gave top marks to the dental plan.” Why would they do it? Is 

there some reason, or is there something that we’re trying to 

improve? 

 

Well, we’ve been given two reasons, Mr. Chairman. We’ve 

been given two reasons. One reason has been given by the 

Minister of Health that there’s a saving of 5.5 million, and he 

was corrected later by people knowledgeable in the field that 

it’s perhaps closer to 500,000. The other reason was given by 

our Premier where he stated that the plan had to be overhauled 

because parents didn’t want dental assistants looking after the 

children’s teeth. But did he do this on the basis of an evaluation, 

or any kind of a survey? Or what was the reason for the story? I 

say both of those were concocted because I don’t know of one 

survey and neither does Verne Clemence of the Star-Phoenix 

know of one survey that was done that on which he could base 

his reasoning. 

 

Now I’m saying the stories were concocted very much like the 

stories were concocted about Weyerhaeuser losing $91,000 a 

day after they found that the program of giving away the . . . 

pardon me, PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) losing 

$91,000 a day after the story of the give-away to Weyerhaeuser 

proved to be unpopular. Why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Well let’s talk about the saving for a minute. Under the new 

plan, parents will have to travel. Now is that going to be a 

saving? Is the government willing to pay? Are they going to pay 

for parents to travel from their place of residence to wherever 

the dentist happens to reside and have his office? What about 

the time taken away from school. Is that a saving? The child has 

to be absent for a half a day or a day instead of half an hour or 

an hour from school. Is the government going to provide a tutor 

for that student? Will there be a saving in education? 

 

What about the time off work? What about the time that has to 

be taken off work? Those parents that work nowadays, two 

members of the family, or both members may be working and 

have to take off the time off work. Is the government going to 

provide reimbursement there?  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2202 

 

Well of course not, of course not. So what kind of a saving is 

there going to be? I ask, what kind of a saving? 

 

Now the other reason which was talked about and mentioned by 

the Premier – I’ve already dealt with that – is that somehow 

parents were dissatisfied with this approach, with the approach 

of the dental therapists . . . makes complete nonsense because 

the parents had the opportunity if they didn’t like to participate 

in the program to go to any dentist of their choice at any time. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m somewhat disappointed, to say the least, 

that the government would proceed with this, and I can only 

conclude that the reason for doing it is because they have a sort 

of a . . . because the government of the day has a very dogmatic 

view to what they want this province to be. There is not one iota 

of practicality in cutting this particular plan. It’s based on a PC 

theory that, well, if the NDP originated it, it must be bad, so we 

must cancel it. 

 

The government was completely uncritical, I think, when it 

came to this plan – uncritical of their own prejudices and 

uncritical of their own values. I think the government has 

forgotten that it should be in the business of governing. It’s not 

in the business of PC politics. It shouldn’t be in the business of 

scuttling NDP programs which have worked. It shouldn’t be in 

the business of destroying. It should be in the business of 

governing – providing good government, and I’m afraid, Mr. 

Speaker, that the government has lost all practicality when it 

comes to that. 

 

So I would like to summarize then, Mr. Speaker, what it was 

about the program that I liked. And I began, when I started 

speaking, I said that I liked the smiles on the children because 

they were symptomatic of a good, healthy program right from 

the beginning. And I say, Mr. Chairman, that this is a regressive 

move. It’s a regressive move to cut off the four-year-olds; it’s a 

regressive move to cut off the 14- to 17-year-olds; it’s a 

regressive move to reduce accessibility. I say the government 

has got the wrong objectives in mind when it brings in this 

so-called new program, by putting the program back to a basis 

which is dependent more on the profit motive instead of on the 

service motive. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion put by 

the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as a 

Progressive Conservative member of the legislature, I’m proud 

of the record of the government and our Premier when it comes 

to health care. I’m proud to speak of the excellent 

accomplishments of this government in building the best health 

care system in any province in Canada. 

 

The $1.2 billion budget for health care is the largest in the 

history of the province of Saskatchewan. It represents 63 per 

cent increase in health care budgets since this government came 

into office in 1982. Mr. Speaker, the NDP opposition does not 

wish to deal with reality when it comes to health care issues. 

The motion before the  

legislature today is a classic example of NDP politics of fear. 

 

I’ll just move back to some of the comments of the member 

from Prince Albert, he just made before he ended his 

comments. He’s tried to scare people by saying there’s no 

dentists available in rural areas. He named Shellbrook, and 

Canwood, and Big River, and all the towns up to the line where 

I live. We have one of the best dentists in this province of 

Saskatchewan in Shellbrook, and he’s done a very good job for 

many years. I can understand why he would want to try and 

draw people away from small rural communities, scare them 

into bringing their children into the city of Prince Albert 

because there’s no dentist in the country, but I assure him that 

there is very good dental facilities in Shellbrook. And I don’t 

know much . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I don’t know about 

Big River, that’s not in my constituency. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well why don’t you find out before you 

cut the program? 

 

Mr. Muller: — Well, the member from Prince Albert should 

find out what kind of dental facilities we have in Shellbrook 

before he makes comments in this legislature about what kind 

of . . . what facilities are in communities, and what facilities 

aren’t in communities. 

 

But anyway, that’s the kind of fear tactics that these people 

across the way like to instil in people. The motion before the 

legislature today is, like I said, a classic example of politics of 

fear. And those who deal in the politics of fear have no honour 

and are without principle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those who would frighten the poor and 

underprivileged, those who would use scare tactics on the 

families of this province, I serve notice to them that there is no 

room for the politics of fear in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you and I remember all too well the politics of 

fear that was practised when the members of the opposition 

went to senior nursing homes and told the seniors: medicare 

will be dismantled by the Conservatives. Can you imagine the 

heartache and fear that caused? Well I can assure the members 

opposite that we have got more nursing homes that they’ll be 

able to campaign in next time. In fact, we’re getting another one 

in Canwood, and we’re going to turn the sod this month. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muller: — We may not have a dentist in Canwood; we 

have one of them in Shellbrook, but we will certainly have . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member 

from Nutana on her feet? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Member from Saskatoon. She’s on her feet 

on a point of order. I would ask that you ask the speaker to say 

on subject and deal with the dental plan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — All right. 

 

Mr. Muller: — I am dealing with subjects that the member 

from Prince Albert brought into the debate, and  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2203 

 

if all members were in the House to listen to the debate while it 

was going on, they would know what was brought into the 

debate by the member from Prince Albert. I’m just doing it in 

answer to him. He brought into the debate the highway auction, 

dentists. He was far ranging in his debate, Mr. Speaker, and I 

believe that I’m relating it to the dental plan and the motion 

before the House. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Continue on. 

 

Mr. Muller: — I was talking about, I was talking, Mr. Speaker, 

about the nursing homes and, of course, the new Canwood 

nursing home that is coming in my constituency. The people out 

there worked very hard, and I give them credit for the work 

they’ve done in putting that together, and certainly I’m looking 

forward to going out there with our new federal member after 

the next election, who will be John Gormley, and he’s going to 

be attending that sod turning with me. And I’m sure the 

Minister of Health will also be coming and we’ll be looking 

forward to meeting those people in Canwood. 

 

Yes, those who sit in opposition have past been masters of the 

politics of fear and now in 1987 they wish to, once again, deal 

with scare tactics. Let me remind those who sit in the 

opposition benches, you have no right to use the health care 

system to blackmail and manipulate the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the commitment of the Progressive Conservative 

government is to assure the people of Saskatchewan that we 

will continue to have the best health care system in all of 

Canada. 

 

I have to stop here, Mr. Speaker, just to make a comment that 

when the other two members were up speaking on the motion, 

and the seconder of the motion, that they couldn’t get a rise out 

of us because they weren’t making any points, but I can sure see 

that I’m hitting home because they’re all starting to try and 

upset me, which I assure you they cannot do, but I kind of enjoy 

it anyway. I kind of enjoy the interruptions. 

 

But this is the commitment of our Premier and the commitment 

of the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. And I’m proud to say 

that all members of the government side of the legislature are 

proud of that commitment to keep Saskatchewan’s health care 

system the best in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to discuss the 

Saskatchewan dental plan. This government has made changes 

to the dental plan to make it the best in the nation. It takes 

leadership to build effective and efficient health care programs 

like the dental program, and it takes leadership to make changes 

when changes are needed. That is what this government has 

done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us not deal with the rhetoric of opposition. Let 

us deal, rather, in facts. The fact is that the Saskatchewan dental 

plan needed some changes. Professional health studies showed 

that the drug plan had to be revised, and now the dental plan 

protects those who most need to be protected. We have made 

changes so we can provide excellent dental care for children 

from 5 to 13 years of age. I urge all members of the legislature 

to  

listen to those facts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes, let us take a good look at the dental program. 

Health studies indicate the best place for children aged 5 to 13 

to get their teeth fixed is at the office of a dentist and, in some 

cases, in Shellbrook. 

 

Dentists go to university to become professionals in dental care. 

Many parents of this province were already taking their children 

to dentists, and they asked this government to pay for that care. 

And we agreed with the parents. Mr. Speaker, every child in 

Saskatchewan between the ages of 5 and 13 now has an equal 

opportunity to go to a dentist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just the other day I was looking through an issue 

of a weekly magazine called U.S. News and World Report. It 

was about how poor children in the United States suffer – the 

hungry – and the lack of proper health and dental care. And that 

article reminded me of how fortunate we in Saskatchewan are to 

have such an excellent social fabric that allows us to provide 

good quality health care for our children. 

 

There’s not a better system in all North America. And what we 

have in Saskatchewan when it comes to providing excellence in 

health care, Mr. Speaker, surely the opposition will admit that 

nowhere in the United States would you find such a dental plan 

for children. 

 

(1530) 

 

Suddenly the opposition will concede, no such dental plan 

exists in other parts of Canada. Mr. Speaker, the dental program 

here in Saskatchewan is a model that we can hold up to the rest 

of the world in pride. And certainly, we’ve done that in other 

areas too, but I guess I better not get into agriculture and things 

like that or I may be called to order. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the new Saskatchewan dental plan will cover 

the same services as the old plan did. Under the plan, 187,521 

Saskatchewan children will qualify for the coverage. I should 

note that through sound management and planning, this 

government will save the taxpayers $9.7 million, while at the 

same time providing a high calibre, first-class dental program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, children in the plan will now receive their dental 

treatment directly from dentists. This will replace school 

clinics. Parents will be able to select a dentist of their choice for 

their children. Saskatchewan families will have access to high 

quality dental care for their children. That spells out a solid 

commitment to dental care and a solid commitment to our 

health care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 1987 marks the 25th year of medicare in our 

province. This government is proud of its record in building the 

best health care system in Canada. To ensure that our health 

care system is prepared to meet the challenges of the next 

decade, this government has shown some real leadership in 

making positive changes. The changes to the dental plan are 

examples of building a better health care system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

History has shown that those who deal in the politics of  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2204 

 

fear end up in the scrap-heap of history. A certain dictator in 

Europe in the 1930s played with the politics of fear. Those who 

valued freedom and cherished truths know what happened to 

that dictator. History will also show that in a fair and decent 

society scare tactics by politicians are not tolerated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I contend the motion before the legislature deals 

in the politics of fear. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to report to this 

Assembly that reports of the gutting of the dental plan are not 

true. That’s the kind of fear tactics that the member from 

Lakeview was trying to project, but they’re not true. 

 

The Saskatchewan dental plan is live and well and, I might add, 

the best in Canada. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I am proud 

to report to the Assembly that health care professionals still 

agree that the Saskatchewan dental plan is considered to be the 

best in North America. 

 

As I’ve said before, we’ve been leaders in other fields such as 

agriculture and forestry, and especially forestry. I can mention 

forestry because the member from Prince Albert talked about 

that he didn’t want the Weyerhaeuser plant, the new paper mill, 

and the jobs in Shellbrook-Torch River just outside of the city 

of Prince Albert. He’s against the expansion of what’s 

happening . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, please. We could carry this 

quite a distance so I would ask you from here on in to please 

stay on the topic. 

 

Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just making 

comments on the comments the member from P.A. made. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. I think if the 

member checks the record he’ll find that he’s misquoting me. I 

never, ever at any one time indicated that I didn’t want a paper 

mill in Prince Albert – never! 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’d like to speak to the point of order. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Please do so. 

 

Mr. Muller: — The member from Prince Albert rose during his 

remarks, talked about the losses of the Crown corporation in 

Prince Albert, and how bad this government was to expand on 

the give-away to Weyerhaeuser. And I say the expansion in 

Shellbrook-Torch River of the paper mill is one of the greatest 

things for Prince Albert and the jobs it will create and the other 

jobs that are created within the city. And I don’t agree with his 

point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — All right, speak. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — The member from Shellbrook-Torch 

River indicated that the member from Prince Albert opposed the 

paper mill expansion. On a point of order, the only thing that 

the member from Prince Albert, and the member from Prince 

Albert-Duck Lake as well, ever opposed was the fact that they 

gave away $248 million,  

not the expansion. And I would like that on the record, and I 

would like the member to apologize. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — What we’re seeing here is members 

opposite not understanding the difference between a point of 

order and debate, and they are persisting in getting up making 

debating points. People of Saskatchewan all know that the 

members from Prince Albert oppose the pulp mill, oppose the 

paper mill, and that’s debate, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the record, 

and as a matter of fact, as I say, it’s not a point of order, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The point of order is not well taken. 

Let the debate continue. 

 

Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m proud to report to the Assembly that health care 

professionals still agree – I wanted to make this point – that the 

Saskatchewan dental plan is considered to be the best in North 

America. The Saskatchewan dental plan is the best because of 

solid commitment of our Progressive Conservative government. 

A government is proud that it is the largest health care budget 

of any government in the history of the province. A government 

is proud to have removed extra billing from health care, and a 

government that is proud of consistently meeting health care 

needs in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in so-called prosperous Ontario where they have 

no comprehensive drug plan, and in Ontario they have 

premiums on medicare. Mr. Speaker, all too often we fail to 

look beyond the borders of our province to determine what an 

excellent health care system we really do have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Premier and the Progressive Conservative 

government are meeting the challenges in health care for the 

future, at a time in our history when resource revenues are 

down and we still are able to give the people of Saskatchewan 

the finest health care there is, and that includes dental care for 

our children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the strongest words I can use in this legislature, 

I implore on the opposition to stop tactics of fear in discussing 

health care. I say, shame on all of you in the NDP benches. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion by the member from Regina Lakeview 

reminds me of a story I once heard told by John Diefenbaker. 

Diefenbaker said that if the hon. member and the real facts ever 

met each other, it would be sheer coincidence. I have spelled 

out the real facts about the dental plan. We are proud of what 

we are doing in dental care for Saskatchewan children. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to the main 

motion, seconded by the member from Canora: 

 

That resolution no. 29 be amended by deleting all the 

words after the words “That this Assembly” and replacing 

them with: 

 

congratulate the Government of Saskatchewan for its 

decision to change the Saskatchewan dental plan as to 

provide excellent and professional dental care for 

Saskatchewan children from five  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2205 

 

years to 13 years old, and thus make it the best dental care 

program in Canada. 

 

Mr. Kopelchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is with 

some regret that I join this debate. I say regret because this is a 

regrettable motion, and I am therefore with confidence going to 

support the amendment as presented by the hon. member from 

Shellbrook-Torch River. 

 

This motion, Mr. Speaker, is another example of the 

opposition’s determination to use fear and distortions to gain 

their ends – fear and untruth, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Instead of 

helping to explain to the people the substance of, and the need 

for, changes to the dental program, the NDP has chosen to 

spread falsehoods such as those contained in this motion from 

the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

So while it is regrettable, and it is a shameful waste of the time 

of the House, and a shameful display for supposed adults to use 

such tactics, Mr. Speaker, it is necessary for me to join the 

debate to ensure that some truth is brought forward for the 

people to see. 

 

What are some of those truths, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The truth 

of dental care under the Liberal-NDP coalition government of 

Ontario is that unless you are a child that lives in a remote area, 

or you are a welfare recipient, or you are a psychiatric patient, 

unless you fall into one of these categories – one of these 

narrow categories, I might add – the Liberal-NDP government 

of Ontario gives you zero dental coverage. Zero, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The truth is that if you live under the NDP government of 

Manitoba, unless you are a child suffering from a cleft palate or 

if you live in a very narrowly defined special area, the NDP 

government provides you with zero coverage. Zilch, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now I want to pause here for a moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because I know members opposite are saying, don’t use 

comparisons; worry about what is happening in Saskatchewan. 

And I do worry about what is happening in Saskatchewan, but I 

just want to diverge for a moment to show how using 

comparisons, particularly comparisons with NDP Manitoba 

government, is a practice that is accepted by the NDP and 

promoted by the NDP, and therefore should be consistently 

applied by the NDP. 

 

And because I am using the comparison, my remarks are 

relevant to the debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Even the member 

who moved this motion has proven herself quite willing to 

accept the validity of comparisons with Manitoba. On July 13 in 

this House that member expressed concern about the funding 

for the Human Rights Commission and she said, to bolster her 

argument: “Manitoba’s Human Rights Commission has a staff 

of 23.” And she thought that we should be taken with that 

comparison. 

 

And the member for Regina Rosemont likes and accepts the use 

of comparisons with Manitoba as well. On July 21 in this House 

that member was speaking, and to try to get  

his point across, and again I quote: 

 

If you look next door to Manitoba, a have-not province, 

you see that they have not been forced to do the same. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these people across the way obviously 

accept the practice of making comparisons. And so I would like 

to thank them for the renewed credibility their own arguments 

supply to my point of comparison. 

 

And picking up on the phrase of the member of Regina 

Rosemont that the NDP in Manitoba have not been forced to do 

the same, I want to say that when it comes to dental care for 

children they most certainly have not been forced to do the 

same. They not only have not come close to our standards of 

care, they have begun the process of gutting the entire medical 

services system in Manitoba, and anyone can read the Winnipeg 

Free Press to follow that horrendous process. The NDP do not 

care, and they do not provide dental care where they now have 

power. 

 

And another thing that those people over there like to say is, 

forget about what happened in 1981 and before. It is what is 

happening now that counts, they say. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

in a large measure, especially in this debate, I agree with that. 

So let’s not have the NDP stand in this House and say, but we 

were the ones who way back when started the dental program. 

Forget about what happened back then. What matters is what 

the NDP are demonstrating they would do right now. 

 

And all you have to do to find out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to 

look where they have power – in Ontario and in Manitoba. And 

in those places right now there is almost zero coverage. There 

is, in fact, zero coverage except in most special of 

circumstances. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could take you across the rest of 

the country. I could compare our program to B.C. or Quebec or 

anywhere else in North America, and the comparisons always 

yield the same results. Saskatchewan, under a PC government, 

has the best dental plan on this continent, Mr. Deputy Speaker – 

the absolute best. 

 

There have been modifications, and I am not upset about those 

modifications, and I am more than prepared to defend them. 

What were those changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well the first 

change was that now doctors of dentistry, dentists, now provide 

the service. 

 

(1545) 

 

And while I want to make it clear that I believe that the service 

provided by the dental therapists and the dental assistants was 

good quality care and personally dedicated care, it is still a fact 

that a dentist must go through significantly more rigorous 

training before he or she gets a licence to practise, than does a 

therapist. And it is simply not an arguable thing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that the care provided by a dentist is the best possible 

dental care available. Again I say that without intending any 

slight whatsoever to the excellence of the therapists and 

assistants who provided care under the old program. 

 

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2206 

 

What is more, Mr. Deputy Speaker – and I think this bears real 

consideration – under the new plan, if the parent is not happy 

with the care his or her child is receiving from the dentist, they 

have the absolute right to take that child to a different 

practitioner and still be covered 100 per cent by the plan. That 

surely is a genuine and worthwhile improvement. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that too often government 

programs, while designed with the best of intentions, serve to 

weaken the family and to reduce the ability of parents to make 

vital decisions such as those affecting their health and dental 

needs. That is a trend I have always opposed, and will continue 

to oppose. And it is clear to me that these changes to the dental 

plan take away from the government the right to decide who 

operates on my children and gives that right back to me. 

 

But one legitimate concern has come from that particular 

change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is the concern that in 

rural areas like mine, people will be inconvenienced because 

they may have to take their children to town for a dental visit 

instead of relying on the school and the government to do it for 

them. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some members opposite 

have even suggested that children will not get care because 

parents will be unwilling to make the arrangements and drive to 

the dental appointment. I have a few things to say to that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

First, it is patently absurd to suggest that rural people are any 

less caring of their children than urban folks. It is an idea so 

ridiculous that I won’t even comment on it any further. 

 

The second point is that the situation is already the same as it 

exists for obtaining medical care. Are the NDP suggesting, 

because there are not government-selected doctors operating in 

the schools, that rural children are being denied medical 

attention. 

 

Finally on this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it should be noted 

that the government in its consultations with the college of 

dentists and dental surgeons had every confidence the dentists 

would begin operations in rural communities as a direct result 

of these changes. Those expectations were well founded, as is 

evidenced by the fact that one dental clinic has already opened 

in Radville, Saskatchewan, and a second is scheduled to open in 

another community some time this month. The changes have 

hardly taken effect, and already the dentists are moving into 

rural areas. 

 

I could add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that my concern about dentist 

services in my constituency led to me talking to the two dentists 

in my constituency, and both assured me that they were willing, 

number one, to expand offices; they were willing to expand 

office hours. They would do anything possible, that the 

children’s concerns would be their main policy in running their 

dentist’s office. I’d say that this is good for those communities, 

and it is good for Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There are many more aspects to the dental program that can be 

examined, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they should  

be examined. Unfortunately, my own time is limited, so I would 

like to make one final comment. Had no changes been made to 

this program, it would have cost the taxpayers $15.2 million. 

With the changes, it will cost $9.7 million. That is a saving, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, of over 30 per cent. Any time you can save 

over 30 per cent and preserve the best program in North 

America, I’d say you are to be congratulated. 

 

And so in closing, that is what I’d like to do, congratulate the 

Minister of Health for an outstanding job. Obviously I will not 

support this motion, but I will be supporting the amendment as 

moved by the hon. member from Shellbrook-Torch River. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Since you 

gave the member from Shellbrook-Torch River such latitude, I 

will take the same latitude, and I want to talk about the politics 

of fear that the minister so ineptly talked about in terms of my 

colleagues on this side of the House. 

 

The politics of fear that we’ve seen in this province in the last 

five years goes totally unmatched in the history of this province. 

I want to talk about an example of that politics of fear. Prior to 

1982 I worked for the Office of the Rentalsman in Saskatoon, 

and there were a variety of political opinions prevalent in that 

office. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to tell you that in the 

1979 federal election there was three women who had three 

different political views, and we went to see – and our boss 

knew about it – we went to see Prime Minister Trudeau; we 

went to see Joe Clark, who was the leader of the Progressive 

Conservative Party; and we went to see Ed Broadbent. And that 

was acceptable at the Office of the Rentalsman – totally 

acceptable. 

 

Now I want to talk about what happened after 1982 when this 

government was elected. Workers in that office were in fear. 

They didn’t dare talk about politics for fear they’d lose their 

job. They didn’t dare go and see any kind of political event with 

each other because they might not necessarily support the 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. They didn’t dare do any 

of those things, and that’s the politics of fear that this 

government has put in the hearts and minds of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to talk about a women in Prince Albert who thought 

she should be able to do whatever she wanted to, politically, 

during the last provincial election. If she wanted to, she could 

campaign. If she wanted to, she could put up a sign. If she 

wanted to hand out pamphlets, that was her right. And what 

happened? What happened? She was told that a directive had 

come from Regina that no government employees were to be 

involved in any kind of political activity. And those members 

opposite are now being sued because it goes against the very 

charter of rights in this country. And that’s politics of fear. 

 

And there are organization after organization in this province 

that are afraid of you people and will not speak up because 

they’re afraid of what you’ll do to them, and that’s politics of 

fear. And the member over there talked about the attitude in the 

’30s and ’40s – the fascist attitude of Germany. And I want you 

to know that there  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2207 

 

are thousands and thousands and thousands of people in this 

province that think that that’s the attitude of your government, 

and they’re afraid of you because of what you’ll do to them. 

There are organizations that don’t speak out because they’re 

afraid their funding will be cut. And what do you do when 

organizations do speak out? You cut their funding. The Voice 

of the Handicapped spoke out against you . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I would just like to 

make the observation that the latitude in this debate is very, 

very far ranging. I did allow the member from Prince Albert to 

get a little bit off track – I take part of the blame for that – and 

of course the member of Shellbrook-Torch River also. 

 

But I think so far I’m listening very carefully to what you’ve 

been saying, and I would like to remind the member that we are 

dealing with the Government of Saskatchewan’s role in the 

dental plan. So I would like you to, at this point, revert back – I 

did give you that opportunity to . . . with wide latitude – and 

having done that, I would caution the member that we get back 

on the topic, please. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. I understand 

your remarks. But what I wanted to finish off by saying was 

that the AMNIS (Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians 

of Saskatchewan) association here in Saskatchewan, the group 

that represents native people, had its funding totally cut because 

of – because of – Jim Sinclair giving the Premier a good 

tongue-lashing on . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, you just talked about latitude, 

having given some latitude on this subject. You encouraged the 

member from Nutana to get back on track. We’re talking about 

the dental plan here. She should be talking about the member of 

Lakeview’s proposal that she put forward and talk on that 

subject, and I’d like to get her back on track where she should 

be. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I think that point of order is in good 

standing, having just said what I did say, and I’m sure that the 

member is going to get back on track at this point. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Just to complete my sentence, because Mr. 

Sinclair . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. I 

would ask the member from Saskatoon Nutana to get on the 

dental plan, please. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I am. I’d like to complete my sentence. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — All right. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Because Mr. Sinclair gave the Premier of 

Saskatchewan a serious tongue-lashing . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I’m wrapping it up, Mr. Speaker. AMNIS got 

their funding cut. And now I’d like to . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Martin: — When you’ve made at least three rulings on 

this subject, she persists with exaggerating her dislike for this 

government, way off track. You’ve already asked her to go on 

track – very politely, I might add – and I think she should show 

some respect for the Chair and listen to what you have to say, 

instead of showing the disrespect that she is. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The point of order is well taken. And 

I would ask the member at this point to get onto the dental plan, 

please. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I was getting onto the dental plan when I was 

so rudely interrupted on a point of order. 

 

Now on the amendment and on the motion, I just want to read 

into the record an August 14 article by Bev Spencer, who is a 

journalist with the Regina Leader-Post. And this is how she 

describes the firings by this government of the 411 dental 

workers in this province when they decided to do in the dental 

program, and I quote: 

 

Jacquie Oleksinski of Regina heard it in a parking lot. 

Darren Berg of North Battleford got the news in a motel 

room. 

 

They had been fired, along with almost 400 others, from 

the Saskatchewan Dental Plan. 

 

There was shock, there was disbelief, and there were tears. 

Dental therapists, I want to tell members opposite, are still 

recovering from the news. And Mr. Speaker, that’s how all 

dental workers in this province were advised that they had lost 

their job as a result of the government’s decision to privatize the 

dental program. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all dental workers in our province were told 

in basically the same manner that as of Friday, August 7, 1987, 

their positions were being abolished. The Conservative 

government claimed that they had undertaken a review, and I’ll 

quote. I quote from the contents of a letter, sent to all dental 

workers, that programs and priorities in keeping with the 

government fiscal restraint program, and as part of that review 

they decided to change the structure of the children’s dental 

plan, and effective September 1, 1987, children’s dental 

services will be provided by dentists in private practice. 

 

I want to read into the record the letter that was sent to the more 

than 411 dental workers in this province by the deputy minister 

of Health. And it goes like this: Dear So and So, and I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan Health has undertaken a review of programs 

and priorities in keeping with the government’s fiscal 

restraint program. As part of this review a decision has 

been made to change the delivery structure for the 

children’s dental health program. Effective September 1, 

1987, children’s dental health services will be provided by 

dentists in private practice. 

 

I regret to inform you that as a result of this decision your 

position as a dental therapist, (or a) dental assistant, (or a) 

dental technical will be abolished effective Friday, August 

7, 1987. You  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2208 

 

will be authorized leave with pay from July 1 to August 7, 

1987, inclusive. 

 

As a permanent employee, you were entitled to the lay-off 

procedures under Article 132 of the Saskatchewan 

Government Employees’ Union collective bargaining 

agreement. To expedite the bumping process, the attached 

lay-off options election form must be completed and 

returned to the Human Resources branch within five 

working days upon receipt of this letter in accordance with 

the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ agreement. 

 

Should you wish to discuss the bumping process or your 

specific options, you’re invited to contact Doug Pomfret in 

the Human Resources branch. (And at the end) I wish to 

thank you for your contribution to the department, and 

particularly to the dental program. 

 

That’s the letter that 411 dental workers were given telling them 

that their services were no longer required, that they were being 

fired. They had put in years and years and years of service, and 

they were thanked for their contribution to the department, and 

particularly to the dental program. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And now they live in fear. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And now, Mr. Speaker, they live in fear. 

 

I want to ask the members opposite how you bump in the civil 

service in this province when there’s no positions to bump to. 

Dental therapist positions were highly technical in nature. There 

are no other jobs available in Saskatchewan as a dental 

therapist, and there certainly aren’t any jobs available in the 

civil service. And how can that . . . how on earth could they 

possibly get a job in the civil service in view of the fact that that 

program is no longer available? 

 

Now the government has predicted that they’ll save $5.5 

million, but their own annual report, Mr. Deputy Speaker, states 

that the saving will be closer to $500,000. To save $500,000 

they have laid off more than 400 workers, and they’ve closed 

578 clinics in schools throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

(1600) 

 

I want to talk about the dentist in every town, as put forward by 

the members opposite. That’s absolutely ludicrous. And I want 

to read into the record a letter I received from a woman who 

lives in rural Saskatchewan, and as she says: 

 

I have grown up in the small town of Ituna. I can 

remember the few times dentists did set up a satellite 

practice in our town. It didn’t take more than six months 

before they were gone. Having to persevere the winter 

weather, use up potential earning time to travel, and bring 

with them or maintain extra staff, the dentists were soon 

back in their practices in Yorkton where the conveniences 

of getting to work in a matter of minutes and  

maximizing their profits were of greater importance to 

them. Each time we were left to phone long distance for 

appointments, spend our time and money in travelling to 

Yorkton to see the dentists, and to return at later dates if 

our check-ups showed there was any extra work to be 

done. It was all done at our inconvenience and at our 

expense. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re returning to today. We’re 

returning to a situation where people . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who’s it from? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — It was sent to the Premier of the province, 

June 23; he can check his correspondence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re returning to the very same scenario that we 

had in the 60’s, and the same scenario that I grew up in. I grew 

up in a rural community, and we had to travel to Saskatoon in 

order to see a dentist. What that meant was it took valuable time 

away from the farm. It took us out of school, and it didn’t 

necessarily mean we saw a dentist on a yearly or a six-month 

basis. We usually saw a dentist when we had some sort of 

dental problem. 

 

And I predict, Mr. Speaker, that that’s exactly what’s going to 

happen again. Because you may say all you want that parents 

are going to take their children to dentists, but they’re not going 

to unless there’s a problem. Some parents will not take their 

children to a dentist unless there’s a problem, and some parents 

can’t afford to travel those huge distances. 

 

I think what’s really distressing is that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has abandoned the very best dental program in 

the entire world, and that has been demonstrated by numerous 

studies. They’ve abandoned as a fundamental principle for 

health delivery in this province that, regardless of where you 

lived and regardless of your income, you had access to health 

services, and that those health services were readily available 

and accessible. 

 

No longer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will children receive those 

services in a familiar environment. Gone will be the 

introduction of dental care and dentistry with the support of 

peers and class-mates. The world’s best dental plan was 

specifically designed to make a child’s first experience with a 

dentist’s office, or dental care, a positive one. Parents are losers 

in this situation as well as children. Parents will now have to 

juggle schedules or take time off from work to take their 

children to dentists. 

 

I just want to note that this summer, with this new and 

improved dental plan that we have, that there was absolutely no 

coverage for children in this province from the end of June until 

September 1; there was absolutely no coverage, and if children 

had a particular problem, their parents paid for it. 

 

Now for families in rural Saskatchewan there will be the added 

expense of greater distances to travel and lost time from school 

for children. The cost saving, as indicated by the Minister of 

Health, is highly suspect, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Minister of 

Health is banking on the hope  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2209 

 

that savings will result from decreased utilization of the service. 

Cost per child now is approximately $103 for a dentist and 

approximately $92 for a child seeing a dental therapist. With 

132,000 elementary school children eligible for dental care by a 

dentist, and with the government paying about $103 per child, 

how can that be a tremendous saving? 

 

My calculation puts the cost at about $13.5 million. With 

administrative costs added in, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that adds an 

additional 1.2 million. We are now looking at a program that 

could cost us over $15 million. But that’s not what the minister 

is budgeting for. His budget reflects very clearly his view that 

there will be many, many children in this province who will not 

see a dentist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the number of people, and 

particularly women who were laid off by this government’s 

decision to do in the dental plan – when you look at the saving 

of approximately half a million dollars, it makes no sense. 

 

I want to remind the members opposite that many, many, many 

of those dental workers lived in rural Saskatchewan. They were 

married to farmers, and that income derived from that job as a 

dental therapist or a dental assistant or a clerical person helped 

the family farm survive. That option is no longer available to 

those farm families, and I think you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

as a farmer, how important it is for farmers these days to have 

some form of off-farm income. And that income that was 

derived form that dental plan is no longer available for those 

many, many rural women who worked for the plan. 

 

And I’ve received dozens and dozens of letters from rural 

communities concerned about the fact that they will no longer 

have that service available in their community and in their 

school; that they will have to travel huge distances to get a 

dentist or see a dentist. They are not banking on a dentist 

locating in their particular rural community, and they really feel 

that a valuable service such as the dental plan has been done in 

to them. 

 

And let’s face it, members opposite, rural people do not have all 

of the services that we in the city take for granted. And that 

really is too bad. And here was a service that, regardless of 

where you lived in Saskatchewan, you had access to, and that 

service is no longer available. 

 

And it’s interesting that the members opposite spoke about how 

parents were dissatisfied with the dental program, and they 

wanted to have a dentist do the work. And I just want to tell 

members who may not be familiar with the 1979 survey of 

attitudes, an attitudinal survey of families enrolled in the 

Saskatchewan dental plan, that 89 per cent of the respondents 

were happy with the plan. They were happy with the plan. And 

some of the people who weren’t happy were disappointed 

because their children didn’t get to see a dentist or a dental 

worker as often as they wanted to, and they thought the plan 

should be expanded. In fact, there was 40 per cent of the 

respondents recommended the plan to other people. 

 

Now I think that if you’re going to do in a plan or change a 

plan, as the Premier said – the Premier said that parents  

weren’t happy with the program – you should either table the 

survey or the study showing us that people were unhappy, or 

you should table the thousands and thousands of letters for the 

over 132,000 individuals who were in the plan from their 

parents showing the dissatisfaction, because I suspect that that 

is not true; that people weren’t dissatisfied with the program in 

general, and that this is merely a way to save a little bit of 

money — $500,000 – because of their huge $3.4 billion deficit, 

a deficit that arose as a result, for the most part, of their own 

mismanagement and fiscal irresponsibility. 

 

And what we have now is the very best dental plan in the world 

being done in because these people don’t know how to govern 

and don’t know how to run a business. And government is a 

business. You have to have the revenues available, and you 

have to watch your expenditures. We have people putting in 

jaccuzis as a result of their home program – jaccuzis and 

swimming pools – things that are luxuries. And yet we have a 

situation here where over $500 million is apparently going to be 

saved at the expense of the best children’s dental plan in the 

province, or in the world. I think it’s deplorable. 

 

I will not support the amendment. I will support the original 

motion put forward by my colleague, the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

And I would now like to move adjournment. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, with leave I would like 

to move a motion respecting an absence being granted to a 

couple of members for a Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association trip. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence for Members 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly 

I’d like to move a motion, seconded by the member from 

Regina Centre: 

 

That by leave of the Assembly, that leave of absence be 

granted to the hon. members for Morse and Regina 

Rosemont from Tuesday, September 8, to Friday, 

September 11, 1987 to attend the seminar on behalf of the 

Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, Saskatchewan 

Branch, in Washington, D.C. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I’d like to move: 

 

That we move to government orders, Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Leave granted. 

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2210 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 39 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ve been waiting 

to get into these estimates for some time, and thank you for this 

opportunity. 

 

And before we move into the culture and recreation side of 

estimates – and there will be a goodly number of questions 

there – it should come as no surprise, perhaps, to the minister 

that I have a few questions concerning the wild animal park in 

Moose Jaw, and I hope we can deal with that at some length, 

perhaps, this afternoon. 

 

(1615) 

 

I might just say to members present that on Sunday afternoon 

past I enjoyed the afternoon with my family and a good number 

of friends in the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park. It was my 

observation that there were hundreds, if not thousands of us 

there on Sunday afternoon. It was my observation in visiting 

around in the park that a goodly number of the people at the 

park on Sunday were from beyond the city of Moose Jaw, and 

as I just scanned some of the licence plates in the parking lot, I 

noticed a fair number from out of province. 

 

It is agreed by those who visit the park that in some ways the 

Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park is a park second to none – for a 

park of its size, of its nature – second to none in the nation. And 

many of us feel that it is that way because from the very 

beginning it’s been a publicly owned and publicly supported 

facility. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Great tourist attraction. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — And a great tourist attraction for both the city 

of Moose Jaw and the province of Saskatchewan. And I, for 

one, am very proud when I visit the Moose Jaw Wild Animal 

Park to see the wheat sheaf symbol on the sign – the symbol of 

our province – indicating that this is a park that belongs to we, 

the people of Saskatchewan, and one that we can be very proud 

of. 

 

We’ve been more than aware, over the course of this summer, 

that it is this government’s proposal or plan, first of all, to have 

the city of Moose Jaw take over the park and bear the total cost 

and, failing that, then to privatize or to lease it out to a private 

developer. And, Mr. Minister, that’s sort of the area that I 

would like us to explore this afternoon. 

 

Just so that in our discussions there is no confusion or 

misunderstanding, I’d like us just to agree on some figures 

before we start. And I wonder if you can provide for me the 

number of visitors to the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park during 

the 1986 season and a breakdown of those visitors, between 

those which would be described as local, i.e. from Moose Jaw, 

and those who will have travelled to visit the park. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I do have that 

information for the hon. member, and hon. member from 

Moose Jaw South, welcome to the estimates; I’ve been looking 

forward to this. 

 

The visitation, Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park, attracts greatest 

number of visitors of the tourist facilities in Moose Jaw. In 

1986, 159,813 people visited the park. Of these, over one-half 

came from beyond 50 miles, one-third of the total visitors from 

Regina, and less than one-fifth from Moose Jaw. And if the 

hon. member would like a copy of this for use, I’d be please to 

send it over to you. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, those are the figures 

that I have. I do not need the copy; I have those figures. Some 

other figures that I would like to have: the current value of the 

land, buildings, and equipment at the Moose Jaw Wild Animal 

Park. And I would also like to know, if you can provide it for 

me, the amount of money that has been invested in the park by 

the province since the province took it over in 1975. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the total area is 218.5 

hectares. The estimated land value is $218,500. Since 1978 a 

total of $2,563,207 has been spent on capital improvements. 

There are 43 buildings on site. The estimated value of the 

existing buildings is $1,045,000. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The total again for 

investments since 1978 – $2,563,207? Thank you. 

 

Just then one other figure so that we’re operating on the same 

figures – your department’s calculation of the operational 

deficit in 1986. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, lost to March 31, 1985, 

$279,934.13; to March 31, 1986 the loss was $297,923; to 

March 31, 1987 the loss is $247,000 . . . 247,446. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the city of Moose Jaw, in 

calculating the cost – if the city were to absorb the animal park 

into its operating budget, the city has calculated somewhere in 

the neighbourhood of $450,000. Does the minister accept that 

figure? That if the city of Moose Jaw were to take the park over 

that, in fact, it would cost the city of Moose Jaw some 

$450,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t really know 

how the Moose Jaw council came up with their figure. We 

weren’t privy to any discussions they had on arriving at a figure 

other than providing them with the information we had at our 

disposal. It has been suggested that, quite possibly, they’re 

taking into account some numbers that we might not be taking 

into account to do with staff pension plans, worker 

compensation costs. But I hardly think that would cover some 

$200,000 per year. So we really don’t know how they come up 

with a $450,000 figure. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, my understanding of the 

city of Moose Jaw’s work in this regard included some increase 

in salary levels that are paid by the city as opposed to those paid 

by the province. In fact, there would have to be some additional 

salaries paid for  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2211 

 

administration. In the deficit figures that you provide, I 

understand there is no amount for employee fringe benefits. 

There would be some insurance costs that the city of Moose 

Jaw would have to bear, some auditing fees, and there would 

have to be built into that budget some capital replacement 

allowance. 

 

I think it’s fair to say that if the city of Moose Jaw were to 

absorb the animal park and its operation into their budget, the 

deficit would be closer to 450, or a half a million dollars. So 

that seems to many of us in the city of Moose Jaw an 

unreasonable request, coming from your government in a year 

when your government has already cut from revenues in the 

city of Moose Jaw some $1.7 million. It seems like a highly . . . 

a difficult situation for the city of Moose Jaw to have to absorb 

another $500,000 of costs. 

 

I’d like to spend some time on how you approached the city of 

Moose Jaw, and sort of the history of this summer. It’s my 

understanding, and correct me if I’m wrong, Mr. Minister, that 

you first approached the city of Moose Jaw with the proposal 

concerning the park via a letter dated March 31, and in that 

letter you demanded an answer from the city of Moose Jaw in 

something less than three weeks. Many of us in the city felt that 

to be a very heavy-handed and unreasonable request, that the 

city should have to look at accepting an expense, maybe of a 

half million dollars, and to be considering that in a matter of 

three weeks. Mr. Minister, is my history on that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I can confirm that 

the chronology presented by the hon. member is essentially 

correct. A letter was sent out under the signature of Lyle 

Lensen, the acting deputy minister at that time, dated March 31, 

1987 and we’d asked to hear from them by April 17 of that 

year. So essentially your figures are correct. I’m sure you 

already have copies of the letters anyway, so I won’t bother 

reading them into the record. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, then is it your position that that 

in fact was a reasonable and a fair approach to the city of 

Moose Jaw, when the city would have to consider so much, to 

expect an answer in three weeks? Was that a fair and a 

reasonable kind of approach to make? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Some of our officials did meet, Mr. 

Chairman, with people in city council. They were at an in 

camera meeting of the Moose Jaw council. The council 

expressed some concern over the April 17 deadline. They were 

given an extension to April 30, at their request, and with which 

they agreed. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Related to this summer’s events, Mr. Minister, 

can you tell me and the House why in fact the park did not open 

on the traditional opening date of May 1 this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the events unfolded 

thus: the city informed us that they did not want to meet that 

particular deadline and they were going to take some extra time. 

So we went along with that. But we didn’t feel that we were 

going to open the park and then turn it over to the city of Moose 

Jaw. So when we didn’t hear from them we just let the time 

barrier go by and waited until they communicated back to us 

that they would not be  

interested in taking the park, at which time we decided we’d go 

ahead, open the park and run it for the summer, which we have 

done. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I think I should tell you, in that 

two-week interval, that the park was not open. I had a fair 

number of phone calls, concerns expressed to me. Just as a bit 

of an example of that concern, one parent called me about his 

son’s birthday which was traditionally celebrated in the Moose 

Jaw animal park. His birthday falls on May 2. There was a great 

deal of disappointment in that household. I know a variety of 

people came to Moose Jaw to visit the city and our community, 

some from out-of-province, expecting the park to be open. It 

was not open. 

 

I think I hear you saying today that you were providing that 

time for the city to continue in its thought, to continue the 

consultation. I want to know why those consultations couldn’t 

have gone on with the park open. I still don’t understand why 

the park couldn’t have opened May 1. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Very simply put, Mr. Chairman, the 

city of Moose Jaw did not tell us what their intentions were 

until May 12. I rather assume that by doing so, they had hoped 

we would open on May 1, and they would not have to respond 

at all during that summer period, and we would run the park all 

summer. As it turned out, we opened on May 14, two days after 

they notified us they weren’t interested in operating the park. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, do you have any estimate on 

revenues lost to the park in that two-week period, both through 

the gate entry and perhaps through the concession? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m advised that it’d be difficult to have 

an accurate estimate. But it would certainly be well under 

$10,000 and perhaps closer to $5,000, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I just want to submit to you that 

it seems to me if you were sincere in wanting to work closely 

with the city of Moose Jaw on this issue, that in fact the park 

could have been opened, and the working together, the 

consultations, could have gone on in a reasonable fashion. 

 

I submit this keeping the gates closed was just another part of 

the heavy-handed tactic to attempt to get the city of Moose Jaw 

to take the park over, which clearly, with a $500,000 cost to the 

city and having lost some $1.7 million in revenue already, was a 

very difficult proposal for the city to undertake. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to . . . I know in your 

communications with the city, officials of your department 

suggested that, in fact, it was more advisable that the park be in 

the city of Moose Jaw’s hands. Could you provide for me some 

of the argumentation that leads you to that conclusion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to put things fairly 

simply, I think, we’re faced with a situation where  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2212 

 

we’re operating a park – certainly adjacent to the city of Moose 

Jaw. I believe some of it, perhaps, right in the city of Moose 

Jaw – losing a fairly large sum of money every year. And at a 

time when we were looking at ways to reduce expenditure, we 

rather wondered if, perhaps, this was to be operated by someone 

other than the department. They would have an opportunity to 

run it in, perhaps, a more frugal manner, but certainly in a 

matter that they might be able to break even. 

 

I don’t know if they could manage it. Obviously, they feel they 

can’t because they’re looking at a . . . they look at a deficit of 

$450,000 a year so we operated it for this year. I don’t know 

what we’d lose on the operation over this summer, but I 

imagine it would be fairly substantial. And I just question if we 

should go on with certain operations of government losing 

money year after year without making some attempt to place it 

in someone else’s hands who may be in a better position to 

break even. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Minister, you’re saying then that . . . 

and at one point, I tend to agree that I do feel the city of Moose 

Jaw can manage things a little more efficiently than your 

government. When I hear you say then that . . . what you’re 

wanting to do simply is to transfer from provincial taxpayers to 

the taxpayers of Moose Jaw the total cost of the wild animal 

park. Is that what you’re saying? That you simply want to 

transfer the cost from the treasury of Saskatchewan to the 

treasury of the city of Moose Jaw? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It struck me, Mr. Chairman, the hon. 

member was hinting that perhaps the city of Moose Jaw is a 

more efficient organization than the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and if that is the case, then we’d be pleased to 

see them take it over and run it. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, this is a park that clearly serves 

the entire population of our province. I think the number of 

visitors at 160,000 visitors – and we agreed that one-fifth of 

those visitors come from the city of Moose Jaw; four fifths of 

those visitors come from beyond the city of Moose Jaw – 

clearly this park is serving the entire population of our province. 

Clearly it’s drawing visitors to our province from 

out-of-province, and the benefits of this park surely are 

provincial benefits. Therefore, why then should the city of 

Moose Jaw, and the taxpayers in Moose Jaw, be asked to bear 

the entire financial cost of maintaining the animal park? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the beneficiaries may be 

provincial in nature so far as people from other parts of the 

province do go to Moose Jaw and visit that park – four-fifths, as 

the hon. member just said. And what do they do when they go 

to Moose Jaw? That’s the prime tourist attraction and they 

spend money there. And the major, major beneficiary of this 

park, I submit, sir, is the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

And we didn’t say we wanted to transfer all of the costs to the 

city of Moose Jaw. We were willing to negotiate with the city 

and come up with something that, perhaps, we could both have 

lived with. They chose not to do that. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, then if I follow your line of 

argument, then what you would say is that facilities  

which are local in this province, and yet serve the province 

should somehow . . . their costs should be borne locally. 

Therefore, would you argue then that, for instance, the Museum 

of Natural History in Regina ought to be funded by the city of 

Regina? Are you saying, for instance, that the Prince Albert 

National Park should somehow be funded by the city of Prince 

Albert? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, essentially we 

have no other urban parks. This is the only one. I think it’s 

somewhat spurious and devious to try and take the argument 

away to the Museum of Natural History which firmly belongs 

in this department – it’s part of a department of government – 

or to Prince Albert National Park, which has got nothing to do 

with me. You just said it’s a national park. No, we don’t say 

that. What we’re saying is, here we have an urban park situated 

in the city of Moose Jaw benefiting the residents of Moose Jaw 

and we were not in any way, shape or form forcing this park on 

to the city of Moose Jaw. We said we’d negotiate; we wanted to 

discuss. They didn’t want to discuss. We may well have come 

up with a compromise option that would have suited all of us. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I think it’s going to be apparent 

in our discussions about the animal park that we perhaps differ 

in our understanding of the purpose of a park and of the many 

benefits that accrue from a park. Certainly the dollars, the 

tourist dollars, that remain in Moose Jaw are a benefit to our 

community. But indeed those people who are travelling to 

Saskatchewan to visit the Moose Jaw animal park are paying 

your gas tax and it’s going into your treasury. And the Moose 

Jaw jobs that are supported by the park, I mean, those folks are 

all paying taxes and they end up in your treasury. 

 

There’s a goodly number of benefits that have nothing to do 

with money. This park provides a place where families can 

travel together to, can enjoy; it’s a park that at least over the last 

10 years or so we’ve built a fine collection of indigenous 

species. Surely that has some value. It’s a park that provides 

educational opportunities. We have a number of school tours 

that come from all over southern Saskatchewan. So the benefits 

are not simply monetary benefits to the city of Moose Jaw. All 

sorts of benefits accrue both to Moose Jaw and I submit to our 

whole province. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Including giving to the Saskatchewan 

children the opportunity to see animals. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Precisely. 

 

Mr. Minister, your calculation of the deficit figure to the 

provincial government is somewhere in the neighbourhood of 

$250,000, plus or minus some on a given year. Can you share 

with me studies that perhaps your department has done in ways 

that as a provincial government, as your department, that deficit 

might have been addressed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we took some measures 

this year to try and increase the efficiencies within the park, to 

try and make it a more viable operation. We feel that the deficit 

this year could be in the neighbourhood of $200,000, which is 

down  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2213 

 

considerably from what we’ve been losing in other years. 

 

But really to make the thing balance out we’d have to look at 

big increases in revenue if it’s going to balance, and that, I 

think, would be particularly difficult because of the large 

number of children, as the hon. member himself has indicated, 

who visit the park; or we could increase the facilities within the 

park to make it more attractive. Now that has happened in other 

areas around the province. I can think of a water slide that went 

in to Kenosee. It has been immensely popular; it’s increased the 

visitation there considerably. 

 

But given the financial restraint that we’re all under in the 

province, I ask: is it wise use of taxpayers’ dollars for this 

department to be building golf courses, water slides, or other 

such recreational facilities when there are people in the private 

sector who may be willing to build those facilities – lease 

arrangement with the department whereby we get income from 

them; they assume the responsibility for running the park, make 

it more attractive for tourists, and the city of Moose Jaw again 

is the ultimate beneficiary. And I think the hon. member has 

indicated that, too. The city benefits enormously from the park 

being there, and we don’t want to see the park closed. 

 

And if you check over the history of who owned that park since 

1929 when it was a private zoo and it was taken over by other 

clubs and other organizations – why? Because they couldn’t 

break even. They couldn’t make money. So ultimately, where 

did it come? Mr. Chairman, when groups run into trouble they 

say, here government, you take it over and you absorb the loss. 

 

Well we’re very determined in government, Mr. Chairman, to 

be as efficient as we can and to cut out as many of our losers as 

possible, not by closing them down, but by making them 

available on a lease basis to somebody else who can perhaps 

run it efficiently and make it work. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’m a little concerned that I did 

not hear you say, in the ways that you had considered to address 

the deficit of the park, I did not hear you say the words: greater 

or better promotion of the park. I think it’s fairly widely 

recognized, at least in our community, that in some ways this 

Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park is one of the best kept secrets in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

To my knowledge there has been one major highway billboard 

advertising the park – one billboard. Mr. Minister, I have a very 

specific question about that billboard. The park . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . There’s two. There’s two billboards. I stand to 

be corrected – two billboards. 

 

Mr. Minister, on the billboard that I pass daily travelling 

between Moose Jaw and Regina, the one at Belle Plaine, I note, 

has now been covered and changed. The park is going to close 

on September 30. There’s still a month of operations left. Why 

is that billboard covered? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m glad the hon. 

member raised that particular point, because in 1985-86 we 

spent $35,505 promoting this park. In  

1986-87 we spent $33,208 promoting this park, and we did a 

province-wide promotion of the thing. We did a lot of 

advertising. I was at the kick-off for the campaign in the city of 

Moose Jaw, attended by the mayor and other local people in 

Moose Jaw who were very happy about the campaign because 

they thought it would promote the number of entries, and it was 

successful in that regard. The promotion was successful in 

bringing more people in, but at the kind of revenue or the kind 

of fees we’re charging, there’s no way we were going to break 

even unless we had everybody in the province visit several 

times. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I asked a specific question; 

maybe you didn’t catch it. Just to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The billboard. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — The billboard, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry, nobody can 

tell me if they know if the billboard’s covered up or not, or why 

it would be covered if, indeed, it is covered. I’ll check that out 

for you. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Calvert: — It’s covered. I pass it daily. It now has a TIPS 

billboard, which is a reasonable thing to do, I would suggest, 

after the park is closed. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I agree. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I’m glad to hear you say you agree, and 

hopefully the park will still be under your control a year from 

now, and indeed you will not do this again. 

 

Mr. Minister, you talked about perhaps the need of some other 

facility in the park to attract visitors, and I don’t think that’s an 

unreasonable notion, but then you went on to say you didn’t 

think it was wise for the province to be engaged in that kind of 

activity just now. Then I ask you to square that with the new 

marina and harbour that’s just been opened up, up at Elbow. If 

we’ve got dollars to do that sort of thing, could there not be 

some dollars to put into the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to respond 

to the latter part of the member’s question-cum-statement, when 

he brought Elbow harbour into this. And this is very interesting. 

Lake Diefenbaker, in the estimation of my officials, and 

certainly many of my colleagues, has the potential to become a 

major tourist attraction. It is an excellent body of water. It’s 

terrific for sailing and a host of water-based activities, but there 

didn’t seem to be much impetus on behalf of private sector 

folks to get involved out there. By taking the initiative with the 

Elbow harbour which, yes, we constructed, but we did it 

through the New Careers Corporation whereby we took people 

with no job skills or little job skills, people who were on 

welfare, we employed them and trained them on that project. 

 

So it was built as a training project whereby many of those 

people went on to find gainful employment afterwards, and at 

the same time we’re left with a valuable piece of  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2214 

 

infrastructure, Mr. Chairman, which has attracted now all kinds 

of interest from the private sector people to become involved 

not only in that particular site but with Diefenbaker Lake in 

general. 

 

So I would say to the hon. member, that was why we did that 

project. It wasn’t a question of saying we don’t have money for 

a project in Moose Jaw to run a wild animal park, but we’ll find 

something for Elbow harbour. That’s apples and oranges, Mr. 

Chairman. What we wanted to do was get a development on to 

Lake Diefenbaker to spring loose private sector development in 

other areas on there. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding . . . If we 

could maybe move, then, into the proposals for private lease of 

the park. Now it’s my understanding that there’s a bidder’s 

conference, in fact, tomorrow in Moose Jaw. You’ve called for 

tenders, I think, in the middle of August, near the middle of 

August. 

 

Again I question then your sincerity in dealing with the 

community of Moose Jaw, because as you well know the city 

council in Moose Jaw has put together a committee to 

thoroughly study the issue. And in late July that committee, 

through the city, requested that you would withhold or hold off 

the call for tenders until September 30 to give them adequate 

time. And so I ask then, Mr. Minister: why, in fact, did you call 

for tenders in the middle of August disregarding the request 

from the city of Moose Jaw that that call not go out until the 

end of September? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I know the hon. 

member – I say this in all honesty – is a sincere member. And 

the last comment he made somehow implied that I wasn’t being 

sincere in my approach to the city of Moose Jaw. And I take it 

he made that comment not knowing that we had, in fact, 

responded to the city of Moose Jaw who said, please don’t 

make a decision before September 30. So to accommodate them 

we’ve moved the tender closing date to October 5. 

 

So tenders won’t even close until October 5, and they have lots 

of time to get together whatever they want to do or to get in 

touch with me, department staff, and discuss it with us. We’d be 

pleased to hear from them. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that explanation. 

In your previous comments you suggested that to address the 

deficit of the park would require, perhaps, large increases in the 

gate fees or, indeed, the addition of some other attractions or 

better promotions. I can’t somehow follow the argument that 

says a private developer can somehow address this deficit, 

whereas the province cannot, unless the private developer is 

intending to increase gate fees, make the park less accessible or 

somehow change what is the essential nature of the park. 

 

In your proposal for tender you have suggested, I think, that the 

general theme of the animal park must be maintained. I would 

like some further detail on that phrase. What does it mean to say 

that the general theme of the animal park must be maintained by 

a private developer? 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well very simply put, Mr. Chairman, it 

continues as a wild animal park. That is the essential theme of 

the park, and that’s what we want to see maintained. But at the 

same time, in granting a lease to anybody, or accepting a tender, 

implicit in that is that they have to invest money. They can’t 

just come in and say, I’ve got a good idea; I’d like to take this 

off your hands and run it. They have to put cash up front. They 

have to invest in it. 

 

And I submit that if they do invest and put in something 

significant in the city of Moose Jaw – perhaps a water slide, and 

I don’t know; I don’t look at any marketing studies on that kind 

of thing – but as an example, if they want to do a golf course in 

there because of the amount of land that’s available, or a water 

slide, or something else, just perhaps – perhaps – it would 

become more attractive to a wider range of people, a larger 

clientele. And if the facilities were improved significantly, I 

imagine revenues would increase concomitant with that. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I have some very specific questions about this 

whole tendering process. If the park is leased, will you ensure 

that the number and variety of species housed in the park will 

be maintained? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I just point out to the 

hon. member it would be very difficult for me to stand here 

today and say, if there are five moose and three elk and two 

white-tailed deer, that will be maintained forevermore. 

 

Because of the dynamics of that particular park, and I’m sure 

the hon. member knows this, we take in orphaned animals in 

there right now; we have injured animals in there. Some die; 

some move on. We’re a clearing house for any game farming or 

ranching activity that would be taking place as well. So by the 

very dynamics of the nature of the park, those numbers can 

fluctuate. 

 

What I can tell the hon. member, as we’re telling any interested 

parties, that we want to see that continue as a wild animal farm, 

and definitely we would have some expectations as to what we 

imply by a wild animal farm. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I’m still not clear. You talk about putting a 

golf course, for instance, in the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park. 

If I know the park at all, it seems to me the appropriate or only 

location for a golf course in the park would be in that area 

which now houses the bison – the buffalo. I’m not sure that 

bison and golf balls are all that compatible. 

 

Will you give some assurance that the wide variety of species 

now housed in the park – and it is a wide variety, and it tends to 

be a show-case of indigenous species, indigenous to western 

Canada, with the exception of a few others – would you give 

me the assurance that in some kind of privatization of this park 

we’re not going to lose that; that we’re not going to lose the 

opportunity to study our own indigenous species, and 

show-case them for visitors, and for students, and so on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, in discussion with  

  



 

September 1, 1987 

2215 

 

the officials, I was just pointing out to them it would be 

certainly my intention at any meeting with potential proponents 

to inform them exactly the position that you’re taking right 

now, or I think it’s exactly your position, hon. member, that we 

would expect to maintain the current flavour down there – 

certainly a variety of indigenous species to Saskatchewan and to 

western Canada, and I think that would have to be implicit in 

any discussions with the proponents. 

 

Again, referring back to the dynamics of the park and how 

animals are acquired and the flow that’s coming in and out, I 

really couldn’t get into specific numbers, and I don’t think we 

could tie anybody to numbers, but certainly, to take your point, 

we can make it clear to a potential proponent what the 

expectations will be in the tenders. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that the easy way 

to insure that the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park does, in fact, 

remain a show-case of indigenous species, and so on, with a 

wide variety, is for it to remain in the provincial park system. 

There are some of us who fear that it will become something of 

a totally different nature, not to say that that wouldn’t be wrong 

in a different situation, but there are many of us who fear the 

transformation of the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park into some 

kind of a petting zoo and amusement park complex. That may 

have its place, may well have its place, but at the same time 

there is a place in our community and in this province for a wild 

animal park that show-cases indigenous species. 

 

In terms of the tender, will you be ensuring that the park does 

remain accessible to people? And by that I’m asking you to 

ensure that, in fact, if you do tender it out, that the gate prices 

will not dramatically increase. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I wouldn’t be able to give an assurance 

that there’d be no gate price increase whatsoever. Depending on 

what type of facilities may be added to that park, I think that, 

Mr. Chairman, would determine what potential revenue 

increase would exist. 

 

For instance, we did – just off the cuff and only cursorily – we 

looked at, well, would a swimming pool go in there; would a 

golf course go in there; perhaps a restaurant. And a swimming 

pool, I forget which of us brought that one up originally, but 

depending on what kind of facilities went in there, I think that 

would probably determine what the entry fee would be. 

 

And of course, if the entry fee was such that it was driving 

people away, then nobody’s going to be doing any business in 

there. So I think anybody who wants to do business, wants to 

make it viable, wants to have a feasible organization, at the 

same time maintaining the flavour of a wild animal park, would 

have to give careful consideration to just what the traffic will 

bear. And I think that will be determined if – and it’s 

hypothetical at this stage – if there are changes to be made in 

there, the nature of the changes. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Being near 5 o’clock, the committee is 

recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 


