













































September 8, 1987 Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 8, 1987 

 

 

2335 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure to introduce to you, and to the members of the House 

and to all present, a delegation from the Jilin province, another 

of the exchange visits between Jilin province in China and 

Saskatchewan. The delegation is “education” in make-up, with 

particular discussions with the University of Regina, related to 

student exchange and curriculum discussion. 

 

Let me introduce the group, accompanied by Dr. Murray 

Hutchins, Dean of Administration, and Dr. Bob Bryce, Dean of 

Education. In the group, Mr. Speaker, are Mr. Chen, the deputy 

chairman and deputy director of the Education committee; Mr. 

Chang, president of Jilin Education College; Mr. Zhou, deputy 

secretary-general of Friendship Association for Foreign 

Countries; Mr. Xu, president of Jilin Finance and Trade 

College; and Mr. Ma, director of Foreign Affairs of the 

Education Committee. 

 

Accompanying them, as well as the two educators from the 

University of Regina, is Shuban Wang who is the interpreter 

and who, you will recall, Mr. Speaker, was introduced in this 

House just last week. He is one of the scholars from China who 

is attending the University of Regina. 

 

I want to welcome them to our House, to the Legislative 

Assembly, to Saskatchewan, and thank you very much for that 

delightful lunch we had today, and wish all the members of the 

Assembly to bid them welcome to our House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to, on behalf 

of the official opposition, add my words of greeting to those of 

the member for Regina Wascana. I have many happy memories 

of visiting Jilin. In 1982 I was there as a guest of Youxie and 

went up to Ch’ang-Ch’un and met many officials on that 

occasion. I greatly enjoyed my visit to that province, as I have 

to other provinces of China, and I know that all members of the 

House will join me in the welcome extended by the member 

from Wascana. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Increase in Fees and Licences 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Revenue. It has to do with your government’s 

hidden taxes on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Everyone knows about the gas tax and the unfair flat tax and the 

unfair increases in sales tax, but not everyone realizes that your 

government has increased hidden taxes  

in the form of government fees and licences and other charges 

by more than 42 per cent since you took office – a 42 per cent 

increase in hidden taxes since your government took office, 11 

per cent this year alone, or an increase of nearly $17 million. 

It’s widely known that your government and the federal 

government of the same party favour these hidden taxes. 

 

Can the minister justify an 11 per cent jump this year in hidden 

taxes, when you are preaching restraint to everyone else and 

cutting services to the public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the only taxes that are hidden 

are hidden from the eyesight of the hon. member, because the 

budget makes it clear where we expected the revenue increases, 

whether they be from liquor, driver licensing, for example. We 

indicated quite clearly in the budget that there would be 

increases in those areas and that we expected more revenue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the hon. member 

complains. And to use his figure – which I’m sure is inaccurate, 

based on his questions – of some 40 per cent since 1982, when 

one compares power rates of 90 per cent, SGI rates of 90 per 

cent increases under their administration, Mr. Speaker, we 

maintain, and of course the people of Saskatchewan still will 

remain and are, of course, the second lowest taxed people in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the same 

minister. If the minister has trouble understanding what I’m 

talking about, perhaps he should read his own budget 

documents where these figures are posted. 

 

Minister, these increases in fees and charges and licences are 

never announced with much public fanfare. That’s been your 

style. You just sneak them through with as little publicity as 

possible. None of them were announced in your June budget 

speech, even though this year’s increase and hidden tax revenue 

is the equivalent of two basis points in Saskatchewan’s personal 

income tax. 

 

Again, Mr. Minister, how do you justify huge hikes in 

government fees and other charges at a time when important 

and necessary services are being cut and taxpayers are being 

asked to practise restraint? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I suppose like most Saskatchewan I’m 

somewhat surprised at the hon. member. When one considers 

the past practice, Mr. Speaker, a former Finance minister in the 

New Democratic Party, New Democratic government, waited 

until the session was over before they announced an income tax 

increase. I recall where they waited until August, when there 

was no session, for a sliding gasoline tax, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they complain about not having a session, and yet 

when we bring about the increases to the public’s  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2336 

 

knowledge, when they’re sitting there in the opposition they 

don’t want to talk about potash, they don’t want to talk about 

uranium, and they miss the tax increases, Mr. Speaker, and they 

miss the revenue increases which happened August 1, July 1 . . . 

and the hon. member was asleep, just like they’re asleep in 

potash, uranium and the things that are of so much concern to 

the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Tourism and Small Business, he’s been feeding 

answers to the minister of revenue anyway, and it has to do with 

taking money out of the pockets of Saskatchewan’s small 

businesses. 

 

The Consumer Affairs department has increased its fees to 

businesses in recent days by incredible amounts. The cost of 

incorporating a new business has jumped from 150 per cent — 

$100 to $250, Mr. Minister. The cost of registering a business 

name increased from $25 to $50 – 100 per cent jump. The 

annual renewal fees for these registrations have gone up 100 per 

cent. These are just a few examples, Mr. Minister, and clearly 

your government doesn’t look after small business. 

 

I want to know where you were when these decisions were 

made, and I want to know how you justify those increases? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite, it was only a week or two ago, was asking about what 

this government has done for small business. 

 

I’ll just reiterate some of the things that we’ve done for small 

business in this province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I remember distinctly when small business was having trouble 

with taxes in this province, the same as they were with homes; 

we took action. In 1982, with interest rates, we took action and 

we pegged the interest rate for small business. We removed 

regulatory reform for small business – over 1,400 regulations 

taken from the books of this province. We put a regulatory 

reform council in place in which small business makes up the 

majority of the people on that council. 

 

So sure there’s going to be some increases in incorporating a 

business and things of this nature. But I think if you look at the 

action of this government in support of small business in this 

province, you will see a strong stand that is causing small 

businesses to expand and new ones to start. 

 

I cite, for example, Mr. Speaker, and I invite all members on the 

opposite side of the House to come to North America’s biggest 

trade show where you can bring franchiser and small-business 

people together in Saskatoon the 11th to the 14th of this week. 

Please attend. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

more, Mr. Minister. Are you aware that you’ve increased the 

licence fees for direct sellers from $50 to $250? And are you 

aware that you also require direct sellers to have their licences 

for a five-year period as opposed to the one-year period that 

used to be there? 

 

Mr. Minister, the government is just pocketing bigger licence 

fees to pay for your mismanagement. And I want to know – and 

you still haven’t said, but I want to know how you justify these 

kinds of increases on already hard-pressed Saskatchewan 

small-business people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

member opposite is trying to mislead or cast innuendo, which I 

don’t think is justifiable. I think if he would look at the length 

of term of some of these increases and fees, he will see they are 

over a five-year period of time, which I think is probably 

reasonable, probably something that small business would 

appreciate – that you don’t have to be renewing each year; that 

you have that business for some period of time. 

 

I think that’s far better and more in line with what the people of 

Saskatchewan and small business want, rather than plans like 

when they were in government, the party opposite thought of 

nationalizing downtown Regina and things of this nature. And I 

believe what we are doing . . . And once again, I want to invite 

you . . . And I will look with interest because I will be there to 

see if any of the front-benchers are in Saskatoon at North 

American’s largest small-business conference where you have 

franchisers, Mr. Speaker, and investors coming together, the 

biggest in North America. And I’d like to see you there on 

Friday. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, simply put, are you telling 

me that the people of this province and the business community 

of this province are happy with the increases that you’ve thrust 

upon them? Is that what you’re telling me? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think the biggest thing that the 

small-business people in this province are happy about is that 

we’re here and you’re there, if you really want to know the 

answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s what I hear anyway, and I think 

they intend to keep it that way for some time to come, if you 

really want to know what they’re thinking about. 

 

But certainly there are increases. There are increases in 

licensing fees and so on, but I think spread over five years, as 

the Department of Consumer Affairs has done, is more in the 

interests of business than a year by year fee, and people realize 

that fees go up. It costs money to do these types of things. So I 

go back to my final . . . my opening remark that if you talk to 

small business, and again, come on the weekend, ask them 

yourself, and they’ll tell you:  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2337 

 

thank God we’re here and you’re there. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the Minister of 

Tourism, Small Business and Co-operatives believes truly that 

the people of Saskatchewan are happy that you’re the 

government and we’re the opposition, ask your Premier to call a 

by-election or, better yet, call a general election and let’s find 

out just who should be where. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — My question to the minister also deals with the 

government’s hidden taxes. Your government has displayed a 

total lack of commitment to the co-operative movement with its 

decision earlier this year to virtually dismantle what one was a 

proud department of co-operation and co-operative 

development. 

 

Now you’ve decided to discriminate against co-operatives even 

in the setting of government fees. This month the Consumer 

Affairs department increased the fee to incorporate a private 

business from $100 to $250, an increase of over 100, or of 150 

per cent. But at the same you increased the fee to register a 

co-op from $75 to $250, or an increase of 233 per cent. Can the 

minister tell the co-operative movement why he didn’t question 

the size of this fee hike on their behalf? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member talks 

about the amalgamation of the department of co-ops into Small 

Business and Tourism. I believe it is a move that has been well 

received, I met with the leaders of all the major co-op 

movements in the province soon after the announcement and 

indicated to them some of the benefits that, I believe, can come 

by this amalgamation. And I think proof positive is taking 

place. Previously when there was a department of co-ops, that’s 

where one went entirely if you’re looking at this type of 

structure. 

 

We are using the small-business resource centres, Mr. Speaker, 

to allow people to come in at store-front and see the various 

ways you can form a government in Saskatchewan . . . or form 

a business in Saskatchewan. You can do it by private enterprise, 

you can do it in partnership, you can do it by forming a co-op. 

And those are things, I think, that co-ops are certainly 

appreciative of. 

 

Certainly there has been increases in fees for co-ops as there has 

been for other types of businesses. I think that is justified, and I 

understand that these things take place from time to time, and 

it’s hit the co-ops right now. That’s the type of increase that has 

been necessary. And again I would ask you to look at the length 

of time of licensing for some of these things. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, the minister should 

well know that the co-operative movement is not happy with 

the amalgamation of the department of co-operation and 

co-operative development as a tack-on, a third tack-on to your 

other ministry. The co-operative movement is simply not happy 

with that, and they’re certainly not happy with your unfair 

increases. 

My question is: why, when you’ve increased the fee for small 

businesses by 150 per cent, why do you jump the fee by 233 per 

cent for co-ops from $75 to $250? You did not deal with that 

question. And I simply want to know why, and if you deny that 

this is a discouragement to co-ops, how do you justify that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

member opposite would be better to get his facts straight before 

he asked the question. I think he’s trying to compare apples and 

oranges here. Registering a co-op is a one-time fee; it’s not like 

a renewable licence that would come due year after year. 

 

Certainly there are costs to administering government. I heard 

him rise in this House not three minutes ago and stand up and 

say, why don’t you call a general election. This is his way of 

containing costs. 

 

We have, certainly, costs of administering this government, and 

there are fee increases as there were fee increases under the 

NDP government to drivers’ licences and licence plates and so 

on. There are fee increases towards business. There are to 

private enterprises and there are to co-ops. 

 

Lost Markets to Honey Producers 

 

Mr. Sauder: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier 

and Minister of Agriculture. In light of recent decisions, 

arbitrary decisions by the federal government restricting the 

sales of honey both on the domestic market and in the export 

market from Canada, and in light of how that particularly 

affects our Saskatchewan producers, I’d like to ask the Minister 

of Agriculture what he and his department are doing to 

encourage the federal government to rethink those decisions 

and to open it up so that Saskatchewan honey producers can 

once again enjoy the benefit of exporting into eastern Canada 

and the United States markets? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious 

situation with respect to honey producers in Saskatchewan, and 

particularly in the northern part of the province. It is the result 

of a combination of rules and regulations that apply differently 

to provinces across Canada, and Saskatchewan is being 

discriminated against. 

 

We are asking the federal Minister of Agriculture and the 

cabinet to modify the rules and regulations as it applies to 

exports and inter-provincial trade of honey. Right now people 

in Saskatchewan have been denied markets to United States. 

And it’s very serious. In fact, the producers don’t know what to 

do with the excess honey . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — They’re giving it away. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — And they’re giving it away. It may be a 

laughing matter to the members opposite, and they don’t think 

it’s serious, but to farmers, Mr. Speaker, who have to deal with 

this situation, it’s extremely serious. 

 

And we are taking their concerns firsthand to the Minister  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2338 

 

of Agriculture federally and to the cabinet to ask them to 

modify the rules and regulations to treat Saskatchewan people 

the same as they do those in Quebec; and secondly, to 

standardize the measurement of the various ingredients in 

honey so that in fact we don’t have this discrimination. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I’d like to ask the Premier a supplement 

relative to his question that was fed to him by the member from 

Nipawin. Mr. Minister, you are aware that this problem has 

been around in respect to the honey producers for some time. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Oh yes, it has. It has been known for a 

considerable length of . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I know 

the hon. member would like to make a few points here that he 

has on his mind, but it is a supplement that you rose on. 

 

Mr. Koskie: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for reminding me, 

because this is important. The question of the honey . . . the 

problems of the honey growers in Saskatchewan has been 

known for some considerable time. And so my supplement to 

you, Mr. Premier, is: why in fact haven’t you addressed it; and 

why haven’t you got a solution, rather than just sent it down to 

Ottawa for further study? Why haven’t you come up with the 

solution? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly glad that the 

member from Quill Lakes now realizes that it is a problem. It 

will apply to the 1986 and ’87 honey crop. It won’t apply to the 

year after that because of the modifications that we can do here 

in Saskatchewan. But this is a federal law. 

 

We have raised it with the federal government for some time, 

Mr. Speaker, and we’ve continued to lobby to make sure that 

they would modify the rules and regulations so not to 

discriminate against Saskatchewan. If they don’t change it, 

Saskatchewan producers are prepared to modify their producing 

practices so in fact that we meet this double standard, and we’re 

going to have to do that. But we want them to make the changes 

before that and have the federal government make it fair and 

equitable across North America, and indeed certainly between 

provinces. 

 

So they have heard that lobby early. They’ve heard it again, and 

it’s been raised now because obviously farmers don’t know 

what to do with the honey. And clearly the members opposite 

didn’t think it was that significant. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, can you give the honey producers 

of Saskatchewan any deadline as to when you expect the federal 

government to address and to modify the regulations, as you 

indicated, which would in fact overcome their problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I advised the member, 

we have been informing the federal government and the 

Minister of Agriculture on a continual basis about the 

discrimination. And so we have asked them, and asked the 

Minister of Agriculture federally, to make modifications to the 

rules, so in fact that we can market interprovincially and export. 

Now the federal government is going to have to make that 

announcement and the hon. member will hear it the same time I 

will. 

 

Privatized Children’s Dental Plan 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the Acting Minister of 

Health, and it deals with the government’s decision to destroy 

the school-based children’s dental plan and replace it with an 

inferior privatized version. 

 

Mr. Acting Minister, your government has claimed that the 

privatized children’s dental plan will make dental services more 

readily available to people in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, when you killed the school-based dental plan on 

June 30, you closed 578 clinics in schools throughout this 

province, and those clinics were in 338 communities. Today 

you have dentists available to Saskatchewan children in a total 

of 75 communities. How do you define that as increased access 

to dental care for people in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that there 

have been a number of dentists who have been looking at 

purchasing some of the equipment from the . . . that was 

previously in the school dental plan, and that they’re going to 

be establishing satellite clinics throughout the province. I think 

we’ll see more of those developing over time. 

 

I understand from the Minister of Health that the cards have 

been sent out to all the parents in the province regarding the 

changes in the dental plan. I know I’ve received mine, for my 

son. 

 

I expect we will see a growth in the number of dental offices 

and satellite offices manned by dentists and also by some of the 

people that were in the dental plan throughout the province. I 

think we have to, in fairness, give time to see this develop 

because, you know, the equipment was only sold last week. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, this is the list 

of dentists that was handed out to parents throughout this 

province who have children enrolled in the dental program. 

This is the list. Of this list, 27 of these dentists are practising in 

satellite offices which often aren’t open five days a week. It’s 

also interesting to note that of these 75 communities listed here, 

one is in Provost, Alberta. 

 

I’d simply like you to answer the question. How do you justify 

the closure of a school-based children’s dental plan that was 

located in 338 communities when we now only have dentists in 

75 communities? How does that increase accessibility to 

children in rural Saskatchewan? 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2339 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well I can only answer, Mr. Speaker, 

again saying that the equipment was only put out for tender on 

September 2. I believe, we will see, there will be more dentists 

accessing this equipment, setting up satellite stations and 

offices, and also there may be, as I understand, more flexible 

hours that are taking place. Some of these offices are certainly 

open on Saturdays. I understand there’s going to be some open 

at night. 

 

So I think for the member opposite to stand and try and cast a 

black shadow that there will not be access to dental services for 

the children of this province, at this point in time, is simply not 

correct. I think it’s inappropriate. I would advise, sir, to allow 

things to develop as I think they will. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. Can you explain to me why 

one of the communities listed in your little list of dentists 

available to parents, why one of the dentist’s offices is in 

Provost, Alberta, and why Saskatchewan taxpayers are paying 

for a dentist in Provost, Alberta? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know the 

exact case of Provost, Alberta, but I can probably guess that 

there may be people coming to Langenburg, Saskatchewan, and 

so on for dental services from Manitoba. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — A new question. On August 17 in this 

legislature your government made the following promise with 

respect to the dental records of Saskatchewan children enrolled 

in the old school-based program, and this is what the minister 

said: 

 

There’s no question that the records of individual children will 

be made available to parents. 

 

There’s no question in my mind – and I’ll say so here on behalf 

of this government – parents should have, and will have, the 

records of their children. 

 

Can you explain to me, Mr. Minister, why the Department of 

Health is denying parents access to their children’s records. 

They won’t give them to parents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have no indication that 

the allegation made by the member opposite is correct at all. It 

could be entirely false. I will take that under notice, contact the 

Minister of Health, and get back to the Assembly with the 

appropriate answer as soon as I can. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Final supplementary. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: —: Mr. Acting Minister of Health, when you 

killed the school-based children’s dental plan last June,  

you put more than 400 people out of work. At that time you 

claimed that many dental plan workers would be hired by 

private dentists. Can the minister tell us today how many of 

those fired 411 workers have been hired by private dentists? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take note of 

that. 

 

Call for Inquiry into Collapse of Principal Trust 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Consumer Affairs and has to do with the 

Principal Trust matter. The minister will probably be aware that 

today a lawyer in Regina has made certain comments in the 

media indicating that the Department of Consumer Affairs had 

some information, as much as two years ago, that should have 

set off some warning alarms about the Principal Trust affair that 

might have, if heeded, headed off the problem that we are now 

facing with that company and associated companies in 

Saskatchewan across western Canada. 

 

And I wonder if the minister now, in light of the allegations that 

have been made, would reconsider her position in refusing to 

call a public inquiry into this matter and indeed call a public 

inquiry in this matter so that this allegation and all of the facts 

surrounding this affair, including the conduct of the 

government, can be examined in full? 

 

Hon Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I heard the report by the 

defeated Liberal candidate, and I think that should . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. I’m having difficulty hearing the Minister of 

Finance, and I ask for your co-operation. 

 

Hon Mr. Lane: — The defeated Liberal candidate is acting as 

counsel, as I understand, for two individuals I believe charged 

with fraud on the farm source management. Some may be 

familiar with that. Many farmers were taken during those 

activities. A search by the Securities Commission would 

indicate that the individual referred to by the Liberal candidate 

was, in fact, licensed at the time, and properly licensed, that in 

fact the allegations stem from the fact that Principal Trust, as 

any trust or bank company could be, happened to be the 

depository for the funds. 

 

Now that of itself . . . for a lawyer to make an allegation that 

that of itself indicates that there was something wrong, I frankly 

think is spurious. And I suppose I’m reminded, Mr. Speaker, of 

the old legal maxim that the weaker the case the more you want 

to get to the press rather quickly. And I suggest that the lawyer 

involved was not only totally inaccurate, totally wrong, but 

frankly doing a disservice to his profession with those 

statements. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Could I have 

order, please. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2340 

 

Appointees to Saskatchewan Gaming Commission 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to make 

an announcement which will be of interest to all members of the 

Assembly and to the general public in Saskatchewan. I am 

pleased to announce today that Bill MacRae of Regina Beach 

has been appointed chairman of the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Commission. The other members have also been named today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. MacRae, a former RCMP superintendent, is most recently 

chairman of the rent appeal commission and aide-de-camp to 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. Mr. MacRae is also a 

member of the National Parole Board, a sessional lecturer at the 

University of Regina, and is currently executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Golf Association. Mr. MacRae holds an honorary 

doctorate of law degree from the University of Regina. 

 

Hon. members will recall that the establishment of a gaming 

commission was a primary recommendation of the independent 

inquiry into commercial bingo hall operations in Saskatchewan, 

which this government initiated. The commission will assume 

responsibility for the licensing and administration of bingos, 

raffles, break-opens, and casinos in the province. As well, Mr. 

Speaker, it is charged with making recommendations to the 

government respecting a comprehensive gaming policy and any 

necessary legislative changes, to us. 

 

The appointment of Mr. MacRae and the other members of the 

commission represents a common sense, widely supported 

action by the government, and is proof of our commitment to 

ensuring fairness in the market-place. Members will agree that 

gaming must be rigorously controlled to ensure that charitable 

organizations receive the profits which are due them, and that 

the gaming activities are themselves independently supervised. 

 

Mr. MacRae and the other excellent appointees to the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Commission, reflect our commitment to 

public consultation, meaningful input for all citizens, and our 

continuing support for the worthy and charitable community 

activity in the province. 

 

The other appointees, Mr. Speaker, are Bunnie Hanwell of 

Regina, who will act as vice-chairman; Henry Hanson of Prince 

Albert; Frank Smith of Swift Current; Gerald Nelson of 

Yorkton; Sophie Harder of North Battleford; Don Morgan and 

Keith Swan, all of Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s about time that the 

Gaming Commission was announced because it’s been in the 

works and promised for some time, and I’m pleased to see that 

it’s finally materializing because there’s been a lot of problems 

with the bingos as they’ve been operating in Saskatchewan in 

particular, and there’s been a long-time need for someone to be 

overseeing the recommendations from the bingo inquiry, 

particularly since the Department of Commerce and 

Commercial Affairs seems to be having trouble getting that 

under control. So I look forward to seeing the results of the 

Gaming Commission. 

 

I notice with interest the appointment of Mr. MacRae, a  

former RCMP superintendent; presumably that will give him 

some qualifications for the job. I don’t know about being a 

member of the golf association and how much that has to do 

with it. But we certainly look forward to the work of the 

commission. 

 

I see, with interest, that you’re talking about the need for 

commitment to ensure fairness in the market-place, and I’m 

really interested that you see this as proof of your commitment. 

And yet when we’ve had the many, many questions about the 

Principal Group, and the failure and the collapse of the First 

Investors Corporation and the Associated Investors of Canada, 

that you’ve not even been willing to answer the questions about 

that. And that certainly reflects almost the deregulation of the 

market-place and very little concern about fairness in the 

market-place or to the investors in Principal Trust. 

 

I also note that you see these excellent appointees as a reflection 

of commitment to public consultation. The way in which your 

government defines public consultation has given me a great 

concern. As a representative, a person to speak on behalf of 

consumers, I really believe in public consultation. I hope that 

that will be an open public consultation and not the kind of 

consultation as it’s been defined by some of your colleagues 

who consider consultation to be phoning up somebody and just 

telling them what you’ve decided to do. 

 

We look forward to the work of this commission; as I say, it’s 

long overdue And I know that there are many, many concerns 

out there in the province of Saskatchewan about the activity 

going on with bingos and nevada tickets and the other gambling 

enterprises that are going forward. 

 

I certainly will have more to say about that when it comes time 

to estimates, and I just want to recognize today the setting up of 

the Gaming Commission – long overdue, and we welcome it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise to 

table a document signed by 97 Saskatchewan citizens. This 

document calls upon the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to 

continue to allow SPC customers to pay their monthly SPC bills 

at Saskatchewan drug stores and other small business outlets. 

 

These people, Mr. Speaker, are the customers of just one – one 

of the hundreds of small businesses across the province hurt by 

SPC’s decision to eliminate collection agents. The business is 

Harris Drugs of Regina. Although this document was not 

prepared with formal presentation in the legislature in mind, I 

felt that the views of these Saskatchewan residents should be 

brought to the attention of the government and should not be 

ignored by the government, so I’ve decided to table it this 

afternoon. I urge the government to reconsider its anti-small 

business decision to eliminate . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. It’s not the practice of the 

House to have speeches about petitions. You can state  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2341 

 

what the petition is about. Keep it relatively short because it can 

go on for many, many minutes. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank you, and I would 

now like to table this document. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

would like to draw the attention of the House to the sudden 

passing this past weekend of a person who was never a member 

of this Assembly, but a person who none the less played an 

active and vital role in Saskatchewan’s public life. 

 

I refer of course to Mr. John Embury, who was a former 

president of the Saskatchewan Liberal Association. Mr. Embury 

was one of those who toiled faithfully behind the scenes for the 

political causes in which he believed with great passion and 

dedication. He was representative of those who, while not 

candidates for public office themselves, make an enormous 

contribution to the political process, and without them that 

process simply could not function. 

 

John Embury served his community and his province well 

through political involvement and otherwise, Mr. Speaker. I 

know all hon. members of this House would want to 

acknowledge Mr. Embury’s record of distinguished service, and 

we would all, Mr. Speaker, want to extend to his wife, Margo, 

and to the Embury family, our sincere condolences in their 

bereavement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I would like to, on behalf of the 

government side, just join with the member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg in offering the condolences of this 

caucus to the Embury family. 

 

As has been said, he did not serve in this House, but his father 

and his brother both served in this House, and all of those who 

knew John Embury, I think, would attest to the fine character of 

the fellow. Those of us that were close friends of his, I know 

will all agree that he will sadly missed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my 

words to those of the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and 

the member for Souris-Cannington. 

 

The Embury family has been a very prominent family in the 

politics of this province for many, many years. As it was 

indicated, the father, Col. Embury, was the father of both Tim 

Embury, who served in this House, and John Embury, who was 

so active in the political field, including being the president of 

the Liberal Party. 

 

The Embury family, and I speak now particularly of John, 

devoted a great amount of their time to the political process in 

this province; giving of their very considerable talents and of 

their time. I would want to join with the members of this House 

in expressing our condolences to Margo and other members of 

the family at the untimely death of John Embury. 

INTRODUCTION OF PAGE 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Also before orders of the day, I wish to 

inform the Assembly that Margaret Baerwaldt will be a page for 

the remaining portion of this session. Margaret has been 

working as a guide in our legislative building through the 

summer, and we welcome her now as a page in our Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Cuts to the Saskatchewan Education System 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to Rule 16 to 

make a few remarks regarding the education of our children in 

our province, a topic very dear to me. At the end of my 

remarks, I will be moving a motion. It will be seconded by the 

member from Regina North East. The motion will read: 

 

That this Assembly acknowledges that the children of 

Saskatchewan are the most valuable resource for the future 

of our province and commends the educators of 

Saskatchewan for their commitment and dedication to 

excellence in education. And further, that this Assembly 

condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for having 

betrayed the educational system of Saskatchewan by 

unwarranted cuts in funding, staff, and programs. 

 

The central point of this resolution, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

province’s richest resource is its children. In the emerging 

world economy, information and knowledge, not resources, are 

the most valuable commodities. In future, our province’s 

economic security will depend less on natural resources and far 

more on the wealth inherent in our educated citizenry. To deny 

our children the leading edge in education, to limit their choices 

and potential, is to short-change the very future of our province. 

 

Governments must think of education as a worthy long-term 

investment. Enlightened competent governments do view 

education in this manner. Competent governments shield 

education from the cyclical fluctuations of the economy. A 

competent government recognizes that some agencies in society 

must be protected; that they cannot be asked to shoulder the 

burden during tough economic times. Education is one area in 

which cut-backs are made only with great cost and long-term 

ramifications. 

 

To risk the education of our children by cutting educational 

programs in the name of government restraint is to squander the 

province’s investment in its future. The present PC government 

obviously does not recognize the valuable resources for the 

future of our province which our children represent. 

 

Educational opportunity for our children is no longer the  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2342 

 

central priority it once was in Saskatchewan. Recent unilateral 

actions by the government opposite have signalled a major 

change of direction for kindergarten to grade 12 education. 

These actions, undertaken without prior consultation, have 

violated the long-standing tradition of co-operation, of 

collaboration, of respect and trust between educators and the 

provincial government. 

 

This unfair, incompetent government is acting in terror of the 

$3.4 billion deficit, a deficit of its own making. It has neither 

the foresight nor the leadership necessary to recognize that 

education must be insulated from restraint. It is not only the 

abrupt manner in which these cut-backs to the educational 

system have been instituted which is disturbing. This 

government has been particularly mindless of the dangerous 

timing of its cut-backs to education. 

 

(1445) 

 

Rapid changes in technology have meant that our educational 

system must be prepared to keep up with the times. In 

Saskatchewan, until now, our educational system has largely 

met this challenge. Over the past few years, the province has 

undertaken a number of educational projects such as the 

educational development fund and core curriculum changes. A 

new emphasis in the core curriculum on areas such as 

communications, critical and creative thinking, and computer 

literacy are evidence of how our educators have been 

attempting to meet the challenge of the future. 

 

And now the momentum and the potential of these initiatives 

could be lost because of reduced financing. It is precisely at this 

time when the new curriculum is nearly under way, at a time 

when important advances must be made in our educational 

system, that this government has imposed an extremely 

detrimental program of restraint. Our school boards are having 

to trim costs. Our school boards are having to raise property 

taxes at the same time as implementing this vital new 

curriculum. In other words, at precisely the time when 

leadership is needed, our provincial government is shirking its 

responsibility for education. 

 

The province’s share of education costs is ever decreasing. 

School boards have been unfairly forced to pick up the burden. 

Every year the province’s share of the cost of providing 

education gets smaller and smaller. The people of this province 

have to wonder how much of a priority is being placed on 

education by this provincial government. 

 

In the decision to cut provincial operating grants by 1 per cent, 

this has meant a hardship to school systems across the province. 

The net effect on all school boards has been some combination 

of program cuts and/or staff reductions. The situation is 

particularly difficult for rural school divisions faced with 

dropping enrolments and decreasing foundation grants. The 

provincial funding cuts hits them the hardest. Without support 

for education in the rural areas, the overall decline of rural 

communities accelerates. In our education system we now find 

a creeping mediocrity born of a minister and a party and 

government out of date, out of touch with the reality of the 

demands of Saskatchewan, out of touch with the special  

crucial needs of rural areas. 

 

I want to talk briefly about the educational development fund, 

Mr. Speaker. Stretching the educational development fund over 

10 years, rather than the promised five, has shelved many new 

initiatives and educational programs. Shelved have been 

programs related to computer technology. Shelved have been 

upgrading of school libraries. Shelved have been work-study 

programs and other special needs programming. The stretching 

of the educational development fund, Mr. Speaker, will have its 

political toll; it represents a broken promise and it stretches the 

government’s credibility. 

 

The provincial government cut-backs – that is, the operating 

grants to school boards and educational development fund 

changes – along with the rising costs of goods and services, 

means serious changes to the quality of education. Government 

cut-backs, resulting from incompetence in management, will 

result in higher pupil-teacher ratios. The cut-backs will result in 

fewer program options for children. The cut-backs will result in 

innovative and timely program losses, such as counselling and 

life skills coaching. The cut-backs will result in fewer new 

upgraded facilities. 

 

I want to talk briefly, Mr. Speaker, about the school dental plan. 

Another long standing tradition in Saskatchewan’s schools has 

also been destroyed by this government, and I’m referring to the 

school dental plan. This dental plan distinguished our 

educational system. It did more than provide convenient dental 

care; it taught our children how to keep their teeth in good 

condition. Saskatchewan no longer has a public educational 

system with preventative dental care, thanks, thanks to this 

short-sighted, incompetent government. 

 

Before I close, Mr. Speaker, I want to return to the lost 

collaboration and trust – the collaboration and trust which used 

to exist between our educators and the provincial government. 

Educators in our province have been demoralized by the 

arbitrary, thoughtless measures of restraint practised by this 

government. They have been frightened by the severe effects 

these measures have had on the quality of education. 

 

As though educators were not discouraged enough by this 

government’s crass and callous cut-backs, this government also 

abolished 20 key positions in the Department of Education. 

Many of these positions are vital, vital to the successful 

implementation of the new curriculum. These educators, who 

were cut, possess the corporate memory and the substantial 

expertise in kindergarten to grade 12. Administrators cannot be, 

and should not be, asked to take their places. Their absence will 

be noted in our school system more with each passing year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Next year, Mr. Speaker, when our school boards have no 

reserve funding to rely on, when many of our most qualified 

and dedicated educators have left Saskatchewan for a more 

progressive educational system, a substantial price will be paid. 

Unfortunately it is our children who will pay that price, Mr. 

Speaker. 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2343 

 

In Saskatchewan our educators have had a tradition of 

providing excellence in education to our children, Mr. Speaker. 

We want to continue, and our educators want to continue 

providing that excellence to our children, and to provide it we 

need the leadership. We need a commitment to education and 

we need a commitment by the government and we see that it is 

not here, and I am afraid, Mr. Speaker, that it is our children 

who will end up suffering as a result of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I close, I want to make mention of two 

other examples of cut-backs. There are eight regional 

superintendencies in Saskatchewan. Two of those are now 

without superintendents; one to be cut altogether, one where a 

superintendent has not been replaced. 

 

The process of feeding information back to the government and 

to the government is not taking place in those areas now – in the 

Yorkton superintendency and in the Melfort superintendency. 

Who is to blame? Certainly not the people of Saskatchewan; 

they’re paying their taxes. It’s this government who has not 

done the job of keeping those superintendencies in place. 

 

So accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will move, seconded by the 

member from Regina North East: 

 

That this Assembly acknowledges that the children of 

Saskatchewan are the most valuable resource for the future 

of our province and commends the educators of 

Saskatchewan for their commitment and dedication to 

excellence in education. And further, that this Assembly 

condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for having 

betrayed the educational system of Saskatchewan by 

unwarranted cuts in funding, staff, and programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, want to 

make a few remarks on this very important resolution. As 

members are well aware, there are many parents and educators 

throughout the province who are growing in numbers in their 

concern for what is happening to our education system. 

 

I think that this resolution, Mr. Speaker, makes a good point 

that everyone in this House, I’m sure, could not possibly 

disagree with when it says: “. . . the children of Saskatchewan 

are the most valuable resource for the future of our province 

. . .” and our nation. 

 

Surely, when we consider the priorities of the things that 

happen in this place, and when governments consider the 

priorities of the expenditures of the resources available to them, 

that is one point that should never be lost sight of . . . and that is 

the importance of those young people, our children, not only 

from the point of view of their well-being today and into the 

future but also from the point of view of the importance that 

they are and their future is to the future of this province and this 

country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the prosperity and the standard of living of any 

nation has a direct relationship to the educational level of its 

people. There are those, I regret to say, who are  

so concerned about today, and only today, and about their own 

personal well-being, whatever their position in life might be, 

that they forget that the future needs also to be of a very high 

priority. 

 

And I also regret to say that it’s that kind of attitude, Mr. 

Chairman, and Mr. Speaker, which has led to the creation of a 

financial situation in Saskatchewan such that now the 

government feels that they have to sacrifice that future and the 

well-being of our children in its budgetary process. 

 

It’s that lack of foresight which has brought about a province 

from a surplus of $140 million in 1982 to an accumulated 

deficit today of in excess of $3 billion. That kind of an attitude, 

Mr. Speaker, an attitude which said that for expediency 

purposes and for the rewarding of wealthy friends, $300 million 

a year should be given up, which this government has done, to 

the oil industry in holidays given to royalties so that they don’t 

have to pay them; a rent which the people of Saskatchewan 

have a right to get and are not getting – that $300 million a year 

which now the government is asking the children of 

Saskatchewan to pay, with the cut-backs that we have seen in 

education. 

 

It’s that kind of misguided priorities, Mr. Speaker, which has 

led to the kind of foolish expenditure of revenue, of taxpayers’ 

dollars, such that we have given away, or the government has 

given away, a pulp mill in Prince Albert which was worth in 

excess of $328 million to a foreign corporation and got not one 

cent for it. So that the children of Saskatchewan in our schools 

now are told programs and opportunities will be cut back 

because the government says there are no revenues. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, both as a parent and an educator and 

also a legislator, that the government has chosen to punish our 

children because of its own mismanagement and its own 

incompetence. And I want to say that to neglect the education 

of our young people is a travesty of the highest order. To do so 

is to rob from the futures of our children. To neglect education 

is to ignore the important needs of our society’s future. And the 

very future, as I have said, Mr. Speaker, the very future of our 

province and our nation are dependent on the well-educated 

population. 

 

Now recently I have heard the Premier say that he was calling 

for a broad review of the education system. In light of all the 

concern that people are having with the cut-backs that have 

taken place, the Premier has felt obligated to respond by saying 

there needs to be a broad review of our education system. And 

when you take into context of reality what he is saying, I think 

there is cause to worry, especially when you hear the Premier 

also say that our education system should focus more on 

preparing our children for jobs. 

 

The whole exercise of budget cuts and the destruction of the 

Department of Education in the K to 12 area shows a complete 

lack of understanding of education by the new hierarchy in the 

department, by the Minister of Education and by this 

government. This total response, Mr. Speaker, simply to the 

corporate needs for employees, has led to the neglect of the 

most important part of education, and  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2344 

 

that is preparing our children and our students for life. 

 

(1500) 

 

That too, Mr. Speaker, is a crucial and important component of 

our educational system. And to hear the Premier suggest that we 

should back away from that in some way, I think should cause 

us all to become very concerned and very worried. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the call for another review, while 

massive cuts to programs are being made, can only be described 

as irresponsible. There was just a public study which took some 

six or seven years to do which has just been completed. Why do 

we need another review? There was massive public 

participation; there was educator participation; there was trustee 

participation, and it resulted in the proposals of the core 

curriculum. 

 

Now, as we heard in the media reported today, there is concern 

by educators in this province that this core curriculum is dead, 

that it will not ever see the light of day. And I think there is 

reason for that concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What the government has done is it’s cut operating grants to 

school boards by 1 per cent, and if you factor into it inflation, 

it’s really a cut-back of in excess of 4 per cent. It is reducing 

funding for capital projects such that we now have in the city of 

Regina a new Catholic elementary school in the north-west part 

of the city, opened this fall, and it has already more students 

that it can handle. But the Department of Education and this 

government has cut back the funding for capital projects. 

 

Not only that, but it has transferred a bigger shift of the cost of 

education capital to the local property taxpayer. Because 

whereas the school division’s share used to be up to two and 

one-half mills, it is now up to 20 per cent of the cost of the 

project – a direct and deliberate transfer of the taxation from the 

level of the province, where it can be more broadly based and 

be more fair, to the property taxpayer. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, the government has eliminated all the 

positions in the department involved with the implementation 

and the development of the core curriculum, and one can only 

conclude from that that all of that six or seven years of study 

and development has been for naught. And the only result of all 

of that seems to be an indication by the Premier and by the 

Minister of Education that there is yet going to be another 

review. 

 

Mr. Speaker, educators are concerned – not only parents but 

educators are concerned. Our teachers and our educators have 

been dedicated beyond the call of duty. They have seen their 

class ratios grow. There are class-rooms of grade 1 students in 

division one that have 30 students in them. That is no longer an 

educational situation; that is an assembly line process. We have 

situations, Mr. Speaker, where special education classes for 

children with special needs have been cancelled and done away 

with because of the lack of funding because of the cut-backs 

that have been brought about by this government. 

Mr. Speaker, that is no way to establish the priorities about the 

needs of our children and the needs of our students. As I said 

earlier, those kinds of priorities which neglect the education of 

our children can only be described as irresponsible, and are a 

travesty. 

 

Our teachers are going beyond the call of duty. In spite of 

cut-backs in their salaries – because there have been no 

increases and inflation is eating into those salaries – in spite of 

increased student enrolment ratios, in spite of two grades and 

three grades in some classes, they are still contributing with 

extra-curricular duties. They are still taking part in professional 

development. 

 

And they, I think, have a right to ask this government: where 

are your priorities? When are you going to decide that our 

children are just as important as the multinational oil companies 

to whom you give $300 million a year while you cut back in the 

education of those who are most important to us, and that is our 

young people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Over the 

last while I’ve had numerous opportunities to debate in this 

House matters on the budget, on the throne speech, 

diversification, potash, and so on. But today in particular it 

gives me a warm feeling to be able to get up here and speak on 

a topic that I think I know a little bit about, namely on 

education. I could take the particular tack, I suppose, that the 

previous two speakers took, but after hearing on their 

negativism, their cynicism, and so on, I think it is probably 

better to take a little bit of a high road approach and discuss 

education on the level that I would have expected those 

members to discuss. 

 

And with that particular thought in mind, and having listened 

carefully to the motion as it was read, I would like to at this 

time give notice that I’m making an amendment to that motion, 

and I will read it at this time: 

 
That the motion under Rule 16 be amended by deleting all words 

after the word “Assembly” in the fourth line and by substituting 

the words: 

 

commends the Government of Saskatchewan for its commitment 

to our education system as shown by the record funding it has 

provided after years of neglect by the former government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you are well aware of by now, I have been an 

educator for many years. My education as a teacher . . . my 

years as a teacher, as an educator in this province, began back in 

the ‘50s. I started teaching in 1959 in the small town of 

Hepburn where I had a grade seven and eight class. And in 

during the ensuing years I had the opportunity to teach grades 

one to twelve. I had the opportunity to teach those little tykes 

how to read, follow them through the educational system, see 

them enter the work-a-day world, become married, and I even 

had the opportunity to teach some of their kids. And when that 

happened, I knew it was time to get out and try something 

different. 

 

But during that time, Mr. Speaker, I saw the development of the 

educational system in the province of  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2345 

 

Saskatchewan. I was part of it and I always was proud because I 

think over the years Saskatchewan has been a leader in 

education. I saw many trends. I saw many reversals of trends. I 

saw the open environment kind of a situation which we copied 

from the United States, as we did many other things. But we 

just barely got into copying them, and then the States realized 

they were wrong, and they would go another track and then we 

would follow. But we were innovative through many of those 

years. 

 

And I think that one of things that I have found and, as the 

member from North East also said, Regina North East, the 

educators are to be commended. Because education . . . being 

an educator in any province under any circumstances can be and 

generally is a very stimulating experience. But along with the 

stimulation is also the fact that it is a high-stress kind of an 

occupation, there is no doubt about it. And the burn-out factor 

and so on, I don’t know if I was a victim of the burn-out factor, 

but it is there because of the stress. It is rewarding but very 

stressful, certainly. 

 

And what I would just like to say is that the educators deserve a 

lot of praise because they are the ones that are not only teaching 

arithmetic, the ABC’s, but we teach the like skills, and I think 

that is extremely important for educators to do that. I recall just 

one of my last years of teaching. I gave an exam, for example, 

in grade 10 science. One of the fellows got an 80 per cent on it 

and I got hold of him in the hall and I reamed him out. I said: 

Darrel, what’s the matter with you? – an 80 per cent; I can see 

that you’re not putting your best foot forward. Conrad, on the 

other hand, in the class, I noticed had a 60 per cent and I 

commended him for it because this was an effort. He had put 

his nose to the grindstone, he had worked hard, he had 

achieved, and he came up with 60 per cent. And so in order to 

make Darrel understand, a little talk was in order because I 

think it is much more important for educators than just teaching 

the ABC’s, to teach life skills – to teach these people to think 

for themselves, to give them the tools so that they will be able 

to face all kinds of situations in the life that comes . . . that they 

are facing. 

 

Children, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are indeed our future, and it is 

our duty as parents and educators to help them to grow and to 

learn. When one talks of developing a natural resource, one 

usually worries about how quickly and how efficiently it can be 

done. But our children require more than piles of books and 

reams of information. Children are not to be processed; children 

must be encouraged; children must be nurtured to learn. And 

here is where the education and the dedication of our educators 

comes into play because a good educator can make an 

invaluable impression on a child both in terms of knowledge, 

but also in teaching the social values. A good educator will try 

to leave a child with something that lasts for the rest of their 

lives; the ability to learn, to accept change, to adapt to new 

challenges. 

 

Today we are faced with a number of vital decisions on how 

best to improve and to preserve our educational system. We 

must look into the future and plan so that our children will be 

equipped with the skills and knowledge that will be needed in 

the years to come. For the challenges of the future, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, will be very  

different than those of today. 

 

I am sure that all of us have heard of the information age that 

we are moving into. We’ve heard our minister speaking of that 

quite a bit during estimates. New technologies and new ways of 

creating economic wealth are becoming ever more closely 

linked together. Knowledge and information are the 

commodities of the future, and what is evident here is that the 

basic raw material, human intelligence, can be found 

everywhere. And our challenge is to develop that. 

 

Our government has recognized the need to face these future 

challenges. We know that our education system must be geared 

to provide our children with the best possible, the most 

forward-looking education we can afford, and already we have 

begun to implement the changes necessary to do so. We have 

introduced a new core curriculum policy for kindergarten to 

Grade 12, from K to 12, to help maintain our emphasis on life 

skills, not just the three Rs, not just for preparing for jobs. This 

was done in co-operation between government and those closest 

to the day-to-day process of education, the parents and the 

educators. Together we have charted a course for basic 

education well into the next century. 

 

As well, we have moved to make our adult education system 

more accessible, more efficient. By concentrating our resources 

on the needs of tomorrow, we will be better prepared to take 

advantage of the opportunities of the new information age. 

 

Now we’re being criticized for what we’re doing in this 

government, but there is much, much optimism if we are 

prepared to look into the future with open eyes. By changing 

the entire education system from K through to university, we 

are able to provide the children Saskatchewan with an education 

that will suit their needs and challenges of tomorrow. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my wife and I have four children. 

They range right from elementary through to two in secondary 

and one at the university level. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

therefore, because of this range I’m interested in education as a 

whole. And I suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we love 

our kids, and the last thing that I’m going to do as a legislator 

and as a parent is going to do anything to jeopardize my 

children and the future that they can have in Saskatchewan. 

Never will I be party to a situation where I would think that 

their welfare and their education and their potential in life is 

going to be thwarted with anything that we would do as a 

government. 

 

I suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is not what is 

going to happen with this government, and that is why, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I have come up with the amendment to the 

motion as it stands. And that is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, also I 

wholly support the Minister of Education and his vision for the 

future of education in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The member never moved his 

amendment. 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2346 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thought I had read it at 

the beginning of my speech and moved it at that time, but if . . . 

I will so now move the amendment as previously read. 

 

(1515) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

welcome the opportunity to participate in the debate this 

afternoon that acknowledges the fact that children of 

Saskatchewan are the most valuable resource for the future of 

Saskatchewan. And I really find it amusing when I listen to 

members opposite. Two have both been in the class-room not 

that long ago, and I’m really amazed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how 

out of touch they are when I hear some of the statements that 

they’ve made, and talking about cut-backs and this sort of thing. 

I really find that hard to believe. 

 

I want to take the opportunity to commend the educators in 

Saskatchewan for the commitment and dedication that they 

have to our students. There can be no doubt about it that the 

success of our educational programs is very much dependent on 

the teacher in the class-room. There’s no doubt about it, as well, 

that the teachers must have the equipment and the necessary 

materials to provide and . . . or do an adequate job, and I feel 

that our teachers and our educational programs in this province 

are second to none. 

 

After spending a good number of years in class-rooms and 

working in an administrative capacity around a good part of the 

province, I feel that I have a very good understanding of what’s 

happening out there, and I can well say that I feel that our 

educational system today is far and beyond what it has ever 

been in the past. I think that our children have greater 

opportunities than they’ve ever had, there’s no doubt about it, 

with the increased number of resources that they have in their 

schools, the training of the teachers, that we do have, indeed, a 

top-notch educational system in this province. 

 

And also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there can be no doubt about the 

commitment of this government to education in this province. 

We’ve heard members opposite talk about some of the changes 

that have been made – and changes are necessary from time to 

time; I think they should all agree with that. There’s no doubt 

about the fact that as we move on into the 21st century that we 

can no longer be teaching similar types of programs in our 

class-rooms that we did 30 years ago or 20 years ago or even 10 

years ago. 

 

And I think it’s unfortunate that teachers, particularly members 

on the opposite side of the House, would fee that change isn’t 

necessary. I think that change has to be recognized more in 

education probably than in any other field. We have to be up 

with change, and I know that the members opposite don’t like 

to see change, but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is necessary. 

 

They talk, for example, about some of the changes that have 

been made, and they like to talk an awful lot about the fact that 

there has been a decrease as far as the grants  

this year. Well a 1 per cent decrease in the operating budget for 

schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has not created the hardships that 

they would try and have people believe. 

 

I’ve talked to a good many educators, directors, and others 

within the educational system in the last number of months, and 

I think that for the most part that they recognize the fact that 

this government . . . at this particular time the province is in 

tougher economic times, and there have had to been changes as 

far as some of our grants are concerned. But I don’t see all of 

the great fear and the great problems out there in the province 

that these people opposite would have people believe. I don’t 

think that you’d find that the teachers, for example, are feeling 

demoralized and frightened about changes that are taking place; 

not the teachers that I’ve talked to. 

 

We hear them talking about cut-backs, and changes in programs 

like counselling and work-study programs. Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we had programs in counselling and in work-study 

years before that party came in, I suppose, and certainly before 

our party came in in 1982. A lot of these programs have gone 

ahead because of the special initiative of the people that exist 

out there in our schools. 

 

We must say, of course, that as far as the educational 

development fund is concerned, that that is probably one of the 

most positive steps that’s ever been taken in education in many, 

many years to come. I spent over 30 years, 30 years in the 

class-rooms and in the educational systems of this province, and 

as long back as I can remember that’s probably the most 

positive thing that happened in our educational system. 

 

Now they talk about the fact that it was cut back, but I’m sure 

that educators understand full well that when we are in tougher 

economic times that it makes a whole lot of sense to simply 

slow it down – the moneys are still going to be there – but it 

makes a lot of sense to simply slow it down over a longer 

period of time. But the programs that are being implemented are 

still going to be possible. The member from Prince Albert made 

mention of the fact that education must be prepared to keep up 

with the times. Well that’s exactly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why 

we’re making some of the changes that we are today. 

 

He talks about computer education. And there’s no doubt about 

it that the educational development fund had a major impact on 

the provision of computer education programs in this province. 

I know that some of those programs were started prior to the 

educational development fund being introduced, but a lot of 

them were further enhanced by its introduction. And there were 

many other good programs, too, that were brought in as a result 

of it, and of course they are going to carry on. 

 

Now I hear one of the members opposite indicate something to 

do with cut-backs in salaries. Well I don’t know of one teacher 

in this province that’s earning less today that they were last year 

or the year before, so I don’t know what they’re talking about 

when they’re talking about cut-backs in salaries. 

 

They also talk about enrolment changes. The member  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2347 

 

from Regina North East indicated that we have class-rooms in 

grade 1 where there are more than 30 students. Well I can 

remember 20 years ago when they were in power, or 15 years 

ago, that we had enrolments of 10 students in a class-room in 

some of our city schools. I can assure them that out in the rural 

areas of Saskatchewan that the enrolments are much smaller 

than that. Pupil/teacher ratios, as my colleague the member 

from Rosthern has indicated, are smaller today than they ever 

have been. So there are a lot of positive things happening out 

there, but the members opposite, of course, don’t like to talk 

about the positive things because they’re so adept at being 

negative. 

 

Our member from Prince Albert talks about educators leaving 

Saskatchewan. Well I really find that difficult and hard to 

believe. For one thing, I’m sure that we still have one of the top 

educational programs of any province in Canada. 

 

He talks about cut-backs as far as the regional offices are 

concerned. I know that the office in Yorkton was cut back. And 

he makes mention of one in Melfort not being filled – it’s my 

understanding that there is a regional director in Melfort serving 

that part of the province, a good part of the province where I 

also served for four years working with the government. We 

can also talk, I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about many other 

changes that have taken place, and positive steps that have been 

taken by this government. 

 

We can talk about changes at the university with regard to our 

technical institutes. They don’t like to make mention of the fact 

that we have extra spaces in our technical schools today than we 

had before when they were in power. We know that changes are 

being made in the community colleges and they, of course, are 

also going to be for the betterment of the Saskatchewan people. 

 

Another thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that today students going 

on to university or technical schools have much greater access 

to student loans than they ever have before, and at lower rates. 

So I think that’s something else that we can be very, very proud 

of. 

 

One of the members opposite also was talking about the 

increases in property tax rates. Well, let’s point out, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and get one thing straight – that the increases in 

property taxes were much greater when that party was in power 

than they ever have been since the PC government came in in 

1982. So some of the statements that they make over there are 

just not true. 

 

Hardships to school boards – I don’t think that, for the most 

part, that school boards are finding things as difficult as they 

would have people believe on that side of the House. There’s no 

doubt about it that there have been changes as far as the local 

assessment is concerned and, in some cases, school boards may 

have access to more funds this year than they did in the past, 

even though they have had that 1 per cut-back as far as the 

provincial grant is concerned. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in so far as the educational system in 

this province, I don’t have any doubt that things are going 

ahead and that we are moving towards the 21st  

century, and that the students that are in our schools today are 

going to be well prepared for it. And they’re going to be well 

prepared because of some of the changes that our minister has 

brought forward, and is bringing forward. 

 

We’re committed to education. We’re spending in the 

neighbourhood of three-quarters of a billion dollars in education 

now, and there are many more great things that are going to be 

done in the next few years ahead. I think one thing we have to 

keep in mind, we can’t do it all at once. Even though funds are 

limited, education is still a very high priority for this 

government. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the next few years, 

we will continue to support education and recognize the fact 

that our children are indeed the most important resource that we 

have. 

 

With that, I would indicate in closing that I will be supporting 

the amendment, and certainly am opposed to the motion that’s 

put forward by the members opposite. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I am rising, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in regards to 

the motion, and I will be supporting the motion as presented by 

our member, and opposing the amendment. 

 

In regards to the whole issue of education, we hear a lot of 

rhetoric coming across from the members across. In regards to 

the importance of education and the value of our children, there 

is great talk about new problems existing with school boards. 

There is talk about change. But it’s very important, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that you have to examine it in the light of the change 

that the PCs have brought into this education system in our 

province. 

 

I will say at the outset that the cut-backs in education are 

basically there to pay for the huge deficit that exists in this 

province. It is precisely the fact that after over five years of PC 

rule we are over $3.4 billion in debt. The question arises in 

regards to . . . the question of which has more value, the large 

corporations, or the children of this province? The fact becomes 

very clear that the big corporations are far more important than 

the children as far as the PCs are concerned in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — There is greater concern – and one member 

wonders in regards to what I am talking about. While we are 

cutting back in education and firing key staff from this 

province, we are looking at increases to Weyerhaeuser — $8 

million to build the roads in the bush. But that would build three 

schools in three communities in northern Saskatchewan. Which 

is more important — the education of the children; the road to 

access for greater freedom to access jobs in the future? Which is 

more important – that, or the roads which the big corporations 

can themselves afford? The schools are, of course, and the 

children are, of course, more important. The whole scheme by 

the PCs is one of providing big dollars and big give-aways, and 

in conjunction they slowly, slowly tear down the foundation of 

an education  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2348 

 

system that has been built by our teachers and the community 

people in Saskatchewan history. 

 

I would like to look at education in the aspect of the process of 

education – again that was mentioned by one of the members 

from across. There’s a lot of rhetoric about the process. What is 

important in any process is to look at people. I already 

mentioned the importance of our most valued resource in the 

future, our children. But we also look at the importance of the 

existing staff in the support systems to the teachers. The 

existing staff were very important to the whole process of the 

past seven years of curriculum revival in this province. 

 

(1530) 

 

From the initial 1981 period where there was task force reports 

in social studies and the beginnings of the initial stage of 

Directions, and on to the period where Directions and then the 

core curriculum was developed, there was tremendous input by 

people. And the key people that received this information were 

the ones that were cut away by this PC government. There was 

absolutely no continuum in any educational process. 

 

In any aspect of change you need continuum. You don’t start 

building a house and create your three corners with your 

foundation, and all of a sudden stop and try and build another 

one, because in the long run, huge cracks and crevices will 

come in. And that’s the basis of your policy. There is no 

continuum in your process. 

 

The key people in your department who were very involved, not 

only in the education of a comprehensive nature, but also in 

specialized fields such as Indian/Metis curriculum, were cut 

away by your slashes this spring. I find, therefore, that all of 

your talk about process has absolutely no basis; that in fact the 

key group of people that were the precise mechanisms for 

change no longer are here to provide a continuum in the most 

important phase of implementation. 

 

The question, therefore, comes in on content, and the very 

important aspect of curriculum and content. The educational 

development funds will be, and have been, cut by 50 per cent. 

Many of the projects, whether it was in the area of computers, 

whether it was in the area of social multiculturalism, whether it 

was in many other scientific educational field, these have had to 

be put on the back burner because of your cuts. 

 

Because you have put a lot of money in the back pockets of big 

business, you had to cut the content of education in this 

province. In the North, for example, while you will still give 

100 per cent subsidy on booze, you will cut back on education. 

Children become less than even your 100 per cent support for 

selling booze in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So when you look at the summation, of course the PC 

government is seeing the very basic of looking at the 

foundations of our educational system and starting to chop 

away at it like they’re doing in all sectors of our system. They 

are saying that private, large-scale multinationals are more 

important that our children. That is the message that you are 

giving us. You are saying  

these big corporations who have millions and billions in the 

banks, who continually take money from our pocket on a daily 

basis, are the ones you’re going to build roads for, you’re going 

to provide money for in economic development. 

 

When it comes into investing, though, on our children, you miss 

the mark completely. You slowly chop away at the very basis 

and foundation of our future, which is our children. And when I 

see this happening, as a parent I have to stand up here in the 

legislature – and especially when I see the little people running 

away to school, to this very day it gives me a strong sense to 

fight for the children of this province. 

 

As far as we’re concerned on this side of the House, we know 

very clearly that children come first when it comes down to 

education, and not the big corporations like the PCs have done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot say that it’s a pleasure to 

join this debate because, as the motion before us is of two 

minds, I have a divided opinion of the motion. 

 

I would like to say that this motion is typical of the petty 

partisan attitude of the NDP in all of their debates, in all of their 

activities, in this House and out. They try to drag a fine group of 

people into their partisan sniping by tying them to a sheerly 

political resolution, and they rub their hands in glee at the 

thought that they can drag teachers into the mud with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hate to disappoint their appetites, but disappoint 

them I must. The people involved in education in 

Saskatchewan, people in every position from teachers, 

caretakers, to administrators, these people have shown their 

dedication to our province and their high standards of 

excellence and dedication, and I do commend them. I commend 

those people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I know the people of 

Saskatchewan share the same view. 

 

But let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP motion stinks of 

hypocrisy. They are so concerned about education. If they were 

so concerned about education, if they were as committed to 

education as they now loudly acclaim, where were they from 

1971 to 1982? 

 

We all know they sat on the government benches and they had 

the responsibility to develop and enhance our education system. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that the responsibility rested 

with them. Unfortunately we also know, Mr. Speaker, that they 

did not accept that responsibility, that they were, in a very real 

sense, derelict in their duty to the children and the general 

population. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, they did not address the critical need 

for curriculum reform. We know that they did not provide an 

environment for the dollars necessary to see technical education 

excel. We know that they provided funding to the universities 

that amounted to real cuts year after year when they had 

abundant resources, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We know that the 

number of training spaces under the NDP was seriously 

inadequate. We know that they were unable to deal with 

teachers, with custodial  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2349 

 

staff, and with administration. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know their record, and the people of 

Saskatchewan know their record. Yet they have the bold 

audacity to stand in this House and make sanctimonious 

statements about how much they care and how sorry they are 

that they let education deteriorate to the point that they did. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that they care. I do not 

believe them when they say they are sorry, and I do not believe 

them when they say it won’t happen again. Mr. Speaker, I do 

not believe them when they say how much they care because, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s always the same old story. When they have 

the power they say the rural schools can rot – no money for 

renovations and no money for special programs, and certainly 

no money to bring higher education to rural communities. That 

is what they said when they had power. 

 

And I see them laughing on the other side, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll 

give them some facts a little later. They know that and they’re 

ashamed of themselves. Now that they are in opposition they 

promise unlimited funding to everyone – unlimited funding to 

everyone. And when they were in opposition they say: we 

didn’t really mean it; we didn’t really mean it when we were in 

power. 

 

And it’s the same in almost every category of government 

policy. When senior citizens had nowhere to go, the NDP in 

power said, we have no money for nursing homes; it’s up to the 

elderly to work it out for themselves. Now they are in 

opposition and they say, we didn’t really mean that. Now they 

are in opposition they say, we will give unlimited funding for 

nursing homes too. Shame on them. 

 

The NDP in power told the university they had to cut back. You 

will recall, Mr. Speaker, the protests happened under the NDP, 

as well as the occasional fray that we get into on this side of the 

House. You will recall the famous teach-ins at the University of 

Regina; the public condemnations of the government by student 

union leaders; urgent demands for funding to at least keep up 

with inflation. 

 

And if the NDP need to have their memories jogged, I can 

arrange to have some of the copies of The Carillon, the student 

newspaper, tabled in this House at a later date because those 

student newspapers from the time of the NDP are full of 

condemnations of the NDP. Even the left-leaning professors are 

quoted in these papers, and they are quoted condemning – 

condemning – the NDP for the complete . . . of education in this 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

You can chirp and chuckle if you like, but I can bring those to 

you and show it to you. 

 

We have the right to call the NDP on their petty games and their 

hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. It was a dark day for education when 

this province was under the NDP. When this government took 

office in 1982, it was faced with a situation that was very near a 

crisis in education. The physical plant system had been allowed 

to deteriorate in some cases beyond repair. Those are facts. One 

only had to look at the College of Agriculture building at the 

University of Saskatchewan for the proof of the NDP  

pudding. Every time there was an election, they promised to 

rebuild that important facility; and every time they gained 

power they said, not now. Not now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

response to the education in general; that was their response; 

wait awhile, yes. 

 

Then there was the man who had some background in 

education, a man who has a real grasp of what is needed in 

education; he was elected Premier of this province. We got a 

new college of education . . . a new College of Agriculture, I 

should have said, Mr. Speaker. We got several other new 

buildings – several, several, yes, at the university, a variety of 

subject and a variety of subject areas. And here in Regina we 

built a new archives building that allowed an expansion of the 

university library; that come out of our government. We put 

new money into the University of Regina to allow it to obtain a 

special collection for the library, and more money to allow the 

library to go into a full, computerized system. These were 

actions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not rhetoric. 

 

That same kind of action was taken in rural Saskatchewan. And 

if you look at the books, Mr. Speaker, you will see, in my own 

riding in Wilkie, just a tremendous commitment of maintaining 

the physical quality of buildings for our students to use. 

 

In the town of Unity over 200,000 has been invested in St. 

Peter’s elementary school for capital projects; almost $2 million 

was provided for the Denzil Comprehensive High School; $2.5 

million was given to the Macklin school; 1.5 million to the high 

school in Luseland; 500,000 to James Charteris school in 

Kerrobert; and the list goes on, to every school in my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we did – that’s what we 

did. That is commitment, and that is action. That is the proof of 

whether you think highly of our educators . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . that’s right. 

 

And the NDP stand up in this House and they whine and they 

promise they won’t abandon rural schools again if the people 

will just give them another chance – we will not do it again. 

Under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, there was no education 

development fund. The member gets up on the other side of the 

House and he talks about the education development fund; they 

didn’t even have it; you never even had it. We put it in, Mr. 

Speaker – you betcha. Yes, sir. 

 

They had a Heritage Fund which was to buy potash mines; yes, 

potash mines. And they saw they need to buy potash mines, Mr. 

Speaker, but they did not see any need to provide funds to 

develop education. Well that changed under this government; 

that changed. 

 

I would just like to make a note of a remark made by the 

member for Regina Wascana during the potash debate. He said, 

$1.5 billion the NDP squandered on the potash take-over – 

that’s $1.5 billion, ha, you betcha. If we had that money – if we 

had that money today, we could do much more for the 

education of Saskatchewan, you betcha – 1.5 billion. And I 

agree with that. 

 

And I would like to hear the views of the NDP members who 

will speak on this debate. Do you think 1.5 billion is better 

spent paying off debts to New York banks so the  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2350 

 

government can take over a resource that we owned by 

constitution, or would that money have been more useful 

building our educational system? You tell me that. You tell me 

what you should have been with that 1.5 billion. Well they 

won’t answer, Mr. Speaker, because they’re ashamed of 

themselves – and well they should be, well they should be. I can 

see, Mr. Speaker, that my time is getting short, so I will just 

quickly wrap it up. 

 

First, the government is to be commended bringing forward a 

new curriculum that will take Saskatchewan into the year 2000 

with confidence. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I must tell the member 

his time is elapsed. 

 

(1545) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the outset of my remarks I wish to indicate that I’m going to 

be speaking in favour of the motion and against the amendment. 

 

I had planned today to commend the educators of this province 

who have, under what I believe to be some ever-worsening 

conditions, been able to educate our children and develop a 

future for them through that education. But after the remarks by 

the member from Wilkie, and by the member from Rosthern, 

and by the member from Saskatoon Mayfair, I felt that perhaps 

I should start my remarks and address them as to: what if? 

 

What if this PC government hadn’t governed in this province 

for five years; what kind of an educational system might we be 

looking at? What if we didn’t have a $3.4 billion deficit that 

they’ve amassed; what kind of an educational system might we 

be looking at? What if they hadn’t given $20 million to their 

friend Peter Pocklington from Alberta; what kind of educational 

system might we have? What if George Hill and Paul 

Schoenhals didn’t have their noses in the Tory trough, their 

hands in the peoples’ pockets – the people of this province – 

what kind of an educational system might we be able to enjoy? 

What if this government hadn’t had their hands on the Crown 

corporations that used to put money into general revenues so 

that we could deliver the educational system throughout this 

province? What if all of those things hadn’t happened? 

 

And the member from Wilkie chirps, and he knows full well 

that all of those have been problems. And he can yap and he can 

natter all he wants, but the facts are clear. And I’m going to 

read into the record for that member, Mr. Speaker, a letter, or a 

couple of letters from one particular school unit, the R.M. of 

Prince Albert . . . the rural school division number 56, and I 

want him to understand what these people are saying about him 

and his government and what they feel has been happening to 

education in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first letter that I want to read in, and I think I’ll 

not read the whole letter, but just parts of it to save a little time. 

And I said, what if? What if they hadn’t  

imposed the seven cents gas tax on the municipal . . . on the 

school boards that run thousands of miles throughout this 

province? 

 

The secretary treasurer of the school unit number 56 indicates 

that it’s going to cost his board, some $45,000 to get those 

school children delivered — $45,000 equates to about a mill in 

that particular area – 45,000 more than they had to take out of 

their revenue last year. Unannounced, without consultation, 

after they’d had their budget made, they’ve got to find some 

$45,000. 

 

Let me put, Mr. Speaker, the $45,000 in terms so that even the 

member from Wilkie might be able to understand — $45,000, 

and I see he’s moving back. It’s maybe getting a little warm for 

him up there, but $45,000, Mr. Speaker, would give that school 

board the opportunity to hire another teacher and a half. And 

what if that hadn’t been imposed upon that school board? 

That’s what I ask. What if? Would there be that extra teacher 

and a half in the school division? I would suggest so, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I tell you, as every mother in this province goes into the 

schoolroom, and every father goes into the schoolroom and sees 

an ever increasing student/teacher ratio, I’m telling you that 

they’re asking, “what if” as well. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m a little 

touchy on the subject, and I want to share with you why. We 

have a special little girl in our family who has a learning 

disability. And I know what it costs young children who have 

learning disabilities when you see ever increasing 

student/teacher ratios. She learns better when she’s got the help 

of a teacher, and the smaller the ration and the more time that 

can be given to her, the easier it is for her to absorb whatever it 

is put before her. 

 

And so I say, Mr. Speaker, what if this PC government hadn’t, 

without consultation, taken $45,000 away from the children in 

the Prince Albert School Division? What if? I’d like to ask 

some other questions, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to know if the 

renovations that were promised to Riverside school in Prince 

Albert would have gone ahead. And I’d like to know, Mr. 

Minister, if this government, because of their mismanagement, 

hadn’t scrapped the dental plan because of their 

mismanagement, would those kids still be getting proper dental 

care? Of course they would. 

 

And I’m not suggesting here, Mr. Speaker, that they’re not 

going to get proper dental care through the dentist’s office; I 

just say it’s going to become increasingly expensive to the 

government, and it’s inaccessible, especially to the rural people. 

These members opposite have indicated, and the member from 

Saskatoon Mayfair tells us, that the people in the teaching 

profession he talks to aren’t upset because of the 1 per cent 

decrease. Well I want to tell you he’s wrong. 

 

And it’s more than that. It’s not only that decrease. It’s what’s 

happening in rural Saskatchewan and the decreasing enrolment 

and the level of funding that the rural school boards have to 

work with is becoming smaller and smaller, but yet they’re 

imposed with a new gas tax by this government. The decrease 

in revenue sharing is another burden on them, and they lose 

programs like the dental care 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2351 

 

And the Minister of Health would be aware of this letter that I 

have in my hands. It’s sent by the Director of Education from 

the same school board that I alluded to when we were talking 

about the increase in the gas tax. And he outlines six points as 

to what’s happened to the dental plan and why he felt it was so 

important that that service be maintained. But, Mr. Speaker, it 

fell on deaf ears. They went ahead, this government did, and 

scrapped the dental plan, causing hardship on rural families 

who now have to drive dozens and dozens of miles in order to 

get dental care for their children; lost a service that they had 

come to expect and that their children had come to enjoy 

through a good rapport with the dental assistants. The letter 

indicates that the writer, the Director of Education, indicated 

that the children were becoming comfortable with dental care in 

the way it was introduced to them, and that they didn’t see it as 

a negative thing any longer. And I say, Mr. Speaker, what if this 

government hadn’t mismanaged to the point that they scrap the 

dental plan? What if? 

 

The member from Rosthern was talking about members from 

this side speaking with negativism, cynicism. I say, Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Rosthern was sticking his head in 

the sand because we’re talking about real services that have 

been cut back to real people – real services, real tangible 

services that were there and that could be there and, I say to 

you, Mr. Speaker, will be there when we’re in government after 

the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — He alluded to the fact that in the Melfort 

area they’ve hired another superintendent, and I say that’s all 

fine. But, Mr. Speaker, I ask you, what about the regional office 

in Yorkton that was scrapped? And again, without consultation. 

The board wrote, stated their concerns, but still they failed to 

reinstate that regional office. And what commitment is there to 

that area? It’s added cost to the rural school boards; it’s less 

close information that’s available to those people, and all 

because this government has mismanaged to the point where 

they can’t afford to give the funds to keep it running. 

 

Mr. Speaker, cut-backs in dental care, the drug prescription 

plan, and education – and I want to wind up, Mr. Speaker, by 

saying that, yes, I commend the school boards. And yes, I agree 

with my colleague, the member from Prince Albert, in 

commending the educators of this province who are dealing 

with what seems to be a heartless and an uncaring government. 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying that I 

commend the students who are in facilities that should be 

renovated, that should be repaired, that won’t be seeing that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I indicate to you that I will be supporting the 

motion, and I will be voting against the amendment. The 

motion that was put forth by my colleague was crystal clear and 

I think, right to the point and very correct. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like  

to add a few brief comments with regards to the motion on 

education, speaking in favour of our motion and against the 

government’s amendment. I’d just like to make a couple of 

quick points. 

 

What are the teachers saying? I have talked to many teachers 

around this province since the beginning of this school year, 

and the general theme of that is: boy, what a difference from 

last June to this September. And I’ll say, like, what do you 

mean what a difference? And they go through all the cut-backs, 

all the changes in the education system that this government 

and these people say are great, and yet the educators are saying, 

no, they’re not great. So I would ask, who’s the government 

talking to? Who are they affecting when they’re cutting back 

the programs in education? 

 

And I can go on about some of the things that have been 

mentioned – the cutting the EDF (educational development 

fund) in half by extending the life, by doubling the life of it; 

talking about the incompetence and mismanagement of this 

Tory government. So they’re using money like money from 

superannuation, taking interest off superannuation illegally, 

using it to defray expenses incurred by an incompetent 

government, and putting the children of this province in a bad 

position. 

 

You can talk about the core curriculum as another example – 

core curriculum whereby they’re going to develop character in 

each and every student in each and every class. Core 

curriculum, where is it today? They’ve chopped the people who 

were basically involved in it, leaving it in limbo, leaving many, 

many hours of work by many people gone, and putting no one 

in charge – therefore saying that they don’t like core 

curriculum; they don’t believe in building character into the 

children of our province. 

 

This is what the teachers are saying. And I’ll add, that’s just not 

the teachers; the parents are saying it too. That’s my second 

point, Mr. Speaker. The parents are saying it, because just look 

at the polls. If education is being handled so greatly by this 

government opposite, why are people saying no to all the 

activities, the mismanaged activities, that’s going on from the 

other side of this House? The people of this province are saying 

no. The Tories are telling each other yes. 

 

And why? Because it’s the same old story we’ve seen in this 

province time and time again. Before an election the world is in 

your hands, and after an election people’s hands are out begging 

for something, while the Tories are in the trough, lining the 

pockets of their people. 

 

This is what’s happening in education, Mr. Speaker. They want 

the parents, they want the students, they want the educators of 

this province to be submitted to some kind of a vision that 

they’re trying to propagate. And what is that vision? It’s a 

vision of fewer teachers, of overloaded class-rooms, in urban 

areas especially. And I’ll tell you what the real vision is – 

they’re putting this province and the people of this province in a 

situation whereby the fewer numbers . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Time has elapsed. 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2352 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in talking with the 

Opposition Whip, I think we have an understanding worked out 

that we can move direction to motions for returns (debatable), 

and I therefore ask for leave to move directly to motions for 

returns (debatable). 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 1 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski moved, seconded by Mr. Thompson, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 1 showing: 

 

Regarding the employment of one Don Pringle by the 

Executive Council: (1) the date his employment took 

effect; (2) his exact duties and responsibilities; (3) whether 

he is employed by means of a personal services contract; 

(4) if not, the authority used for his employment; (5) his 

rate of pay, including the value of all fringe benefits. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make 

a few remarks and then I will move at the conclusion of my 

remarks, that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 

1 showing. 

 

And as you have indicated, Mr. Speaker, I want to preface my 

motion by stating first of all that this is a very straightforward 

motion. It seeks information which is not unusual, or 

information that is not such that the public does not have a right 

to know And I think, Mr. Speaker, to ask about the employment 

of an individual of the Executive Council, in this case it 

happens to be one Don Pringle, but if there are other motions 

that asks these same questions about other individuals, and it 

will ask about the date of his employment and when it took 

effect, his exact duties and responsibilities. 

 

(1600) 

 

When the public pays for the salaries of individuals in these 

kinds of positions, surely it is only fair and right that the public 

should know what the duties of those individuals are. 

 

Thirdly, it will ask whether he is employed by means of a 

personal services contract; and fourthly, if not, the authority 

used for his employment, and his rate of pay, including the 

value of fringe benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I move the motion, before I move the 

motion I would urge the government to provide the information 

at an early date because there is nothing complicated about the 

request here. It should not take a great deal of time. 

 

I also would remind the House that this motion has been on the 

order paper since December of 1986, and only today we are 

dealing with it in private members’ day under Motions for 

Returns. 

In light of all of that, Mr. Speaker, that the fact that it is a 

straightforward motion, and because of the fact that it has been 

on the order paper since December, albeit the Assembly has not 

ordered it until now, I think that it is not unfair to ask of the 

government that it be given early disposition so that this 

Assembly can get the information which it must have in order 

to be able to carry out its work effectively and properly. 

 

I also want to add, Mr. Speaker, that the record of withholding 

information in the last five years is rather a deplorable one from 

the point of view of this government. And I say that, I don’t 

mean to be too unkind, but I say that because the record is very 

clear. 

 

I recall when I was elected in the by-election in 1985, in 

November, that I discovered when I entered this House that 

there had been an order from motions of return and it had been 

an order for information about the travels of the Premier which, 

I think, was ordered some time in 1984. The answer did not 

come until some time in 1986 – almost two years. I really think 

that’s unacceptable. There is no conceivable reason, no 

conceivable reason why it should take almost two years to be 

able to provide the answers to a question that is routine and 

straightforward as one such as this one. 

 

And so I would really urge the members opposite, and 

whichever minister – I guess it’s the House Leader of the 

government side of the House – to deal with this, as well as 

other motions which are going to be dealt with today, in an 

expeditious way so that there is not this kind of unnecessary and 

undue delay as there has been in the past. 

 

I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that along with my urging that 

the motion be and the information be provided as quickly as 

possible, is the fact that we have had a case with the Public 

Accounts which was tabled some 15 months after it was the end 

of the fiscal year in 1986, so that the Public Accounts for the 

year 1985-86 were not made available to this Assembly until 

July of 1987. Now we have a Public Accounts Committee 

which is functioning and, I might add, after only two meetings I 

have a great deal of confidence in what that committee is going 

to do and what it’s going to accomplish. But the problem that 

the committee faces is that this information is so old, because 

the government chose to sit on the Public Accounts and not 

provide them to the opposition in this Legislative Assembly in 

the time frame that it should have provided them. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, that is maybe one can say history, and 

therefore it provides an opportunity for the government to turn 

over a new leaf and change some of those ways which I think 

they are finding in their contacts with the public are ways in 

which the public is not accepting. And so why should they? 

Why should they accept the ignoring by their government how 

their taxpayers’ money is being spent? 

 

I mean those people out there who work every day and raise 

their families and pay their mortgages, are finding it harder and 

harder every day to make a living. There are many cases out 

there where the take-home pay of many of those families is less 

today than it was in 1982, because  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2353 

 

of increased utility costs, because of inflation, and because of 

increased taxes. 

 

Now when you consider that the fact that the take-home pay is 

less than it was five years ago and that the costs have gone up 

very dramatically, I think one has to consider that the taxpayer 

is doing more, the working people are doing more, the farmers 

are doing more than their fair share in paying for the bills that 

this government incurs, sometimes on their behalf, but 

unfortunately only too often on behalf of some others who are 

far less deserving because of the patronage kind of 

appointments that we have seen taking place in the last several 

years. 

 

Now this motion that I am going to move, Mr. Speaker, 

requests the information which I have outlined to you about one 

Mr. Don Pringle. It so happens that this Mr. Pringle was once 

an executive director of the Progressive Conservative Party. 

And I’m not suggesting that’s bad. I mean that’s a choice that 

he would make or anybody else would make. But I think with 

the record of patronage that is so prevalent and so paramount 

with this government, it makes it so much more important that 

this information be provided so that the taxpayer of 

Saskatchewan, who is harder and harder pressed every day 

since this government was elected, can know what his tax dollar 

is going to, what his tax dollar is being spent on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by my colleague 

the member from Cumberland, that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for return no. 1 showing . . . Athabasca, I’m sorry, the 

member from Athabasca, and I apologize to the member. He 

sits beside me every day; I shouldn’t forget that . . . but that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 1 showing: 

 

Regarding the employment of one Don Pringle by the 

Executive Council: (1) the date his employment took 

effect; (2) his exact duties and responsibilities; (3) whether 

he is employed by means of a personal services contract; 

(4) if not, the authority used for his employment; (5) his 

rate of pay, including the value of all fringe benefits. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I listened to all of those 

very, very compelling arguments and while I didn’t agree with 

all of them, in fact, I think it’s fair to say that I fell asleep part 

way through it and I didn’t hear all of them. I did hear one 

argument that was compelling enough to cause me to encourage 

all members to vote for this particular resolution. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 2 

 

Mr. Kowalsky moved, seconded by Mr. Solomon, that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return no. 2 showing: 

 

Regarding one S.P. (Sidney) Dutchak: (1) whether he is 

employed by the Government of Saskatchewan or any of 

its boards, Crown corporations, commissions or agencies; 

(2) if so, his exact duties and responsibilities; (3) his total  

remuneration; (4) the procedure used to employ him; (5) 

the date his employment took effect. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I rise, Mr. Speaker, to make several remarks 

before I move this order. The order will be asking for a return to 

show that: 

 

Regarding one S.P. (Sidney) Dutchak: (1) whether he is 

employed by the Government of Saskatchewan or any of 

its boards, or Crowns or corporations, or commissions or 

agencies . . . 

 

The Sidney Dutchak we’re referring to here is one that was a 

former member of the . . . a defeated member of the former 

administration, still under the same Premier, soon to be 

defeated. 

 

The motion will also ask what his exact duties were and are 

related to . . . that is if he was employed under some Crown 

corporation or is presently employed under a Crown 

corporation, his total remuneration, the procedure used to 

employ Mr. Dutchak, and the date his employment took effect. 

 

It is the job, Mr. Speaker, of the opposition in this legislature to 

scrutinize all government expenditures and, particularly, 

whether the government is hiring the best-qualified people to 

this job or jobs provided. And a particular case that is known 

already, and that’s the case of Mr. Dutchak who was hired to 

head up the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, he was also 

minister in charge of that. I’m not certain whether there may be 

other corporations that he was hired to. We feel that it’s 

important that the public of Saskatchewan, through their elected 

representatives, have the opportunity to get this information and 

of course, Mr. Speaker, we know that it’s the role of the 

government to provide this information. Therefore I move, 

seconded by my colleague from Regina North West, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 2 showing: 

 

Regarding one S.P. (Sidney) Dutchak: (1) whether he is 

employed by the Government of Saskatchewan or any of 

its boards, Crown corporations, commissions or agencies; 

(2) if so, his exact duties and responsibilities; (3) his total 

remuneration; (4) the procedure used to employ him; (5) 

the date his employment took effect. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: Mr. Speaker, the short answer to this 

question is: that there would be no return the way that it is 

worded except to say that no, Mr. Sidney Dutchak is not 

employed by any Crown agency or government department. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, it has long been the practice of 

this legislature to make the disclosures of CEO’s and senior 

management of Crown corporations in the Crown Corporations 

Committee. And that’s been the long standing practice of this 

House, and so I think that it’s not improper for that practice to 

continue. 

 

And I would therefore invite the member to, while he’s in 

Crown Corporations Committee, to raise this very question and 

I’m sure that that committee will see fit to deal with it at that 

time, and as has been the long-standing  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2354 

 

practice, Mr. Speaker, as has been the long-standing practice of 

providing the information of the management group as an 

aggregate sum. And I, therefore, Mr. Speaker, urge all members 

to vote against this particular order. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I just want to speak briefly on it, and I don’t 

want to get into a long debate, Mr. Speaker. The facts do not 

really bear out what the Deputy Premier, the House Leader, has 

said because when we get into Crown Corporations, the practice 

has been that they’ll give us sort of the global figure . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right, and what we’re asking 

here is for a very specific pay-out to a patronage position. 

 

And I think it’s incumbent upon us on this side to get that 

specific type of information. We have filed this here in 

December, is my recollections, and had expected that the 

government, with something so straightforward as this, would 

immediately give us a reply to it. Time has elapsed 

considerably, and as the House Leader indicates, there would be 

no return for it because they are saying as of the date of the 

return is passed, that the member, the individual in question, is 

no longer in the employ. 

 

What I would like to do, Mr. Speaker – in view of the fact that 

the government were so derelict in bringing in the response to a 

question which was on the books for months ago, in December 

– is to amend the particular motion: Regarding one S.P. 

(Sidney) Dutchak: (1) whether he is “or has been” employed by 

the Government of Saskatchewan, and correspondingly asking 

for that particular information. 

 

But I just want to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, we will not get the 

specifics from Crown corporations because . . . for a couple 

reasons: that if he was not employed during the year under 

review, then they will only answer questions under the year; 

and secondly, they will only give global figures and they won’t 

go into the specific pay-outs and details of individuals on their 

executive branch. 

 

And so I would move that amendment, Mr. Speaker, in order to 

bring it up to date because of the dereliction of providing us an 

answer by the . . . 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The question before the Assembly then is an 

amendment to the main motion, moved by the member for Quill 

Lakes, and seconded by the member for Moose Jaw North, 

which reads as follows: 

 

Adding after the word “is”, “or has been” in the first line. 

 

(1618) 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 18 

 

Blakeney 

Prebble 

Koskie 

Kowalsky 

Atkinson 

Hagel 

 

Tchorzewski 

Thompson 

Rolfes 

Upshall 

Simard 

Solomon 

Calvert 

Lautermilch 

Trew 

Smart 

Van Mulligen 

Koenker 

 

 

Nays — 27 

 

Devine 

Muller 

Duncan 

Andrew 

Berntson 

Lane 

Taylor 

Smith 

Swan 

Schmidt 

Hodgins 

Gerich 

Hardy 

Klein 

Meiklejohn 

Martin 

Toth 

Sauder 

Johnson 

McLaren 

Swenson 

Baker 

Gleim 

Neudorf 

Kopelchuk 

Saxinger 

Britton 

 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to just add a few 

comments. I think everyone would agree that the House and the 

public are entitled to know whether Mr. Dutchak was employed 

and at what work and at what pay. 

 

The member for Souris-Cannington assures us that something 

will be provided in Crown corporations. He would be the first 

to admit that if Mr. Dutchak worked for the Department of 

Justice, we wouldn’t get it in Crown corporations. If he worked 

for any number of other agencies, we wouldn’t get it there. And 

he is asking us to rely upon the frail memory of the member for 

Souris-Cannington as to which agencies of the government Mr. 

Dutchak may have worked for. 

 

I frankly don’t believe that the member for Souris-Cannington 

is fully aware of who works where, and I’m not at all convinced 

that he should ask us to rely upon the frailties of his memory. 

There could be no possible objection to giving this information 

– none whatever – unless there’s something to hide. No one can 

think of any justifiable reason for not indicating where Mr. 

Dutchak was employed and at what level of remuneration – 

none whatever. And if you vote against it, it means only one 

thing – that you want to hide, you want to hide what you are 

paying Mr. Dutchak and where you are employing him. There 

is no other rational reason. 

 

There have been many instances of this sort of thing in the past. 

If members want us to dig them out, we can. But the member 

for Souris-Cannington will know that. He will know that there 

have been many similar motions passed in past legislatures. The 

only reason why he would ask anyone to vote against it is that 

he wants to hide the information. 

 

And quite frankly, I’m not surprised that they want to hide the 

information about Sid Dutchak. I’m not surprised. But I am 

disappointed that they would withhold that  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2355 

 

information from the public, because the public is entitled to 

know, and everybody over there knows the public is entitled to 

know. And if they know that, they should vote for the motion 

and not against it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 3 

 

Ms. Simard moved, seconded by Mr. Tchorzewski, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 3 showing: 

 

Regarding the appointment of George D. Hill as president 

and chief executive officer of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation: (1) the date his appointment took effect; (2) 

the terms and conditions of his employment, including 

salary, fringe benefits and perquisites; (3) the name of the 

executive placement firm which reviewed applications for 

this position, and the amount their services cost the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation; (4) the names and 

qualifications of the other applicants for this position. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to move that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 3 showing . . . and I won’t 

read the motion at this time, Mr. Speaker, but in summary it’s 

regarding the appointment of George Hill, the salary and 

benefits that Mr. Hill is receiving from the government, and the 

name of the executive placement firm which reviewed the 

applications for the job, and the names and qualifications of the 

other applications . . . the other applicants, rather. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a time of restraint, when the government has 

fired some 411 dental workers, when there’s been some 3,000 

civil servants who have been retired or fired or laid off by this 

government in the last few months, it is only reasonable that the 

public have information as to how much this government is 

paying the past president of the PC Party to be president of 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. It’s only reasonable. The 

public’s entitled to the information, and it would only be just 

for the government to come forward with this information. 

 

I know that the member from Souris-Cannington may say that 

this information can be acquired through the Crown 

Corporations Committee. But I’m also very sure that when we 

get to the Crown Corporations Committee, there’ll be some 

reason, some excuse, why that information can’t be provided. 

You just mark my words, Mr. Speaker. You just wait and see; 

there’ll be some reason why the information respecting Mr. 

Hill’s salaries and benefits will not be forthcoming in Crown 

Corporations Committee. 

 

(1630) 

 

And there’s no good reason – no good reason whatsoever – why 

the public should not have this information when they’re being 

asked to pay higher taxes, unprecedented rates of taxes in this 

province; when they’re being asked to tighten their belts and  

engage in the government’s restraint to pay the government’s 

$3.4 billion deficit; when they’re being asked to pay this 

government’s deficit, Mr. Speaker, they are entitled to know 

how much George Hill, the patronage president of SPC 

(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) is earning for that particular 

job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — We just saw a situation, Mr. Speaker, where 

small business and drug stores in this province are losing 

business, losing business because of a policy implemented by 

this government – by the PC government. And I am advised by 

the PC government they plan to save some $200,000. As a 

result of this policy of removing small businesses and drug 

stores as collection agents for SPC bills, they plan to save some 

$200,000, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they say. We don’t even 

know if that’s sure. That could be an exaggerated amount. 

 

They’re going to cost small business in this province hundreds 

of thousands of dollars to save 2,000, and yet our information, 

what we have been advised, is that Mr. Hill, when you look at 

his salary and benefits, is probably earning about $200,000 a 

year. 

 

The public is entitled to this information, Mr. Speaker, and I 

hope that the government will be forthcoming and vote in 

favour of the motion, because if they don’t, Mr. Speaker, if they 

don’t, it’s only because they’re ashamed of what Mr. Hill’s 

being paid. They know he’s a political appointment, and they 

don’t want to have the information out in public. If they vote 

against it, it’s only for that reason, because they want to hide his 

salary and benefits, Mr. Speaker. That could be the only reason 

for voting against it. 

 

And on that, I want to move then that an order of the Assembly 

do issue for a return showing: 

 

Regarding the appointment of George D. Hill as president 

and chief executive officer of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation: (1) the date his appointment took effect; (2) 

the terms and conditions of his employment, including 

salary, fringe benefits and perquisites; (3) the name of the 

executive placement firm which reviewed applications for 

this position, and the amount their services cost the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation; (4) the names and 

qualifications of the other applicants for this position. 

 

And this is seconded, Mr. Speaker, by the member from Regina 

North East. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the arguments advanced 

by the member are not new to this legislature. I advanced the 

very same arguments when I was on that side of the House. And 

without going into a great deal of detail as to the arguments that 

I heard back when I was sitting on that side of the House, I will 

simply say the long-standing practice, Mr. Speaker, as it relates 

to CEO (Chief Executive Officer) salaries at Crown 

corporations  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2356 

 

has been that that information is sought at the Crown 

Corporations Committees. And I would therefore, Mr. Speaker, 

in keeping with that long-standing practice, urge all members of 

the House to vote no to this order. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — This is the erroneous proposition that the 

member put forward on the previous motion. And I want to say, 

Mr. Speaker, and to the people of Saskatchewan, that as sure as 

I’m standing here today debating . . . requesting this 

information, that when we go into Crown corporations and ask 

for these details in respect to the Chief Executive Officer, Mr. 

George Hill, that that information will not be provided to the 

people of this province. 

 

And so I ask, since the member from . . . the Deputy Premier 

has indicated so clearly that it’s available, I’d like to wonder if 

the Deputy Premier would entertain a question and give us his 

assurance that when we go into Crown corporations that the 

question, as laid out here, will indeed be answered, because you 

are in charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

So if you’re saying we can get this information, Mr. Deputy 

Premier, then can you give us the commitment that when we go 

into Crown corporations and SPC comes up for review, that we 

can ask this specific question in this form, and that we’ll get the 

specific answer. Is that what you’re saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I would be happy, Mr. Speaker, if 

leave of the Chamber is granted, to answer the question, as I 

have in question period on several occasions to the hon. 

member from Lakeview. The question can be asked in Crown 

corporations in this way, or any other way, or seven ways from 

sundown; as it relates, Mr. Speaker, to CEO salaries, the 

long-standing practice has been to give the aggregate sum of the 

management team. That’s been a long-standing practice. It was 

the practice when they were sitting over here. I expect it was 

prior to that, and it continues today, Mr. Speaker, and we would 

not want to breach that long-standing practice. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, all that the members on the 

opposition have said has not proven to be true by the member to 

whom we have just given leave, the minister in charge of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation, that the only purpose and 

intention of the government in voting against this motion and 

the one prior to it involving Mr. Sidney Dutchak, former 

member of that cabinet, is because they are determined to bring 

about a cover-up on their patronage appointments and the kind 

of atrocious salary and perks and benefits that they pay them at 

the expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, there can be no other 

conceivable reason why the government would defeat these two 

motions and others similar to them that may come up on this 

day. There clearly is something, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government is hiding. There clearly is something that the 

government is hiding. 

 

I refer back to the motion we dealt with prior to this one  

involving Mr. Dutchak. The argument that the minister made, 

even his argument about “this has to be asked in the Crown 

Corporations Committee” was wrong, because the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation shows up in this Assembly 

in the form of estimates, and so there can be no other reason for 

what the member opposite has directed his caucus to do except 

to cover up this information because there is something wrong 

with the appointment and the payment to one Mr. Dutchak, as 

there is with one Mr. Hill, the president of the power 

corporation, which the government is trying to hide. 

 

I think that this is a dark day in this Assembly and for the 

people of Saskatchewan who are not able to get an honest 

answer from this government about how it spends tax dollars on 

salaries of $200,000 on more on former presidents of the 

Conservative Party who are in positions for which they are not 

qualified for, but are there only because it’s some way for the 

Premier to pay his friends at taxpayers’ expense. 

 

I know that the House Leader, the member from 

Souris-Cannington, will probably lead the back-benchers to 

support the government in opposition to this motion. Well so be 

it. I just want those back-benchers to know, who are yet maybe 

somewhat inexperienced, that your constituents will know how 

you voted on this, and they will judge you accordingly when the 

time comes in the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1639) 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 17 

 

Blakeney 

Prebble 

Koskie 

Tchorzewski 

Thompson 

Rolfes 

Upshall 

Simard 

Solomon 

Atkinson 

Hagel 

Calvert 

Lautermilch 

Trew 

Smart 

Van Mulligen 

Koenker 

 

 

Nays — 27 

 

Devine 

Muller 

Duncan 

Andrew 

Berntson 

Lane 

Taylor 

Smith 

Swan 

Schmidt 

Hodgins 

Gerich 

Hardy 

Klein 

Meiklejohn 

Martin 

Toth 

Sauder 

Johnson 

 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Would hon. 

members please refrain from speaking as the vote is taking 

place. 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2357 

 

McLaren 

Swenson 

Baker 

Gleim 

Neudorf 

Kopelchuk 

Saxinger 

Britton 

 

Return No. 4 

 

Mr. Calvert moved, seconded by Mr. Lautermilch, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 4 showing: 

 

Regarding the $4 million drug and alcohol abuse program 

announced by the Premier on September 3, 1986: (1) the 

amount of the $4 million approved for the program in 

fiscal year 1986-87 that has been spent; (2) the members 

of the cabinet committee responsible for implementing the 

program; (3) the date the Youth Drug Treatment Centre at 

former CFB Whitespruce opened, and the number of 

people it has served; (4) the date the toll-free information 

and advice line for young people and parents opened and 

the number of people it has served; (5) the new resource 

materials for schools that have been developed and the 

number of schools that they have been distributed to; (6) 

the number of new grants that have been approved for 

alcohol and drug counselling and treatment groups under 

the special program. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, after a few remarks, I will move 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return No. 4. I’ll 

read the motion at the conclusion of my few remarks and I 

sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that the government opposite will 

not defeat the request for the information contained in this 

motion as it just has with others. 

 

The motion that I bring has to do with information regarding the 

drug and alcohol program that was announced by the Premier 

on September 3, 1986. That’s one year and five days ago on this 

very day – one year ago and five days the Premier announced 

this program, and in essence what this motion does is to ask for 

information regarding the status of that program. Just where are 

we in that program? 

 

And I might say, Mr. Speaker, that this is one of the few 

announcements made by this government since it took office in 

1982, one of the few announcements that I and others in 

Saskatchewan welcome. We indeed welcomed the $4 million 

the government announced for drug and alcohol abuse. We 

welcomed the inclusion of youth counsellors in education. We 

particularly welcomed the announcement of a youth treatment 

centre here in the province. 

 

(1645) 

 

We on this side of the House, and many in Saskatchewan, 

would have wished for more to be included in this program, 

particularly more to deal with the causes of alcohol and drug 

abuse among young people. Many of us would have liked to 

have seen this government address the matter of the 

advertisement of alcohol on television and radio. But essentially 

it’s a program that many of us  

welcome. 

 

What my questions hope to do, and they’ve been on this order 

paper since December, is to see where we are in terms of this 

program. In the Speech from the Throne, the Premier described 

the problem as a rising tide in our province, and indeed there 

are statistics that’ll bear that out. 

 

In a recent survey conducted by SADAC (Saskatchewan 

Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission) in the year 1986, we 

see, indeed, that the statistics bear it out. We see from this 

survey that teenagers 12 to 18 years of age: 66 per cent of them 

now use alcohol, 25 per cent of teens now drink at least weekly, 

and by the time you get to the age of 18, 60 per cent of 18 year 

olds in Saskatchewan are now drinking at least once weekly. 

 

That survey, conducted by SADAC, indicates that 31 per cent 

of teens are now using tobacco; 12 per cent of 12 year olds are 

now smoking; by the time the kids are 18 the percentage is 

increased to 42 per cent. Fourteen per cent of Saskatchewan 

teenagers have used cannabis. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, clearly we do have a problem, and clearly this 

is an important program, and particularly the youth treatment 

centre at Whitespruce because we know that young people in 

Saskatchewan have had to leave the province. 

 

And so I would hope that the government would give some 

priority in providing the answers for these questions because the 

issue is of concern and it is a priority for Saskatchewan people, 

and, I would hope, for all members of this House. 

 

And so I will move, seconded by the member from P.A.-Duck 

Lake, that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 4 

showing: 

 

Regarding the $4 million drug and alcohol abuse program 

announced by the Premier on September 3, 1986: (1) the 

amount of the $4 million approved for the program in 

fiscal year 1986-87 that has been spent; (2) the members 

of the cabinet committee responsible for implementing the 

program; (3) the date the Youth Drug Treatment Centre at 

former CFB Whitespruce opened, and the number of 

people it has served; (4) the date the toll-free information 

and advice line for young people and parents opened, and 

the number of people it has served; (5) the new resource 

materials for schools that have been developed and the 

number of schools that they have been distributed to; (6) 

the number of new grants that have been approved for 

alcohol and drug counselling and treatment groups under 

the special program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1649) 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 41 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2358 

 

Muller 

Duncan 

Andrew 

Berntson 

Lane 

Taylor 

Smith 

Swan 

Schmidt 

Hodgins 

Gerich 

Hardy 

Klein 

Meiklejohn 

Martin 

Toth 

Sauder 

Johnson 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’d like to once 

more ask the co-operation of the members in not speaking, 

either when they’re sitting or standing as the vote is being 

taken. 

 

McLaren 

Petersen 

Swenson 

Baker 

Gleim 

Neudorf 

Kopelchuk 

Saxinger 

Britton 

Blakeney 

Koskie 

Rolfes 

Upshall 

Solomon 

Kowalsky 

Atkinson 

Hagel 

Calvert 

Lautermilch 

Trew 

Smart 

Van Mulligen 

Koenker 

 

 

Nays 

 — 0 

 

Return No. 5 

 

Mr. Hagel moved, seconded by Mr. Calvert, that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 5 showing: 

 

Regarding the announcement in the March 26, 1986, 

budget address that 540 additional senior citizens’ housing 

units would be built in 1986: (1) the number of these 540 

units that have actually been constructed; (2) the location 

where they were built; (3) the amount that has been spent 

by the Government of Saskatchewan on the construction 

of these 540 additional units. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

intent to move an order of the Assembly to issue for a return 

showing some information regarding a government 

announcement in the March, 1986 budget address having to do 

with 540 additional senior citizens’ housing unites to be built in 

1986. 

 

Before moving that motion for return, Mr. Speaker, there are a 

few comments I’d like to make. I’d like to comment on the 

interesting phenomenon that we’ve seen going on in this 

Assembly this afternoon in dealing with what I would have 

assumed were fairly straightforward questions and requests for 

information by members on this side of the House. So far we’ve 

dealt with four motions, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve had standing 

votes on three of them. 

 

I find it kind of interesting – the members opposite laugh – and 

I find it kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker, that 27  

members on that side of the House, including the Premier and 

the Deputy Premier, stood to deny the providing of information 

regarding the employment of Mr. Dutchak, a former PC cabinet 

minister. I find it, Mr. Speaker, very interesting, as we deal with 

the seriousness of these motions coming before us this 

afternoon, that that same phenomenon occurred when 

requesting information for the employment of the former PC 

party president, George Hill. 

 

And now just a moment ago, when my colleague from Moose 

Jaw South moved a motion requesting information regarding 

the alcohol and drug abuse program announced by that 

government, there were enough members opposite who said no 

to providing that information that you, Mr. Speaker, ruled that 

the “no’s” had it. And yet when it came to standing in this 

House, they didn’t have the nerve to stand and be counted . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would like to ask the 

hon. member to confine his remarks to motions for return no. 5 

and not to go back and deal with motions we’ve already passed 

and dealt with. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the point I make is that I hope as 

we deal with this motion no. 5, we do not find this same trend 

repeated again. I would hope that somewhere along the line the 

members of the government will see fit to provide the public 

with information that they have a right to hear. 

 

So I look, Mr. Speaker, I look here, and I will be moving a 

motion that the members have before them, requesting some 

information having to do with a budget commitment made in 

1986, a straightforward question again asking for information. I 

would hope that it will be dealt with sincerely and that that 

information be made available to the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has to do with a 1986 budget commitment to 

build 540 senior citizen housing units, and that was at a time, 

Mr. Speaker, that many would refer to as the pre-election 

budget of the PC government. And we’ll all remember those 

days, Mr. Speaker. Those were the days before we had that 

unmanageable deficit. Those were the days when the Premier 

trotted around the province and said we just have a little deficit; 

it’s really not out of hand. That was before the Minister of 

Finance stepped into this Assembly and said, whoops, we 

missed it by 700 million; we’re in dire straits folks, and we’re 

going to have to tighten our belts. 

 

And I remind Mr. Speaker that this was a commitment made to 

seniors in Saskatchewan at a time before this government 

became infamous for its unkept promises and its misleading 

statements. Seniors, Mr. Speaker, have been hit particularly 

hard by the cuts and the announcements of the government the 

last several months; it is a group of society that has been hit 

harder than most. And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that as we ask for 

this information about senior citizen housing units, that there is 

a relationship in Saskatchewan between the access to hospital 

beds and nursing home beds; there’s a relationship between the 

access to nursing home beds and the access to home care; and 

there is a relationship between the access to home care for 

seniors and the  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

2359 

 

access to senior citizen housing units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government which has become 

characterized by short-sightedness. And I believe that seniors 

have a right to expect security from their provincial 

government; they have a right to expect that commitments made 

in a 1986 budget address will be kept, and will be kept in 1986. 

 

And I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member 

for Moose Jaw South, an order of the Assembly do issue for a 

return no. 5 showing: 

 

Regarding the announcement in the March 26, 1986, 

budget address that 540 additional senior citizens’ housing 

units would be built in 1986: (1) the number of these 540 

units that have actually been constructed; (2) the location 

where they were built; (3) the amount that has been spent 

by the Government of Saskatchewan on the construction 

of these 540 additional units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, and many seniors, as well as responsible 

citizens of Saskatchewan, would welcome that information to 

be forthcoming, and I would hope that the government 

members would pay tribute to the reasonableness of 

Saskatchewan people and allow this information to be presented 

readily. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, just a couple of brief 

comments, and far be it for me to say anything about a motion 

that we’ve already dealt with like item no. 4 that deals with the 

Whitespruce and the drug and alcohol abuse initiatives that 

have been taken by this government. I would just say that we 

invite comparison. 

 

The initiatives taken by this government, as opposed to the 

previous administration, and likewise, Mr. Speaker, we invite 

comparison here in the 540 additional senior citizens’ housing 

units that we built in 1986. We invite comparison. We would 

invite all people, when this return is filed, Mr. Speaker, to 

compare the kinds of things that we’ve been doing in the area, 

in the area of senior citizens’ housing, to the moratorium that 

that administration had . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker. And so 

I will urge, Mr. Speaker, I’ll urge all members to vote in favour 

of this resolution. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


