


















































July 8, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 7, 1987 
 

995 
 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Atkinson:— Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Nutana. I rise pursuant 
to rule 11, to present a petition to the Assembly from several 
thousand residents of Saskatchewan. These petitions are urging 
that the provincial governments not impose an arbitrary limit on 
the number of visits to chiropractors that will be covered by 
medicine. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I rise under rule 11 to present a 
petition signed by well over 200 people, mostly from the Willow 
Bunch, Carlyle, Assiniboia, Estevan, Gravelbourg, Coronach, and 
Scout Lake, whereby these petitioners indicate their strong 
opposition in the changes made in the Saskatchewan drug plan 
and the Saskatchewan dental plan. These petitioners seek the re-
implementation of both of these plans as they existed prior to the 
government’s decision to diminish them. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to the Assembly, His Excellency Mahmoud Kassem, 
the Egyptian Ambassador to Canada. He is sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery in the front row. He has been visiting our 
province for the last couple of days and has discussed various 
subjects, including how we might better co-operate in the field of 
agriculture and in the field of trade. I think it’s important to note 
that Egyptians, and that country has been a moderate force in the 
Middle East and a stabilizing force in the Middle East as a 
country, and has had good relations with our country. 
 
I would like to welcome His Excellency to our Assembly. 
Perhaps he could stand, and I trust that your stay will be very 
good. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my 
colleague, the member from Regina Center, I would like to 
introduce 25 Regina Plains Community College, English as a 
second language students who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Jim Rader and Elsa 
Turek. 
 
I would like to ask members to join me in welcoming them and 
extending them our best wishes for a good and informative visit 
here this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
the Assembly, two visitors from Scotland who are seated in your 
gallery, sir. They are my brother,  

Sean, and his wife, Margaret, who haven’t been in the province 
since 1980. 
 
Given that we don’t see each other very often, I would hope that 
our hard-nosed disciplinarian whip is going to demonstrate some 
degree of flexibility in the next couple of weeks. And I know that 
all members will welcome you here and wish you an enjoyable 
stay for the next three weeks. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SGI Employee Wage Freeze 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
minister responsible for Saskatchewan Government Insurance, 
and it has to do with the salary increase given to the out-of-scope 
management people three weeks after the March 5 decision by 
your government and pronouncement by your government that 
there would be a two-year freeze on all public sector employees. 
 
The minister has failed to answer a number of important 
questions about this decision last week in the House, so I ask 
again: when was this management salary increase approved, and 
can you provide this House and the public with written proof that 
the decision was formally made prior to March 5? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the hon. 
member that the increase was approved by the board at a prior 
meeting to March 5; it was in January. The anticipated raise was 
budgeted for in our 1987 budget. 
 
 As I said to the member last week on a number of accessions, 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance will participate in the two-
year wage freeze. The in-scope employees will commence their 
two-year wage freeze. The in-scope employees will commence 
their two-year wage freeze September 30, 1987, and the 
management will commence thereafter . . . 
 
Mr. Trew: — Madam Minister . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is that a supplementary? Order. Order. Is that a 
supplementary? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Madam Minister, do you not understand that your 
credibility and indeed your government’s is what is at stake here. 
You give us these grand statements that it was approved prior, but 
with a great deal of reluctance, I might add; you have not come 
clean with this House yet, and the press and the public are not 
going to let you hide the truth. You’ve made the claim that this 
salary increase for SGI’s management staff was approved prior to 
the March 5 announcement of the two-year freeze, and if you 
want that claim to be believed by us and by the general public, 
who frankly do not believe that, if you want that claim to be 
believed, show this House: when was this salary increase for SGI 
management approved, and by whom, and table the documents 
here. 
  



 
July 7, 1987 

996 
 

Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member 
from Regina Rosemont, or whatever, North, I guess it is, the 
wage increase was approved by the board of directors of 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance in January. The 
performance evaluation on the senior employees, the 
management level, was completed, and the increase was kicked 
in, in April. 
 
I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that it is proper to table board meeting 
documents, no different than it would be improper to table 
cabinet documents. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Supplementary. Madam Minister, what have you 
to hide? If it was indeed approved at the January 29 board 
meeting for Saskatchewan Government Insurance, show us the 
minutes. That’s all we ask. Show the people of Saskatchewan and 
show us when it was approved. And I don’t think you can, but do 
it. You broke your own two-year wage freeze just three weeks 
after the thing was announced. Now come clean; give us the 
proof. You and your government are the ones that are being 
questioned here. It’s your reputation, everything to do with what 
the government says. Come clean and table the document here. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I will not table a board 
meeting document, but I can assure the member that the merit 
increase based on performance was approved at the January 
board meeting of Saskatchewan Government Insurance. The 
performance evaluation was done on the management series, and 
merit increases were paid accordingly. 
 
I will not table, Mr. Speaker, a board document. I can tell the 
member -- I will reiterate what I said Thursday, what I said 
Friday, that SGI will be participating fully in the two-year wage 
freeze as announced by the Minister of Finance on March 5. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary to the minister, Mr. Speaker. I 
have difficulty with her last answer. Because if these salary 
increases were approved at a board meeting in January, how is it 
that they were not implemented until April? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, none of the 
members opposite listen when they ask questions. I indicated to 
the member from Regina North that the performance evaluation 
was done after the end of the fiscal year, which is December 31, 
and then pay was paid accordingly. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now I’m really confused. I’ve listened as 
carefully as I can to the minister, and I’d like her to elaborate 
upon the procedure by which these increases are implemented. I 
understand that there is an end to the fiscal year, which I assume 
from her answer is at the end of December. Then there’s a 
management appraisal. Then there’s some kind of formulation of 
management recommendations. Then there is board approval, 
which she’s indicated occurred in January, and then is there any 
other approval after that? And how is it, in the context of  

all that, that there was no increase actually paid until April, as my 
colleague says, some three weeks after the wage freeze had been 
imposed? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the board of directors 
approved a wage pool. The senior management of SGI, including 
the president, does the evaluation performance of individual 
employees at the management level, and they disperse that pool 
of money. The board of directors doesn’t do it ourselves. We rely 
on the good judgment of the senior managers and the president, 
who work with these people on a daily basis. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, now I think we’re getting 
somewhere, minister. Can I ask you when that pool that you’ve 
described as having been approved in January was actually 
apportioned by senior management? When was a decision made 
by SGI to actually go ahead and pay these wage increases? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the decision to 
reward the good performance of the management level was made 
in January, and the funds were dispersed thereafter. The decision 
was made in January, based on the performance of the 
corporation in the prior year 
 
And I might add that the member who is questioning me now was 
quoted in the Star-Phoenix as saying he thought that SGI was 
doing a great job, and this is our way of rewarding some very 
diligent work that has been done over the past five years to bring 
SGI into a profitable fiscal situation. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to see 
that the minister is reading my press releases, or my quotes. 
 
I would like, though, for her to answer my question. My question 
was: given that the board of directors had approved a pool of 
money for senior management in January, when was the decision 
announced as to how that pool would be apportioned among the 
management people at SGI? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, that after the 
January board meeting the senior people knew that performance 
pay would be coming at some point in time. I don’t know as to the 
date that the senior manager would have informed his own branch. 
I could find out if you wish. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Indeed I do so wish, and will the minister also 
table the documents by which the senior managers, or the 
president of SGI, announced this increase to the out-of-scope 
personnel. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ll get the 
information that the member requests. But as far as tabling internal 
documents of a corporation, no, I won’t do that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I have a question for the minister in  
  



 
July 7, 1987 

997 
 

charge of SGI. Can the minister confirm that the cabinet, your 
cabinet, has been asked as of the last two weeks or so to consider 
carefully this question of the large increases of the out-of-scope 
workers at SGI with a view to effecting a rollback. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I won’t confirm or deny what is discussed 
in cabinet, Mr. Speaker, nor should I. And I think the member 
knows full well that’s highly irregular. 
 

Battleford Provincial Park Golf Cart Rentals 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Parks, Recreation and Culture, and it concerns The Battlefords 
Provincial Park golf course. Earlier this year there were tenders 
released to supply rental golf carts for The Battlefords Provincial 
Park as well as, I understand, some other golf courses throughout 
the province that come under your department. I understand that 
the contract for the rental carts is now being awarded, and I’d 
appreciate if the minister could tell us who the contract is being 
awarded to and if it’s in the name of a company or corporation. If, 
in fact, you could tell us who principals are of that company or 
corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
member for Battlefords who would do me the honor of asking me 
a question. I sat here all fall and got none, and sat here three weeks 
and got none. And final . . . I was beginning to think these guys 
didn’t like me any more, Mr. Speaker . . .(inaudible interjections) 
. . .Mr. Speaker, some things never change, the member for Quill 
Lakes is still the village idiot. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: —-Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A contract was 
awarded after being duly and properly tendered for the operation 
of golf carts in The Battlefords Provincial Park. I believe the name 
of the company that won the contract was Upshot, or something of 
that name, and yes, I can certainly provide the details, and I would 
also be happy to provide the documents for your perusal. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Supplementary. I would guess that the minister 
is telling me he doesn’t know who the principals are of Upshot 
Industries, which is a company registered with the corporations 
branch of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. I would inform the 
minister that at least one of the principals is a former member of 
this legislature in the name of Myles Morin. And I understand that 
the minister is saying that he couldn’t hear because of some of the 
noise n the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to reinforce that at least one of the principals of Upshot is 
one Myles Morin, who is formerly a member of this legislature, 
and he has a partnership on the golf carts, as I understand it, with 
one Regan Hamilton, also a prominent business ma in the city of 
North Battleford. 
 
And what I’m asking the minister in the supplementary, Mr. 
Speaker, is whether or not you can assure us that the contract was 
the lowest bid put in for awarding rental carts to The Battlefords 
Provincial Park golf course? 

Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure all members of 
the Legislative Assembly the tendering was done absolutely fairly 
and above-board and the final award of the tender was to by far 
the best bid. And yes, one f the principals -- I don’t know all of 
their names, but I certainly remember one name -- was a Myles 
Morin, a former member of the Legislative Assembly. His bid was 
easily the best bid, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Is the member over there in the opposition saying to me that, 
because he had at one time served in this Assembly, he has no 
right to bid on any type of government tender at all. I hardly think 
that was the intent of the question, but I will be more than pleased 
to table the document after question period for your perusal. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I do 
appreciate that you will give me the document. In that document I 
would hope that you would list who the other bidders were on the 
tender, and what the price of their bids were. The thing that I find 
a little amazing, Mr. Minister, is the whole question of fairness. 
The only fairness in the province of Saskatchewan for any 
tendering processes that we’ve seen on this side of the House are 
friends of the Conservative government in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
Order. I would ask the member to please get to his question 
please. This is a supplementary, and you know as well as all 
members know that long preambles are not permitted. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — My supplementary, Mr. Speaker, deals still with 
the provincial park golf course. I not only understand that Mr. 
Hamilton is one of the people that have bid with Mr. Morin; also, 
Mrs. Hamilton is working in the pro shop, a job that would 
normally be taken by a summer student to gain some income to go 
back to school in the fall. But is it not true that Mrs. Hamilton has 
been placed in there so they can watch very closely the tendering 
process, the operations, so that they can bid on the development 
proposed and be successful to take over the entire development 
operation of The Battlefords park provincial golf course? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I have no knowledge 
of the employment pattern of any Mrs. Hamilton. I wasn’t aware 
she’s in the pro shop. I’ll certainly look into it. I can tell you with 
absolute certainty that the innuendo which you just cast out here 
and the aspersions you’ve cast are totally false and without 
foundation. 
 
Let me get back to the first part of your question. The tenders that 
came in: Upshot Enterprises Ltd. Offered 27.5 per cent of total 
gross revenue to be remitted to the department, plus a guaranteed 
minimum payment of $10,000; Valley West Sales Ltd. Offered 25 
per cent of total gross revenue with n guaranteed minimum 
payment. Upshot Enterprises Ltd., Myles Morin, Regan Hamilton, 
best bid, awarded the tender. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
  



 
July 7, 1987 

998 
 

Mr. Anguish: — My question to you, Mr. Minister, is whether or 
not these principals had prior knowledge in the tendering process 
and whether or not . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please! 
Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — My question is whether or not Upshot had prior 
knowledge of other tenders that came in, other bids that came in 
on the tender, after there was already bids involved in the process. 
That’s my question Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, Upshot -- I’ve no prior 
knowledge; we had no inside track; we had no assistance. The bids 
came in, as I understand, at the same time, were opened at the 
same time. It was a superior bid. It’s obviously a better bid. It’s the 
one that was awarded. 
 
Once again, should we look at the name and say, this is a former 
member of the Assembly, therefore he is disqualified from bidding 
on anything to do with government? I hardly think so, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Variable Grain Rate Benefits 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to direct a 
question, in the absence of the Premier, to the Acting Minister of 
Agriculture. And, Mr. Minister, you will realize that when CN 
applied to the Canadian Transport Commission for a right to 
introduce variable rates, it offered $1.50 a ton to discount to the 
grain companies, as a discount. 
 
However, it has been reported, Mr. Acting Minister, that Cargill 
grain company is not prepared to pass on, in the event that variable 
rates are in fact introduced, they are not prepared to pass it along 
to the hard-pressed farmers, but rather Cargill has announced that, 
out of that $1.50, Cargill will keep $1.25, and are prepared to pass 
on 25 cents to the farmers. 
 
What I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, is this: are you aware of this 
fact? And I ask you, what are you prepared to do in order to see 
that any variable rate benefits be entirely passed on to the farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of the 
details relative to Cargill. I will take notice of that. But it seems to 
me that . . . Quite frankly, I have a fair amount of faith in the 
judgment of the farmers out there, and if what you say is true, the 
. . . It seems to me that what the . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask the minister: has the government 
. . .He took a notice of the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, order. Order, order. 
Would the member just put supplement. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I ask the minister -- and I know that you don’t 
have many facts at the tip of your fingers, because that’s why 
you’re no longer the minister of Agriculture-- but I’ll ask you, Mr. 
Acting Minister, has the government  

joined the New Democratic Party caucus? Has it joined with the 
wheat pool? Has it joined with other organizations in order to seek 
an appeal of the Canadian transport decision? Have you, in fact, 
joined with these organizations? And if not, I’m asking you here: 
what effort are you prepared to do to seek the Mulroney 
government, the cabinet of Brian Mulroney, to reverse, in fact, the 
CTC (Canadian Transport Commission) decision to introduce 
variable rates? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, one sentence answer on 
this. Our government was represented and made our position clear 
at the variable rate hearings, and the only question the farmers of 
Saskatchewan are asking is, where was the NDP party at those 
hearings? They did not make a presentation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well first of all, your facts are inaccurate. KA 
presentation was made by the caucus of the New Democratic 
Party. 
 
But I want a further supplement, Mr. Minister, do you recall in ‘82 
your election slogan? “Keep the Crow, let Blakeney go.” Do you 
recall that? Well I want to say, Mr. Minister, or Acting Minister, 
the Crow has gone; the variable rates are about to be introduced. 
 
And since you betrayed the farmers in the past, I ask you: are you 
standing here ready here ready to betray the farmers again, or will 
you, In fact, stand up, seek a repeal of the decision of the CTC to 
introduce variable rates? Or at the very least, at least see that any 
benefit as a result of the variable rates will be passed on directly to 
the hard-pressed farmers of western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the farmers of 
Saskatchewan and western Canada are smart enough to make 
those judgments if they are of the view that one company isn’t 
being as fair as the other. Certainly I believe they will make those 
judgments. 
 
As relates to the issue — the Crow, The Transportation Act, all 
those things, Mr. Speaker — we can sit here and continue to 
debate past history, if you like, or we can continue to march 
forward and deal with the things that the farmers of Saskatchewan 
view as important -- not that that one is not, Mr. Speaker. But 
there is some history we cannot rewrite there. 
 
It seems to me that the important issues facing Saskatchewan 
farmers today are things like the Reagan statement yesterday, and 
all what it embodies in terms of the global trade wars, the subsidy 
wars, the protectionists, the bizarre global, international, 
agricultural policies that are hurting our farmers, Mr. Speaker, 
much more than whether Cargill is going to pass on $1.50 or 25 
cents a ton to Saskatchewan farmers. These global aberrations, 
Mr. Speaker, have driven the price down to, not 25 cents a ton, not 
$1.50 a ton, but, Mr. Speaker, down to $2 a bushel. And our 
farmers cannot survive in that kind of environment. I applaud the 
initiatives of our Premier in raising this nationally, and now 
internationally, and  
  



 
July 7, 1987 

999 
 

we’re going to see some action on that front. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Final supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Before the 
orders of the day, I’m prepare to table, before the orders of the 
day, the submission from our caucus which the member said 
didn’t exist. I’ll table that before the orders of the day. So that the 
facts are, in fact . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order. Does the member have a 
supplementary? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I would ask you this: would you be 
prepared to table before this legislature today representations that 
you have made to the federal cabinet to reverse the decision of the 
CTC for the implementation of the variable rates? Will you be 
prepared to table the information or anything . . . representation 
that you made to the federal government? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The submissions that we’ve made . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please; order, please. We are having 
some difficulty hearing the answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The submissions we’ve made to 
government agencies, committee hearings, senate standing, 
whomever, are there for the public record, and you can get them 
just as any other citizen in this province or this country in fact can 
get them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our position has always been clear as it relates to the variable rate 
question. We have no trouble, we have no trouble going to bat for 
our farmers and saying we want lower rates, we want reduced 
rates. The only caveat we’ve ever attached to it is we want reduced 
rates at every point, not just at some points. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 

Canada Pension Plan Disability Payments 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Social Services. Mr. Minister, you’ll be aware that under the 
Canada Pension Plan the federal government pays a disability 
pension to nearly 5,000 Saskatchewan residents who have severe, 
long-term disabilities which prevent them from participating in the 
work force. 
 
You’ll also be aware, Mr. Minister, that on January 1 of this year 
the federal government increased these disability pensions by 
$152 per month. However, and I underline this, Mr. Minister, 
anyone who is receiving that Canada Pension Plan disability 
pension and is at the same time among the poorest of our society -- 
is receiving social assistance in the province of Saskatchewan -- 
had that $152 increase deducted dollar for dollar from their social 
assistance checks. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is: can you explain why you decided to 
take this increase from these people -- the poorest of the poor in 
Saskatchewan -- who are receiving  

a Canada Pension Plan disability pension? 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Of course, Mr. Speaker, we would like 
everyone to have a little extra money; however, this is a question 
of fairness. I was recently at a meeting of federal ministers with 
provincial ministers, and all of the provincial governments are 
unanimous that it wouldn’t be fair to the people receiving 
assistance to not have this counted as income. 
 
As you know, our system is based on need. You calculate the total 
need, you calculate the shortfall, and the province, with Canada 
and the CAP (Canadian Assistance Plan), that makes up the 
difference. So it’s a question of fairness as to which income should 
not be considered income with respect to social assistance. As a 
matter of fairness, all of the provinces are following the procedure 
we are following and saying that this is not a special kind of 
income. It is income like other income. 
 
As far as I recall, it is not deducted dollar for dollar, but there is a 
percentage of income that you can earn and this is considered to be 
earned income or outside income. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Before the orders of the day, I would like to table 
before this House a submission to the Canadian Transport 
Commission in the matter of the request for variable rates pursuant 
to section 45(1)(b) of the Western Grain Transportation Act 
proposed by CN rail, Northern Sales, Cargill grain, Pioneer Grain, 
United Grain Growers, Alberta terminals and Stow Seed 
Processors. This was submitted to the . . . .(inaudible) . . . and 
submitted by Mr. Eric Upshall, MLA, agricultural spokesman for 
the New Democratic Party caucus March of 1987. 
 
We are prepared to file our submissions. I challenge the minister 
to file his submissions. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Also, before Orders of the Day, I 
wish to file the Annual Report of the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Library for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1986. 
 
Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
I’m prepared to stand here for a long time if hon. members want to 
keep talking from their seats. They full well know that when the 
Speaker is on his feet, there shouldn’t be this debate back and 
forth. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 6 -- Protection of Saskatchewan Senior 
Citizens through Housing and Heritage Programs 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Progressive Conservative government believes that  
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1000 
 

senior citizens are very important people. We believe that those 
who have spent a life time building a better Saskatchewan deserve 
to live out their retirement years with dignity. 
 
Since 1982, Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative 
government has brought forward innovative programs, not only 
for the senior citizens but indeed for all citizens of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to make a motion today recognizing the 
number of programs this government has implemented for seniors 
and others. In particular, Mr. Speaker, I wish to move the 
following motion: 
 

That this Legislature commend the Government of 
Saskatchewan for providing protection for Saskatchewan’s 
senior citizens through the creation of a home repair program, 
enriched housing projects and the senior citizens’ heritage 
program. 

 
This motion, Mr. Speaker, will be seconded by the member from 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
It is a reality, Mr. Speaker, that . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Solomon: — A point of personal privilege, Mr. Speaker. I 
can’t hear the member at all. I haven’t heard a word he said, and 
I’d like to ask the Speaker if you could ask the member to either 
speak up or for the government members to be quiet so I could 
hear what he has to say -- I’m sure it’s quite important. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The point of privilege has been noted and I 
suppose all members realize what the member’s trying to say, but 
it is not a point of privilege. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Mr. Speaker, the reality of many seniors . . .The 
reality is that many speakers reach their retirement years and find 
they’re on a fixed income. Inflation eats away at that fixed 
income. So it was in the past years very difficult for seniors to 
have repairs made to their homes -- such things as storm windows; 
the house may have needed a new front step; the old doors may 
needed to have been replaced. 
 
The Progressive Conservative government recognized this. The 
Progressive Conservative government had the leadership and 
vision to bring the home improvement program for senior citizens. 
These were needs, Mr. Speaker, that were ignored year after year 
by the members opposite while they were in government. 
 
But as I stated, this government recognized the need for a program 
that provided immediate relief from the shameful neglect shown 
by the previous NDP government. I repeat that -- the shameful 
neglect by the former NDP government. Did you hear that? 
 
Seniors, and indeed all Saskatchewan home-makers, are eligible 
for the $1,500 matching government grant for the Saskatchewan 
home improvement program. Home  

improvements and renovations continue to be affordable to senior 
home-makers — or home owners, pardon me — with the help of 
the Progressive Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I give you clear examples that this program under Progressive 
Conservative government sincerely believes in programs that will 
effectively help seniors. 
 
The motion that I have presented to this House asks the legislature 
to commend the Government of Saskatchewan for protecting 
Saskatchewan senior citizens. 
 
As an individual MLA I cannot think of programs more beneficial 
for seniors than those introduced by the present Progressive 
Conservative government. Saskatchewan has been a leader in 
Canada in programs to help and protect seniors. Mr. Speaker, our 
Progressive Conservative government established a senior citizen 
bureau to ensure that programs are geared to the needs of seniors. 
Those services are now being provided through human resources 
to the same excellent degree as when the bureau was first 
established. 
 
Through Sask Housing this government created the task force on 
senior citizen housing. Another major Progressive Conservative 
government initiative is the senior citizens’ heritage program. It is 
designed to protect seniors by offering a property tax rebate to 
seniors who have earned less than $30,000 per year. The program 
offers $700 for senior couples, $500 for singles, and 200 for each 
senior in public housing. Again, Mr. Speaker, this is an example of 
the government that cares about seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the enriched housing for seniors is a housing form 
that encourages and promotes an independent life-style for our 
senior citizens. For the information of this Assembly I should like 
to point out that rent is only 25 per cent of a senior citizen’s 
income in enriched housing. Separate living quarters are combined 
with common areas. Depending on the housing unit plan, 
volunteer services and programs provide activities for seniors. 
 
Built largely through our Progressive Conservative government, 
these housing units have provided better retirements for more than 
6,000 senior citizens in Saskatchewan. Land the members opposite 
maybe note that figure -- 6,000. And under their program there 
wasn’t any. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a well known fact that the senior population I 
Saskatchewan is increasing each year. Indeed, in comparison to 
the rest of Canada, the seniors population in Saskatchewan is 
higher than in most provinces. What that means, Mr. Speaker, is 
that as we plan for the next decade, the 1990s, we must, as a 
government, recognize the ever-increasing number of senior 
citizens, people who have made their lifetime contribution to 
building our province. 
 
We as government wish to show that we recognize that seniors 
have indeed helped to build Saskatchewan, and at the same time 
allow them to look forward to their retirement years with a degree 
of optimism. That means government must bring forward the best 
possible  
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1001 
 

program for seniors. 
 
In the motion I have presented to this legislature, I make reference 
to: enriched housing programs for seniors, providing 
encouragement and protection for those seniors who wish to live 
an independent life-style at a fair and reasonable cost; and the 
senior citizens’ heritage program initiative by this government that 
offers property tax rebates to all qualifying senior citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these programs deal with housing. And when 
you take into account the many other social and economic 
programs for seniors, programs started by this Progressive 
Conservative government, I am sure the members of this 
legislature will agree that the Saskatchewan Progressive 
Conservative government is a leader in Canada in progressive and 
caring programs for senior citizens. 
 
That is why I’m pleased to move the motion which states: 
 

That this legislature commend the Government of 
Saskatchewan for providing Saskatchewan senior citizens, 
through the creation of a home repair program, enriched 
housing projects and the senior citizens’ heritage program. 

 
And I would ask all members of the House to support this motion. 
I thank you, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Britton: — I’ve missed something, Mr. Speaker. Moved and 
seconded by the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. Moved by 
myself and seconded by the member from Cut Knife. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for 
recognizing me today. I had not had the opportunity to speak in 
the House for quite some time, and it gives me great pleasure to, 
after listening to my new colleague speaking. Now I feel it’s my 
turn to once again take the podium. 
 
It gives me pleasure to be able to speak on behalf of my 
constituents of Cut Knife-Lloydminster. Mr. Speaker, it has been 
sad that a nation of wisdom is one that honors the elderly, 
knowing that respect for the elderly is a hallmark of civilization. 
 
It’s also been said that the true test of any government is to take a 
look at how it treats the elderly. Does that government offer 
protection for the elderly? Does that government have the high 
degree of respect for the elderly? Let us compare the record of the 
NDP years and this Progressive Conservative government when it 
comes to caring for the senior citizens of this province. 
 
(1445) 
 
I would suggest to this legislature that there is a very clear 
difference in our respective approach to senior citizens. The NDP 
approach was to treat the elderly as nameless, faceless, collective 
group of people. 

Mr. Speaker, for 10 long years the seniors of this province were 
treated as a second class citizen under the NDP administration. 
They were denied even the slightest increase in their seniors’ 
allowances. They were subjected to extra billing on health care. 
They were told that nursing homes were not a priority with the 
NDP. The NDP had put a moratorium on nursing home 
construction. 
 
Simply stated, for 10 long, drawn-out years under the NDP, the 
seniors of this province were sent a message. And that is, it was a 
stigma to grow old. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the NDP told our senior 
citizens it was a stigma to grow old. Did that show respect for the 
elderly? Did the NDP record respect the needs of our seniors? Did 
the NDP offer the seniors protection? The answer, Mr. Speaker, is 
a resounding no! 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative government has a real 
and genuine concern for the senior citizens. We care about seniors 
as individuals. And we believe in the dignity of the individual. 
Seniors, to the Progressive Conservative government, are not a 
group of people in their retirement years. Rather, Mr. Speaker, we 
believe each and every citizen is an individual who has spent a 
lifetime making a personal contribution to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some of those seniors were original pioneers of this province. 
Many of the seniors in Saskatchewan are patriotic citizens who 
fought for our nation, Mr. Speaker, in two world wars. Many 
senior citizens built family farms, taught school, worked in 
factories and shops -- all along the attitude of building the 
Saskatchewan we know. And we believe that in their golden years 
they all must be treated with respect and dignity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion before the House asks this legislature to 
commend the Government of Saskatchewan for providing 
protection for Saskatchewan senior citizens. I would respectfully 
suggest that since 1982 protection for seniors has been a priority 
with this government. Protecting them from extra billing on health 
care by removing extra billing was an initiative; protecting seniors 
from inflation by increasing their pensions was another step; 
protecting senior citizens from inflation and taxes by introducing 
the senior citizens’ heritage program was another step -- just a few 
steps to mention 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, protection of seniors has been part of the high 
degree of respect we, on this side of the House, on the government 
side of the House, have for senior citizens. The motion before this 
House recognizes that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since 1982 the Progressive Conservative government has built 
quality nursing homes throughout this province. And I want to say 
to you, Mr. Speaker, and to this Assembly, that it has indeed, as 
for my own riding, been personally gratifying to have the 
moratorium lifted that the NDP had put on back in 1976. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — That moratorium lifted so as that I could  
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1002 
 

replace the nursing homes in Lloydminster, Saskatchewan, and 
build and construct a brand-new facility in Cut Knife, 
Saskatchewan. From my constituency, Mr. Speaker, I can 
certainly thank this government on behalf of all the people living 
there. We recognize the needs of the aging population. Investing 
public money in these nursing homes is a way of paying 
the respect to seniors. It shows that we as a government do care. 
 
In the past we cared enough to help senior home owners through 
an innovative program that was known as the senior citizen home 
repair program. And, Mr. Speaker, that was a past program. And I 
just wanted to indicate to you, through that program, some of the 
highlights of that particular program. But in order to do so, I’m 
going to read from a news release that was made June 18, 1987, 
where my minister, the Hon. Jack Klein, had made the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would like to 
draw to the attention of the member that we don’t normally refer 
to other members by their name. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — All right. The good minister, the minister in 
charge of Sask housing. But the minister goes on to say: 
 

The Minister responsible for Sask Housing Corporation today 
announced that the applications will no longer be accepted 
under the senior citizens’ home repair program. 

 
The program which offered grants to seniors for home repairs had 
been in its second five-year cycle. More than 75 per cent of the 
eligible home owners had taken advantage of the program — 
more than 75 per cent. Now I think that is just fantastic. 
 
The minister also noted that 1986 changes to the federal 
rehabilitation programs, coupled with the announcement of the 
Saskatchewan home program, provided new opportunities for 
assistance. He was pleased that the vast majority of seniors have 
benefited from this program. There have been few applications of 
recent, and that is basically what his statement was. And seniors 
will continue to have options for help with renovation projects 
through other forms of federal and provincial assistance. The 
minister had said senior citizen home owners will continue to 
benefit from the Saskatchewan home program. 
 
In addition, the federal-sponsored residential rehabilitation 
assistance program administered by the Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation provides grants of up to $5,000 to low-
income seniors for home renovations. 
 
So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that with 75 per cent of the seniors, 
or over 75 per cent of the seniors have taken advantage of this 
program. And just to give you some idea of numbers . . . and if 
you take up to the date ‘84-86, 26,187 households had taken 
advantage of that senior home repair program. Seventy thousand, 
eight hundred forty households have taken advantage of that 
senior home repair program during the life of the program, so 
there is quite a numerous amount of homes. In 1987 
approximately 75,353 households exist in Saskatchewan that are 
owned  

by seniors. So there are the numbers. There’s a few thousand that 
could have possibly, yet have maybe at one time or another taken 
advantage of the program, and that’s if they would have at all. 
 
It gave seniors the opportunity to keep up their dignity and pride 
of ownership in their homes, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
home repair program, with matching grants of $1,500, continues 
the spirit of the original seniors’ home repair program. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, this government has gone the full measure in caring for 
and practicing the needs and concerns of senior citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to point out that it was this government 
that since 1982 has taken the leadership in providing programs for 
seniors. The previous administration was more concerned about 
potash and uranium mines than in the genuine needs of senior 
citizens. The record of the Progressive Conservative government 
in protecting seniors is clear and speaks for itself. This government 
significantly increased the pensions of the seniors. This 
government expanded the health care coverage and services for 
senior citizens. This government established a senior bureau as an 
agency of government. 
 
Time and time again this government has put forward policies and 
programs to benefit the senior population, the senior population 
throughout this province. I would dare say, Mr. Speaker, that 
compared to other provincial governments, the Progressive 
Conservative Government of Saskatchewan has a very good 
record in programs for senior citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, all over North America, all over 
North America there is a growing segment of the general 
population known as senior citizens. Here in this province of 
Saskatchewan the part of our population past the age of 65 is 
higher than at any other time in the history of this province. This 
government has shown leadership and vision in taking 
constructive measures to meet the needs of seniors. 
 
I cannot help but think of the indifferent attitude of the NDP 
opposition during their administration. How one earth could they 
ever have decided to put a freeze on nursing home construction? 
How could they ever have put a moratorium on nursing home 
construction? Yet the fact is, they did put a freeze on nursing 
home construction. Obviously, obviously they gave a greater 
priority to the family of crown corporations than they did to the 
senior -- our real families. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — When the Progressive Conservative government 
came into office in 1982, we began to correct the set-backs 
suffered by the seniors in the years prior to 1982. There have been 
record levels of nursing home construction since 1982. And that 
has sent a clear message to seniors -- that this government does 
care about them. 
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1003 
 

Mr. Speaker, the motion before the House recognizes the decent, 
the fair, the caring, and the compassionate record . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask some 
members to please restrain themselves from entering into the 
debate from their seats. Unfortunately, there are a few who kind of 
have a running commentary all the way through, and it makes it 
difficult for others to hear what’s going on. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it gets fairly awkward, I 
would imagine, for members of the NDP opposition to have to sit 
here and listen to the real record, but this is the factual record. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I’d also like to indicate to them, although we did 
bring Gainers and all those beautiful industries to the province, 
that we still carried on with the construction of nursing homes and 
hospitals and schools, etc., which they never did. 
 
As I was saying, though, Mr. Speaker, and I want to repeat it for 
the record — that, Mr. Speaker, the motion before this House 
recognizes the decent, the fair, the caring, and the compassionate 
record of this Progressive Conservative government in standing up 
for our seniors. 
 
Since 1982, seniors have learned that this government treats them 
as first class citizens. Ultimately that respect in high regard for 
seniors is what makes us a great province. Seniors can look to 
their older years with confidence, faith, and optimism because of 
this government. 
 
They recognize our commitment to seniors. That is why this 
motion before us must be passed. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the motion 
before the House recognizes what this Progressive Conservative 
government has done since 1982 to benefit all the seniors of 
Saskatchewan. It is a record of positive achievement for all seniors 
of Saskatchewan, a record we are proud of, and as such, I believe 
the Assembly should support this motion, as I will. Thank you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I am quite pleased to be involved 
with this debate considering what has been said by the member 
from Wilkie and the member from Cut Knife -Lloydminster. 
Having listened to what they’ve said, one would think we’ve died 
and gone to heaven with all the wonderful things they’ve done for 
seniors. 
 
Of course as we all know, the record of this government -- the real 
record of this government as they have indicated -- is not that 
we’re all in heaven, but the record is that they will in effect be 
killing people and sending them to heaven because of what 
they’ve been doing with our programs for seniors. 
 
I’ve looked at the motion that the member from Wilkie has put 
forward, and I can’t agree with most of it. At the end of my 
remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will move an amendment of the 
motion. If you’d like to hear the  

amendment now, I can perhaps inform you so you know exactly 
what I’m talking about. But I’ll do it later. 
 
I’m quite surprised at the comments that were put forward by the 
members opposite on this motion. The information that they have 
provided to the House and to the public of this province is 
characteristic of information that has been provided in the past by 
the Minister of Finance and by other members of the government 
side, and that is, misinformation, misleading information, total 
inaccuracies in terms of what they are doing and saying. 
 
Certainly, it reminds me of . . . the comments they’ve made with 
respect to seniors programs where they are talking about what a 
wonderful job they are doing in protecting seniors and allowing 
seniors to live a better life in this province reminds me of the very 
old phrase: putting this group of people in charge of seniors 
programs is like putting a weasel in charge of the hen-house. I 
think seniors know this, and they’re going to be sending a very 
clear message in the next campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They talked about the wonderful record that they have in health 
care. I’d like to just review some of their wonderful moves in 
health care with respect to senior citizens, and housing as well. 
They talked about leadership, and they talked about what a terrific 
record they had with respect to providing protection for senior 
citizens. 
 
The record will show, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the protection that 
they would have provided in this last budget is protection seniors 
would rather do without. They have provided, for example, 
massive health care cuts which will impact greatly on seniors. 
There’s a 10,000-person waiting list in Saskatoon for hospitals . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, I would ask the member from Regina 
North to keep his comments on the motion, and it’s to do with 
. . .Order. Order. It’s to do with senior housing and the senior 
citizens’ heritage program. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Does that work both ways? 
 
Mr. Speaker: —-  Order. Order. I would ask the member to keep 
his comments on the motion before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with all due respect, I am 
making the opposition response to comments that were made by 
the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster and the member from 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster and the member from Wilkie. And I’d 
like to have some agreement that I can continue to respond to what 
they have said. If I cannot do that, I believe it is an infringement 
upon my right to speak in this House. So with your . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Certainly the member has a right to speak on the 
motion as I see the motion here before me, and I will allow the 
member to speak on that motion. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Okay, Mr. Speaker. The members from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster and Wilkie talked about the terrific programs 
that they’ve implemented for seniors as it applies to housing. And 
I’d just like to inform the members present this afternoon that . . . 
and share some information about their wonderful housing 
program that they’ve put forward. 
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1004 
 

For example, the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation -- that’s housing, not health care -- announced just on 
June 18 of this year that the senior citizens’ home repair program 
will be no more. It’s been canceled; it’s been terminated. 
 
And of course, this offered grants to seniors for home repairs over 
the last number of years. The program was set up in the mid-’70s. 
The member opposite, in their remarks with respect to the 
resolution, talked about what a wonderful program this was, and 
what a wonderful program that is. They were talking in the present 
tense. They didn’t even know the program has been cut. 
 
And I’d like to remind members as well that the program was first 
instituted, not in 1982 or ‘83 -- the program was instituted in the 
mid-’70s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by an NDP government for the 
benefit of seniors in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The Premier has issued statements. And I have 
a copy of a statement issued with respect to the senior citizens’ 
heritage program. And I’ll quote him. He goes on to say: 
 

The people of this province are proud of the enormous 
contribution that senior citizens have made over the years. 

 
And he goes on to say that: 
 

The senior citizens’ heritage program is based on a 
determination to protect and maintain our heritage and quality 
of life in Saskatchewan. 

 
Words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I maintain, that are dripping with 
hypocrisy, that are gushing with hypocrisy, because he says in this 
little article that he’s announcing the $40 million -- which, by the 
way, was $38 million — Saskatchewan senior citizens’ heritage 
program. And this of course was announced prior to the 
announcement of the election campaign last year. It was a one-
year effort. 
 
I’m informed that senior citizens are not able to submit 
applications for this program at the present, in the current fiscal 
year. And my information tells me as well, this government 
obviously has set this up as an election ploy for seniors, and has 
again terminated the program because of their crassness and their 
double standards. 
 
Good programs for election year. When the year’s over, election’s 
over, they withdraw and retract their position. And I think that that 
is a terrible situation that seniors and others in this province will 
clearly base their judgment on in the next election campaign. 
 
Another wonderful program that the government should be proud 
of is that they terminated the senior citizens’ school tax rebate. 
This was a rebate that provided seniors money that they paid on 
their property towards school taxes. It was an annual thing, no 
strings attached; as long as they owned the property and paid the 
taxes, it was rebated. This wonderful government has cut that off, 
and  

costing seniors to the tune of 4 or $500 a year or more. 
 
The government has had a wonderful track record in terms of 
seniors. They have increased costs to special care homes — a total 
of $73 per month. Here’s an example, Mr. Speaker. They talk 
about their respect for seniors on one hand, and on the other hand 
they knife the seniors in the back with $73 a month increases on 
special care rates. And I think that this is . . . 
 
And I have some information that I’d like to read into record, Mr. 
Speaker, on the special care rate increases in particular. And I 
quote a Leader-Post article, April 7, ‘87: 
 

Special-care home residents will be charged an extra $73 a 
month to live in one of the province’s 147 non-profit nursing 
homes, the province’s director of continuing care said Monday. 

 
Senior citizens groups around this province are absolutely 
appalled at what this government has done. One of them has 
indicated that senior citizens groups are unhappy with the news. 
And that is an understatement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I quote: 
 

The increase will take a “significant bite” out of a seniors’ 
incomes . . . 

 
And this is from a person by the name of F. E. Ewald, who’s the 
executive director of the Senior Citizens’ Service. It goes on to say 
that: 
 

It’s a double blow for seniors, who are seeing costs for 
institutional care rise while budgets for groups that help the 
elderly stay at home are being cut . . . 

 
And: 
 

The government should make some services a priority instead 
of making across-the-board cutbacks that hurt everyone . . . 

 
And again a double standard. They increase costs for seniors, yet 
they provide a $300 million a year tax break for oil companies. 
What a wonderful government to have. The senior citizens — my 
advice to them is they should all incorporate as oil companies. 
Maybe they’d get some decent programs from these members 
opposite instead of the garbage they’ve been getting from them 
over the past number of years. 
 
They talked about improving services for seniors. The member 
from Wilkie talked about the neglect of the NDP government. And 
they talked about how Saskatchewan has been a leader in seniors’ 
programs. Well I think what he’s done is he’s mixed up his words. 
He should have said that . . .And I agree that Saskatchewan has 
been a leader in senior citizens’ programs, and that was under the 
NDP government; it ceased to be the fact in 1982 when this 
government came to power. 
 
And it should have read — the member from Wilkie, and I’d like 
to correct his remarks — it should have read that there’s been a 
severe neglect of the Conservative government with respect to 
senior citizens’ programs. 
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1005 
 

And I’d like to also correct the member from Wilkie, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. He commented about how the Saskatchewan home repair 
grant has been such a wonderful program, and everybody’s 
participating in it. Of course it is a fairly good program, except 
he’s not aware the program has been terminated, and that he’s 
either misinforming this legislature, or he’s been misled by the 
people who have written his remarks for this speech. 
 
They talk about great services for seniors. Well, the NDP 
government introduced SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids to Independent 
Living). What the government has done is frozen and cut back on 
SAIL. We introduced the prescription drug program. What this 
government is doing is they’ve totally annihilated the prescription 
drug plan, thereby passing on 50 to $60 million a year extra costs 
on our seniors. And I think that that is disgusting. 
 
They talked about wonderful health care programs for seniors, like 
the chiropractic program which we introduced as a government, 
and they are now cutting back and restricting visitations to 
chiropractors by seniors. 
 
They talked about the senior citizens’ home repair grant. We 
introduced it as a government; the New Democratic Party 
introduced that program which benefited seniors. They have 
eliminated the program. 
 
They talked about the wonderful job they’re doing with nursing 
homes. They’ve bumped up the prices almost out of reach for 
most of them, most of the seniors that participate, and I n fact we 
have now in Saskatoon a 10,000 person waiting list for hospitals, 
and we have . . . for some seniors what that means is an 18-month 
wait to get in for surgery. 
 
(1515) 
 
Eighteen months when you’re 65 or 68 or 70 years of age is a 
fairly significant time frame in your life. And what this 
government has done, they’ve said this is a terrific program for 
seniors. Well, I think that’s garbage, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster talked about, and I 
quote him: 
 

The true test of a society is how we treat our seniors. 
 
Well, what a lark. Isn’t this incredible! I’d like to remind the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster that the true test of a 
society is not whether we add to the abundance of those who have 
much, like oil companies. The true test of a society is whether we 
as a government, we as a society, and we as a province, can 
provide enough to those who have little. 
 
I think he’s got all of his advice and notes written by somebody 
who’s been drinking or something. I don’t know what his problem 
is, but there are some very serious errors in what these people are 
saying. They’re trying to mislead the people of this province with 
respect to their  

record on senior citizens’ programs and housing programs, and I 
maintain that that has got to stop. And I would ask the Deputy 
Speaker and Speaker to certainly jump in any time and correct the 
record as they’re going off on tangents. 
 
The member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster talks about “protecting 
our seniors has been our priority.” “Protecting our seniors has 
been our priority as a government.” Can you believe that 
statement? With that kind of protection, the seniors would be 
better left to the ups and downs of the market-place, rather than 
have these clowns in charge of programs that affect their lives. 
Eighteen months to get into surgery wait, the cut-backs in all the 
health programs -- unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they talk about leadership; leadership and senior citizens’ 
programs. Well I’ll tell you, if what they have illustrated with their 
performance with respect to seniors is leadership, then this 
province is in more severe difficulties and dire straits than anyone 
can imagine, because the leadership they provided in most 
programs has been abominable and incompetent and mismanaged 
-- to be polite at best, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And what they’re 
going in seniors is a clear indication of the continuing bungling of 
the government. 
 
I have another newspaper article here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 
the Leader-Post — actually it’s from the Star-Phoenix. And the 
title is: “Higher rates for home care not unfair.” And of course 
that’s a quote of the Minister of Health. And he says: 
 

Increasing home care rates by 66 per cent is neither 
unreasonable nor unfair. 

 
And I think that’s a statement that people should be aware of. The 
costs for services provided under the program will rise from $3 per 
unit to $5 per unit. And he goes on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that: 
 

The government had to decide if the increases would cause 
undue hardship to those under the home care program, and we 
didn’t think it would. 

 
Well, I think that if that’s kind of the opinions that they are 
promoting in their cabinet and that they are promoting as a 
government, that we didn’t think it would hurt, I think they should 
take another look and retract what they have done in terms of 
harming senior citizens. And rather than increasing 66 per cent 
home care rates to seniors in this province, they should perhaps try 
cutting the $300 million a year-plus and they’re giving to oil 
companies like Exxon, Texaco, and Shell — those starving, poor 
oil companies that use our money outside of this province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Home Care Association put some figures 
together, and they said that the most expensive home care clients, 
representing about 4 per cent of all clients, cost the program less 
than $1,200 a month each to maintain in the home, which is less, 
by the way, than half of the amount it would cost if they were 
admitted to a nursing home. The program serviced about 19,000 
people in ‘86-86, providing 1.4 million hours of service — or 
dollars, I should say — and units, out of a budget of 22 million. 
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1006 
 

And of course the 9,591 people in nursing homes and level 4 
hospital beds in the same period cost about, not $22 million, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but cost somewhere in the vicinity of $200 
million. So the home care program is a good program, and for 
them to increase rates by 66 per cent is a clear indication of where 
their philosophy is. 
 
The Conservative government of Saskatchewan, in the budget and 
in this motion, are clearly illustrating to the people of this province 
that the philosophy of the Conservative Party is going to be the 
leading light, is going to be the symbol for people in this province 
over the next number of years, and they are implementing and 
enforcing that philosophy through the program cuts, through the 
acute protracted restraint program of the government, that of 
course will hurt middle-income and low-income people, and will 
help those that have a great deal of wealth and power, like the oil 
companies. 
 
And I think that people will recognize, if they haven’t already — 
and I can tell you that most people I’ve spoken to have recognized 
that this government’s days are numbered — but they will 
recognize the government’s day is numbered and they’re gone in 
the next election campaign. 
 
We have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some interesting statistics with 
respect to the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation as they apply to 
seniors as well. The senior citizens’ home repair assistance Act, of 
course, that was terminated with this recent budget — another one 
of their wonderful moves in terms of providing programs for 
seniors. There was about $5 million estimated in the previous 
budget, and of course this budget they’re going to be spending 
$10,000, and I think that that is interesting to note for seniors. 
 
The Saskatchewan housing program provides grants to non-profit 
sponsors of senior citizens’ accommodation. And that of course is 
another leading light senior citizens’ program, and this 
government has cut it by 55 per cent. They’ve reduced it from $5 
million to $2.2 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I can say that grants from the home improvement for the 
disabled program has not been cut. I mean, can you imagine 
people walking around this province and saying I never got fired 
today, or I never got my program cut, as sounding like good news? 
Well, I think that’s terrible news. In terms of a program that 
provides assistance to disabled seniors, they have left it at 
$200,000. A program like that, if they had any sincerity in what 
they say, if they had any belief in some of the rhetoric that the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster espoused earlier, then they 
would be improving programs for seniors. 
 
Seniors have toiled in this province for the 65-plus years that they 
lived in it, and they have done a terrific job in terms of setting up 
programs like medicare and so on. And I guess what’s happened is 
that the government opposite have failed to recognize that. the 
people that worked in 1961 and ‘62 to put together the finest 
health care program in the world, let alone in North America, who 
are now seniors, are being rewarded. The recent 25th anniversary 
of the institution of the health care program 

 — rather than marking the 25th anniversary as the first time that a 
government on this continent thought enough of the people it 
governed to ensure that they had a right to stay healthy; rather than 
marking that celebration; rather than celebrating the 25th 
anniversary for the launching of a CCF model program which was 
created on the principle that a family’s health shall never have to 
depend upon a family’s wealth; rather than doing those things, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what they have done is they have instead, by 
celebrating, they’ve reduced nursing positions by 30 per cent. 
They’ve fired highly-skilled doctors . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s comments 
are straying quite a distance from the motion. I would ask the 
member to speak on the motion before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Rather than celebrating the 25th anniversary of 
health care, they have fired doctors who provide services to . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ve asked the member to relate 
his comments to the motion that’s before the Assembly . . . 
(inaudible interjections) . . . Well, you’re drawing a pretty long 
bow. I would ask you to stay closer to it. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What they have done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
terms of the medical care programs as they pertain to seniors and 
to seniors’ housing, is that they have provided a very heavy 
burden. They have lifted a heavy burden, rather than from the 
shoulders of seniors, they have placed this heavy burden of 
increased costs for health care onto the shoulders of seniors. And 
that goes for people that are involved with the provincial housing 
programs that are in place for seniors. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on and on and on about the 
incredibly bad record of the Conservative government. And I think 
the member from Meadow Lake is encouraging me to do so, and I 
think that perhaps I should. 
 
But I’d like to perhaps draw this into some kind of focus, and the 
focus being that the members opposite say one thing about what 
they’ve done for seniors’ home programs, and they do the 
opposite. They say one thing in terms of health programs for 
seniors and others, and they do the opposite. And I can’t figure out 
why they are doing that. Are they ashamed; are they ashamed of 
what the government has done with respect to seniors’ programs? 
Because if I was a member of that government, I would be 
ashamed and I’d resign, because I wouldn’t be able to put up with 
that nonsense, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I must say that the 
former member from Saskatoon Eastview was quite an honorable 
person by taking that route. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to move an amendment to this 
motion at this point in time. The amendment I’d like to put 
forward, seconded by my colleague from Regina Victoria: 
 

That all the words after the word “legislature” be deleted and 
the following substituted therefor: 

  



 
July 7, 1987 

1007 
 

regrets that the provincial government has betrayed 
Saskatchewan’s senior citizens by eliminating the senior 
citizens’ housing program and by its erosion of health care and 
other services for seniors. 

 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to join in this debate, because it’s a 
significant debate in that it touches upon measures of protection 
for a group of people that through their labor and hard work have 
ensured that we have the wealth that we now have in this province 
-- the people who have built up this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addressing the motion, some thoughts come to 
mind about what is a government’s approach. Why are they 
proposing to put forward this motion at this time? And if nothing 
else, the government’s actions of late, as witnessed in the budget 
process and I think, exemplified in the motion, suggests a dives-
and-conquer strategy for ensuring electoral support in the coming 
years. No effort, it would seem, is being spared, Mr. Speaker, to 
alienate some groups, while at the same time trying to shore up 
support among other groups. For example, we are pitting the weak 
against the powerful. It would seem that those in need of social 
assistance -- welfare, if you like -- get the short end of the stick 
and no end of insensitivity and crude comments from the minister 
responsible, while on the other hand, Mr. Chairman, there seems 
to be no end of public moneys available to assist corporate welfare 
bums like Peter Pocklington. 
 
We see a government that seems to want to play a divide-and-
conquer game when it comes to rural and urban farmers and 
workers. We see . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. The question before 
the Assembly is motion no. 3 with the amendment from the 
member from Regina North West and seconded by the member 
from Regina Victoria. And I would ask the member to keep his 
comments to the motion and the amendment. He’s straying quite a 
ways away from what’s on the motion and the amendment. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Let’s speak to the resolution. Providing 
protection, Let’s look at how protection has been provided by this 
government when it comes to funding for rural municipalities, as 
opposed to funding for urban municipalities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I can read the motion: 
 

(That) this legislature commend the Government of 
Saskatchewan for providing protection to Saskatchewan’s 
senior citizens through the creation of a home repair program, 
enriched housing projects and the Senior Citizens’ Heritage 
Program. 

 
I can also read the amendment to the motion: 
 

That all the words after the word “legislature” be  

deleted and the following substituted therefor: regrets that the 
provincial government has betrayed Saskatchewan senior 
citizens by eliminating senior citizens’ housing programs and 
by its erosion of health care and other services for seniors. 

 
(1530) 
 
So I’d ask the member to keep his comments to the motion and the 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chairman, surely protection 
would pertain to something as simple as property taxes. That we 
have seniors in rural Saskatchewan that have to pay property 
taxes; we have seniors in urban Saskatchewan that have to pay 
property taxes; and surely when I address matters of funding for 
municipalities that affect property taxes, surely we speak here of 
protection in the broadest sense. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’ve seen a provincial government that seems to 
turn its back on senior citizens in urban municipalities as they play 
this game of divide and conquer through massive cuts to urban 
municipalities, while on the other hand they continue this divide-
and-conquer game by ensuring that funding levels are maintained 
for rural municipalities. 
 
And I appreciate and I agree that funding levels should be 
maintained. I disagree, however, that funding levels, which 
provide a measure of protection, Mr. chairman, through ensuring 
that services are maintained, and through ensuring that property 
taxes are lowered and that property taxes are reduced. 
 
But I really regret and would point out, Mr. Speaker, that when it 
comes to protection they don’t seem to provide that kind of 
protection for seniors in urban Saskatchewan. Simple things like, 
when we speak of protection, Mr. Speaker, in the broadest sense, 
you speak of enjoyment of life — the ability to enrich oneself, the 
ability to visit a library, because surely that’s part of protection, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We note, on the one hand, that the government provides a new 
book purchase program which will be applied to all libraries in 
Saskatchewan with the exception of those libraries in the larger 
cities, those that are funded by the municipalities. Again a divide-
and-conquer game, Mr. Speaker. the list goes on; the list goes on. 
Government funds are available to help people install expensive 
swimming pools in urban centers or anywhere in the province. On 
the other hand, special home care rates go up. The list goes on, 
Mr. Chairman — divide and conquer. 
 
And it now appears through the motion that the government is 
engaging in a pitiful attempt to curry favor with Saskatchewan’s 
senior citizens and somehow, through the motion, trying to undo 
the kinds of things that it has done through its actions as 
exemplified in the budget process and its actions of recent years. 
 
Let me suggest to you why this won’t work, Mr. Speaker. I think 
seniors, perhaps more than most, know that you do  
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1008 
 

not turn your back on real friends and turn to fair-weather friends. 
They know that in a divide-and-conquer game, a group that is 
being favored today could just as likely be shafted tomorrow. 
They can see through your shallow, transparent veneer of concern 
that the motion puts before us. 
 
It’s real action and real concern that the senior citizens of 
Saskatchewan want to see. Fair-weather friends, fair-weather 
friends, Mr. Chairman. Friends when it suits their purposes, but 
not there when you need them. Friends that try to fool you. 
Friends with an inconsistent approach of concern one day, concern 
one day, and hardship the next day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would ask the members that moved the motion and the 
members on the other side do they really believe that cutting the 
senior citizens’ home repair program one day and than saying to 
the senior citizens of this province: but you can take advantage of 
the home program that we put into place -- is somehow a blessing? 
I don’t know where the blessing is in that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
You take a home repair program that has fantastically inflated 
prices for work, for home repair work in this province; you take 
out direct help for senior citizens and say to them, but you can 
have help for senior citizens and say to them, but you can have 
help ;under this program. You can have help now that prices have 
been grossly inflated as a result of the government’s program — 
and that’s a benefit for you. I’m not sure where the benefit is. They 
don’t know where the benefit is. 
 
It’s an incredible feat or leap in logic on the part of the 
government, Mr. Speaker, to take away direct help for a group of 
people who we took the position and, as the government did for a 
short period of time, that direct help was necessary — was in fact 
a good thing, to encourage senior citizens to be able to stay in their 
own homes, rather than move into nursing homes or into hospital 
care, or what have you. 
 
Now they say, well, those kinds of benefits don’t make sense; you 
just take advantage of the program that’s there, notwithstanding 
the fact that prices and labor cost and prices for goods under the 
home repair program have just been grossly inflated in 
Saskatchewan — grossly inflated. 
 
And I would ask the members opposite whether they really believe 
that waiting until the last minute — waiting until the last minute in 
a desperate scramble to shore up political support — that waiting 
until the last minute to announce the continuation of the seniors’ 
heritage program will somehow undo the hurt, will somehow undo 
the anxiety that has been created by your budget process which 
saw a discontinuation or a massive restructuring of the 
prescription drug plan. Do you really believe that? Do you really 
believe that taking that kind of callous, cynical, political action is 
somehow going to undo the hurt and the anxiety? 
 
Do you really believe that, and especially the member from 
Wilkie, that he can rewrite history and expect people to believe 
himself? Do you really believe that you can rewrite history and 
expect the senior citizens of this province — in fact, all the people 
of this province — to believe you? 

Do you really believe — and because the member from Wilkie 
said, Mr. Speaker, in opening his remarks, and even if the member 
from Regina North West couldn’t hear him, I distinctly heard him 
say — that there was no senior citizens’ home repair program 
prior to 1982? Well I just want to clarify that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Look here in the annual report of 1975 for the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation, and it speaks of: 
 

The Senior Citizens’ Home Repair Assistance Act, 1973. 
 

This Act enables the corporation to provide grants to elderly 
persons who require assistance in making necessary repairs to 
their homes. 

 
Unless he thinks, unless he forgot about that, that maybe that was 
a temporary program, let’s just turn to the 1979 annual report. And 
again, the annual report for the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation: 
 

Programs, repair. 
 

Senior citizens’ home repair program provides an opportunity 
for senior citizens to remain independent in their own homes by 
assisting them with repairs that will make their homes more 
comfortable and livable. 

 
In 1980, Mr. Chairman, we see it again: 
 

The senior citizens’ home repair program provides an 
opportunity for senior citizens to remain independent in their 
own homes . . .(etc.) 

 
Unless he thinks that, somehow, that this is something that the 
government prior to 1982 might have discontinued prior to 1982, 
let me turn to the 1982 annual report, a report that was tabled in 
this legislature by the minister responsible, the member for 
Kelsey-Tisdale — the member for Kelsey-Tisdale, and that annual 
report, that annual report, Mr. Chairman, speaks of a senior 
citizens’ homes repair program which assists senior citizens to 
remain independent in their own homes, etc. How can the member 
for Wilkie stand up in this House and say there was no home 
repair program prior to 1982? He’s trying to rewrite history. It’s a 
good thing that the people of Saskatchewan, and especially the 
senior citizens of Saskatchewan, will not forget. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Do you really believe, do the members on 
the opposite side really believe, and especially the Minister for 
SaskTel, do they really believe that somehow the senior citizens of 
this province and others in this province will forget that in 1982 a 
Progressive Conservative Party promised the people of 
Saskatchewan that senior citizens would have free telephone 
service as soon as they were elected? Do you think that somehow 
the senior citizens of Saskatchewan are going to believe anything 
you people have to say? Not after that one. 
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1009 
 

Do you really believe that through debating a motion in the House, 
and that putting forward a motion that again, as I say, is but a think 
veneer of concern, do you really believe that somehow people are 
going to forget that at the head of the “keep our doctors’ 
committee, at the head of those that opposed medicare in this 
province was Staff Barootes; Staff Barootes, the senator; Staff 
Barootes, the PC fund raiser? Do you really believe that the senior 
citizens of Saskatchewan are going to forget that? Fair-weather 
friends, Mr. Chairman, fair-weather friends. 
 
And the unkindest cut of all — the unkindest cut of all — let’s set 
the scenario here. Here we have a scenario, a scenario of a Premier 
who’s trying to curry favor desperately with the federal 
government in Ottawa, and I speak of the present Premier who, a 
couple of years ago, in trying to shore up his own support in this 
province, trying to get help for western farmers, was willing to pay 
any price, any price to try and get that help -- any price at all. One 
of the things that the Premier was asked for was support for a 
motion which would oppose -- oppose! -- the federal 
government’s announced intention of de-indexing pensions. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And did he do it? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And did he do it? No, he wouldn’t do it. 
Would any of the members on that side of the House support that 
motion? No, they wouldn’t do it. It was one thing for the 
Progressive Conservative Party in Manitoba to join with the 
government of the day and say, we oppose de-indexing; we 
oppose coming down on senior citizens who have worked so hard 
to build this country; we oppose that kind of action. Would the 
Premier of this province do it? No, he wouldn’t do it because he 
was trying to get help in other quarters from the Prime Minister, 
and he turned his back on senior citizens in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And that’s one that the senior citizens of 
Saskatchewan will not forget. They will not forget, and they know 
your game of divide and conquer, and they know that in the 
divide-and-conquer game that one day you might be favored and 
the next day you might not be favored. They know that in the de-
indexing debate that went on in this country,. and in this province, 
that the Premier of Saskatchewan turned his back on them, and 
that he’s likely to do it again at some future time if it suits his 
political purposes, if it suits your political purposes. 
 
They know you as a government that will promise anything at any 
time to any group in this province in order to win votes. That’s 
how they know you, and that’s why they won’t support you. They 
won’t support you because you’re fair-weather friends. they won’t 
support you because they know that one day, yes, you might help 
them, but the next day you’re not going to be there. They don’t 
trust you. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the senior citizens of Saskatchewan, indeed all the 
people of Saskatchewan, like substance. They appreciated the 
efforts of the NDP, and the CCF before it, to build a prosperous 
and secure province for all  

of the people of the province. I emphasize, all of the people, not 
just the senior citizens, not just the elderly, but for the young and 
for working people as well because they’re tied in to everyone in 
their province; they’re part of the texture and the fabric of this 
province. They are not an isolated little group. 
 
They have concerns, too, about youth unemployment, and they 
have concerns, too, about their grandchildren, and the fact that 
there’s no hope, and there’s no vision and there’s no opportunities 
for them. They have concerns about that, too. That’s part of their 
protection. That’s part of their security, Mr. Chairman, to know 
that those kinds of opportunities exist, and they don’t exist now. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, the senior citizens of this 
province appreciate real progress — real progress such as 
medicare, real progress such as the prescription drug plan. They 
will not support fair-weather friends. I think we should all 
recognize the contribution that has been made by senior citizens, 
the people who worked and labored so hard to build a prosperous 
Saskatchewan, even if it’s been frittered away in recent years by 
the members opposite. 
 
But we should recognize the kinds of things that they have done to 
secure for us a province that has many, many things going for it, 
and especially the people of this province. We should recognize 
them by being serious and sincere in coming to grips with the 
special problems that senior citizens face in this province; the 
special challenges that they face by virtue of their age; the special 
challenges that they face by virtue of infirmities and health 
problems. 
 
We should ensure, Mr. Chairman, that after a lifetimes of building, 
of setting the stage for our wealth, that we never turn our back to 
them. We should never, never condone the kinds of actions and 
the kinds of activities that we’ve seen from the government 
opposite in recent years. That’s why I will not support the motion 
because, like I say, it’s a thin veneer of concern. I will support the 
amendment, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to speak in support of the motion for the hon. member 
from Wilkie, and against the amendment. 
 
Before I start though, I must say that as a relative newcomer to this 
Assembly, that I find it’s somewhat appalling when I hear 
members of the opposite as we’ve heard in the last few days, and 
some of the behavior that we’ve witnessed. It’s quite obvious why 
they’re on that side of the House. But when I hear terms like 
garbage and liar, and the suggestion that members on this side are 
on drugs, or that because a different point of view is expressed that 
it sounds like he’s been drinking, I think that the decorum of this 
place . . . 
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1010 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I haven’t heard anything related to the 
resolutions before us, Mr. Speaker, and I wonder if you could 
bring the member to order. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The point of order isn’t 
well taken. I’ve hear . . .order, order. I’ve heard members from 
their seat made these comments, and that does also enter into the 
debate as the Speaker can hear it, and I would ask all members on 
both sides of the House to refrain from that kind of conduct. I 
don’t think it’s . . . it isn’t very good for the decorum of this 
House; it doesn’t do anything for this House, and I would ask the 
member from Saskatoon Mayfair to refrain from that also. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. I wonder if the member for Weyburn could be quiet 
while I make the point of order. The point of order is simply this, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want you to examine the record and to decide, on reflection, 
whether the point of order was in order or not. And I ask you to 
examine the record, and that’s all I want you to do. And you can 
report back to the House later if you see fit. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I ruled on the point of order, and that’s 
the way it’ll stand. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to be speaking in favor of the motion and opposed to 
the amendment. If I can point out that certainly in my constituency 
of Saskatoon Mayfair that we have a good many senior citizens. 
And it might come as a bit of a shock to members opposite, but 
many of them certainly do not agree with the position that they 
take as to this government’s stand as far as seniors are concerned, 
and the services and programs that have been provided. 
 
We’re talking about people who have spent many of their working 
years contributing to their communities, whether in Saskatoon 
Mayfair or in other areas of Saskatoon, or indeed any place in this 
province. 
 
There’s no doubt about it that this government has been very 
involved during the last five years in building this province and 
making it a better place for all to live. And I can assure you that 
the senior citizens of this province understand full well the 
situation in regard to the economy as it is today. There’s no doubt 
about it that they understand that there are times when programs 
have to be cut back to some extent, or the line has to be held, 
because most of these people have come up through though times 
and good times, and they know full well that a government can 
only spend as much money as it has. They are ready to accept the 
types of changes that we have made, and are certainly in support 
of the types of things that we’re doing. 
 
And a letter that was sent to the editor of one of the papers  

;in the province, I think, is indicative of the feeling that many 
seniors have, and it goes on: 
 

As a senior citizen, I wish to compliment the Saskatchewan 
government on its efforts to balance the budget. 

 
I raised four children as a single parent and never, ever took any 
welfare money. I always worked, and not in any professional 
positions, either. I’m now 73 years old and collect the pension 
(no subsidies). I’ve never lived better and I’d gladly pay my 
share to balance the budget. 

 
Why don’t people realize the government can only spend as 
much as it collects and it must collect from the producing 
people? 

 
I wonder if the ones doing most of the complaining produce 
anything, and I also wonder if they pay anything. 

 
And I think that’s indicative of the feeling that many seniors in 
this province have, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Since 1982 this government has made the protection of seniors a 
special priority. First of all, our commitment to seniors is part of 
the Progressive Conservative belief in protecting the family and, in 
this particular case, the seniors. Secondly, we as a government 
believe in the dignity of the individual, and we know that there are 
certain people in the province that need help during specifically 
tough times. We are committed to helping those people who need 
that type of help. 
 
Over the past four years we have built an impressive record when 
it comes to helping Saskatchewan seniors, and I’ll deal with some 
of those specifically a little later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The motion before the House commends the Progressive 
Conservative government for what it has done in providing 
protection for Saskatchewan seniors with respect to the home 
repair program, enriched housing projects, and the senior citizens’ 
heritage program. The home repair programs have helped many of 
my constituents in Saskatoon Mayfair who are seniors, and I think 
it’s perfectly obvious, when we listen to some of the members 
opposite, that they, in fact, do not believe in change of any kind, 
that we shouldn’t be reassessing programs from time to time and 
making changes that are in step with today’s needs. 
 
A prime example of that, of course, is the fact that the home repair 
program has indeed been changed, and we have to consider the 
fact that with the implementation of the Saskatchewan home 
program and also changes to the rehabilitation program sponsored 
by the federal government, that it is time to take a look at those 
programs where there are duplication and make changes. 
 
These programs have helped seniors to pay for repairs and 
renovations on their homes that they might not otherwise have 
been able to afford. Since 1984, over 25,0000 seniors took 
advantage of the program known as the seniors’ home repair 
program, and it’s expected that  
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1011 
 

many thousands of seniors will also take advantage of the current 
Saskatchewan home program. 
 
During the history of the seniors’ home repair program, many 
seniors expressed their gratitude to this government for helping 
them with needed renovations in their homes. The government of 
Premier Grant Devine was the only government in Canada . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ve asked members not to refer 
to other members by name: either by their position or their 
constituency. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The government of our Premier, the 
member from Estevan, was certainly the only government in 
Canada to bring in such a useful and comprehensive plan to help 
seniors with home repairs. Seniors with homes will be able to 
receive the benefits of the Saskatchewan home program also. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout history it has been said that a person’s 
home is his castle. That’s especially true for seniors. This 
government recognized how expensive it can be for seniors to 
renovate and repair their homes. The senior citizens’ home repair 
program was a very innovate way of helping seniors to keep their 
homes in good shape. In fact, concerning the number of seniors 
that took advantage of the program during its existence are a clear 
endorsement of the success of the program. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I should like to note that all seniors can still 
receive those benefits though our Saskatchewan home program. I 
have reason to believe Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction in all 
of North America to offer such extensive assistance to senior 
home owners for repairs and renovations. As a government we are 
indeed proud of that fact. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was a time a few years ago when there 
was another provincial government in office. They didn’t have the 
same concern for seniors as does the Progressive Conservative 
government, although they tried to make out that they in fact do. 
 
Let’s look at some of the ways in which they ignored the needs of 
seniors. Their attitude was never to bring in such innovative 
programs for seniors as we have done. The liked to go back in 
history and talk about dates when home repair programs were 
introduced by their government. But let me remind them of a few 
other dates that have happened in the past, and the fact that they 
haven’t always done what they would try to lead people to believe. 
 
Nineteen seventy-five. We heard the member from Victoria 
speaking about that date not too long ago. Well let’s think about a 
1975 NDP promise. And what was that promise, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? More nursing homes for rural centers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Well in fact the result was that in 1976, the very next 
year after that election, they placed a moratorium on nursing home 
construction which was to last until 1982, when the Conservative 
government came in. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a fine example of a party  

which makes out like they’re the saviors of all of our senior 
citizens. They’re the only ones that have ever done anything for 
them. Can you imagine — a moratorium on nursing home 
construction at a time when nursing homes were really needed and 
when our economy was very buoyant. 
 
Well the PC record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since that time has been 
the building of over 1,500 nursing home beds across the province. 
we recognize the needs, and we have done something about 
meeting those needs. 
 
So we talk about a party then that placed a moratorium on the 
construction of nursing home construction for seniors, and one 
really has to question the credibility of that particular group 
opposite. That shows how much they cared about seniors. 
 
Let’s look at another example. Let’s go back to the 1978 election. 
What were the NDP promising at that time? Well they promised to 
improve ambulance service. Yes, they were going to improve 
ambulance service, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well in actual fact, by 
1982 there was such a lack of funding for ambulance services that 
there was indeed a real crises in the province. 
 
Now what has this government done since then? We’ve increased 
funding for ambulance services by 83 per cent since 1982, and 
introduced a new funding formula resulting in better ambulances 
service across the province, and particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the main group of 
people that would benefit from that increased service are the 
seniors. 
 
We talk about health care. What have we done there? Well let’s 
take a look at that. In 1975 and 1978, what did the NDP go about 
the province promising? Well, they said, we’re going to have the 
best health care system in Canada. The member from Quill Lakes 
was probably one of those who was running around making that 
very same promise, two different elections in a row. Well what did 
he do? What did he do? They waited for a long time for that new 
hospital in Watson, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I didn’t see the 
member from Quill Lakes doing a heck of a lot about getting that 
new hospital in Watson. That’s very much appreciated by the 
folks out there. And I’ll tell you, when the next election rolls 
around, the people in that Watson and Quill Lakes area are going 
to remember that. 
 
Well what did they do with the best health care system in Canada 
in 1975 and ‘78? They put that moratorium on nursing home 
construction. do they ever talk about that? 
 
What about the cut-backs that were made in funding for hospital 
beds and staff in 1976. We hear the members from Saskatoon 
Center talking about all these great things. Well, does she talk 
about the cut-backs that were made in funding for hospital beds 
and staff in 1976? 
 
What about the cancer clinic? What about the expenditures there? 
This government has moved to improve the facilities as far as 
cancer treatment in this province are concerned. 
 
Another thing that this government has done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we banned extra billing in this province,  
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1012 
 

something that the members opposite wouldn’t do. We’ve added 
over 1,500 special care home beds for seniors. We’ve built and 
expanded hospitals in rural and urban areas and we’ve increased 
staff levels and improved equipment for hospitals. So indeed I 
think our record speaks for itself as far as some of the things that 
we’ve done in health care in this province. 
 
(1600) 
 
We can also take a look at our social policy — some of the things 
that have been done by this government in the last five years; 
some of the things that were lacking by the previous 
administration. One of the things that we did, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
was to increase allowances for seniors. We doubled the income 
supplement from $25 to $50 a month for the single low-income 
earners, and for couples it was increased from $45 to $75 a month. 
Something certainly that was very badly needed in that particular 
time. 
 
Another area that was mentioned here before, but I’m sure the 
members opposite haven’t got the message yet — a 1975 NDP 
promise. Well, what was it this time? It was to have a voluntary 
pension plan to cover those without Canada Pension Plan or a 
company plan. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fact of the matter is 
that no action was taken by that bunch in over seven years. The 
government then, now, until today, brought in our voluntary 
pension plan for Saskatchewan people, and that’s something that’s 
been very widely accepted by all of those in Saskatchewan. We 
brought it in. They’re opposed to it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Another area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government has done 
a great deal is through those home programs that I mentioned 
earlier — the home repair program, enriched housing, and senior 
citizens’ heritage program. You know, we hear a lot of noise form 
the other side of the House about the home care program. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Members on both sides of the 
House will have an opportunity to enter into this debate any time 
that they would like to, so I would ask them to listen to the debate 
that’s going on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it wasn’t long ago 
we heard the member from Regina Victoria talking about the 
home care program. Well I think that the letter that I have here, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, has a little bit more to it than what we were 
hearing form the member for Regina Victoria, and I think it’s one 
that we have to consider when we consider who wrote this letter. It 
was written to the Minister of Health, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it 
says: 
 

On behalf of the Saskatchewan Home Care Association, I am 
writing to thank you for the increase in home care funding and 
recognition of the assessment and co-ordination costs associated 
with the district co-ordinating committee. In these trying times 
every dollar counts, and you may be assured these will be 
handled with great care. 

 
And this was from the president of the Saskatchewan Home Care 
Association. And I think, Mr. Deputy  

Speaker, that one can consider that this is a person who speaks for 
seniors and for the home care program in Saskatchewan, and not 
the member from Regina Victoria. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you stop and consider the fact 
that over 6,000 Saskatchewan seniors have been provided better 
retirements through enriched housing, I think that’s pretty 
significant. And I think it’s a sure sign that this government does 
care about our seniors and is doing everything that we can to 
provide a better living for them in their later years. When you stop 
and consider that senior citizens’ heritage program offers seniors a 
grant of up to $500 for single seniors and $700 for senior couples, 
that as well is very significant. And I know that it’s been very well 
accepted by seniors throughout this province, and something 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was brought in by this 
government. 
 
I would suggest to this legislature that few governments, if any, in 
Canada or in any other country could match the record of this 
government in protecting senior citizens. It says that we have built 
up a solid record of performance in providing for the future needs 
of those in their retirement years, Mr. Speaker, actions speak 
louder than words. The record speaks for itself. Protecting senior 
citizens will continue to be a priority with this government. We’re 
proud of what we have done to assist our seniors in this province 
and those in their retirement years. 
 
As a government,. we have shown leadership providing programs 
for seniors, and that is why I believe this legislature should support 
the motion before us. It correctly commends the government for 
what it has done for seniors. It recognized the Progressive 
Conservative Government of Saskatchewan in its efforts to protect 
senior citizens. And as such, Mr. Speaker, it is appropriate that we 
all support this motion and oppose the amendment. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I wonder if the member will entertain a 
brief question before he resumes his seat. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to take part in this motion, and what I consider is a very 
important motion in Saskatchewan. I see here that the 
Conservative government across the way has proposed a motion to 
commend the government for providing protection for senior 
citizens in this province. Well I want to say to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and to the member who has just sat down from 
Saskatoon Mayfair, who did not address the amendment which I 
intend to address, but spoke of all the good things that have 
happened to the senior citizens in this province . . . and I want to 
say that is just not what’s taking place out there. 
 
I want to speak about the amendment, Mr. Speaker, the 
amendment which reads and talks about the health programs and 
the health care for our senior citizens. And I think that the 
members across the way who can stand up in this House and say 
that they support senior citizens on  
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1013 
 

one hand on the other hand they can take away the type of 
programs that they have taken away from our senior citizens — 
not only have they taken away affordable housing for our senior 
citizens, but they have taken away the drug program. 
 
And I can say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there was not one of those 
members sitting on the other side that went around in the fall of 
1986 and campaigned on the platform that they were going to cut 
the drug program in this province. They didn’t go to the senior 
citizens’ homes and campaign and say they were going to cut the 
drug program. They didn’t go into the homes and say to the senior 
citizens that they were going to put on another burden, a 7 per cent 
sales tax. They never said that. But that’s what they’ve done, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They went out in this province and tried to destroy a group of 
people that deserve so much more and are getting so much less 
from the government. And it’s happening on a daily basis. 
 
And the hardships that the seniors are facing through this drug 
program. I have senior citizens who are coming up to me and are 
saying, instead of taking four pills, I’m just going to take one; I 
just can’t afford to put the money up front. And that’s the case of 
this government and the type of compassion that they’re showing. 
 
I want to talk about the deplorable situation that we have in 
northern Saskatchewan with our senior citizens, Mr. Speaker. And 
I have asked the minister of housing, who’s in his seat and I’m 
sure will be closing off this debate, I’ve asked him to come up 
North and take a look at the deplorable situations that we have in 
northern Saskatchewan. I have asked him to accompany myself, 
and I would take him out and show him conditions. 
 
I have a letter that I wrote to him four months ago, and he still has 
not answered the letter. That’s the type of a minister that we have 
in Sask Housing. And he’s in charge of senior citizens’ housing. 
 
He is also the same minister, Mr. Speaker, who canceled senior 
citizens’ home repair program. Now he canceled that program. He 
said that it was working good, but I say it most certainly wasn’t 
working good in northern Saskatchewan. Where senior citizens 
live — some of them 200 miles one way they have to drive to get 
materials to fix up their homes. There’s a lack of carpenters 
available for them. And most certainly, they just don’t have the 
money to put up front. 
 
But the minister, he indicates, well if they’ve got $100 and they 
spend $100 and fix up their house a little bit, they can get $50 
back. but I say that that’s not fair to the senior citizens. They’re 
entitled to be able to spend $3,000 and get 1,500 back. 
 
And we had a program for senior citizens in northern 
Saskatchewan under the DNS housing, and it worked. Senior 
citizens had home repairs done to their homes, inspectors went out 
and inspected the houses to see what they needed. We had a 
delivery system for them. You can just imagine a senior citizen 
living 200 miles from the nearest lumber yard and wanting to get 
materials. They  

don’t have a vehicle. They just have no means and ways of getting 
it done. And I have asked the minister many questions and I put 
some pretty pointed questions in a letter four months ago, and I 
haven’t received an answer. 
 
Because it’s not just senior citizens’ housing in northern 
Saskatchewan. It’s the whole housing structure we have in the 
North that’s falling apart. And senior citizens who do not have 
homes are caught up in that spider web that has been wound up 
there. And they’re living with sisters; they’re living with their 
daughters; and they’re living with friends and relations. 
 
And you just have to go and see the type of poverty that exists in 
northern Saskatchewan. You have to take a look at the 
tuberculosis that are . . .it’s increasing and it’s increasing, and the 
Minister of Health will agree with me on that. And it’s increasing 
because we have 20 to 25 people living in one household, and 
many of them are senior citizens. Many of them are senior citizens 
who no longer can afford the drugs that they should be taking. One 
problem is going to compound to another one. 
 
Yet you take in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, when civil 
servants come up into the North or somebody comes up and starts 
a business, there is public housing available for them. But they’re 
not available for our senior citizens. We have many senior citizens 
right now who just have no place to stay. They have no house to 
live in and there’s no delivery system available to them. And I say 
that this government has to use some compassion, they have to get 
into northern Saskatchewan and take a serious look. They don’t 
have to appoint a northern development advisory council to go 
around and hold meetings and to pay them big money. That’s not 
solving the problems for housing in northern Saskatchewan, and 
most certainly not solving the problems for our senior citizens. 
 
I ask this government to take a look and I ask the minister when he 
stands up and takes his place in this assembly to close the debate, 
that he will into northern Saskatchewan and he’ll accompany 
myself and I’ll take him in and I’ll show him situations that are 
very, very serious. And this we just cannot let continue. For those 
reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment and I 
will be opposing the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although I wasn’t 
interested on getting involved in this debate, after I listened to the 
diatribe once again emitting from the members opposite, I feel that 
I’ve got an obligation and responsibility to stand in my chair and 
clarify some of the items that have been said by the members 
opposite. 
 
First of all I would like to inform the member from Athabasca that 
I have made a trip to the North, and I have just recently been up 
there and completed it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. I’d 
like to ask hon. members to please allow the Minister of Urban 
Affairs to make his remarks to the House. 
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1014 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems that every 
time I rise in this House, that the members opposite seem to enjoy 
getting after me for whatever reason. I wish the House Leader, 
who’s sitting there, would get a little control among his benches. 
 
If you want me to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. I 
would like members to refrain from interrupting the minister, and I 
would like the minister to get on with his remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, obviously you have get control. 
It appears the opposition will be listening now. Thank you very 
much. 
 
But I have been north, Mr. Speaker, and I have visited with several 
communities. Interestingly enough, I had discussions with those 
communities concerning their housing projects and concerning 
whether or not they were getting proper service as a result of the 
representation that they have in the North. 
 
It seems that they had a lot of problem with that regard Now I 
asked for a matter of clarification, if they had been in touch with 
their MLAs, if they had corresponded with my office, and the like. 
They said that, yes, they had but weren’t getting anywhere. I 
assured all of them that I am interested in their situation and in 
their problems. And as a result, they are corresponding directly 
now with my office, and it seems to work out that way. 
 
(1615) 
 
The member opposite maintains that I haven ‘t responded to a 
letter of his and that it’s been unanswered for four months. If he 
would table that, Mr. Speaker, or would at least supply me with 
that, I beg to differ. I believe that I answer my correspondence 
immediately, and our record is very clear on that. It always has 
been, and that’s one I’m proud of. 
 
And I’m surprised that he would raise that issue at this time in the 
legislature. It’s possible that a mistake was made. I know that on 
receiving one letter from the member opposite, it was sent to me, 
but in Prince Albert. Well obviously I don’t work out of Prince 
Albert, Mr. Speaker; my office is here in Regina, and this is where 
it should be sent to. And as a matter of fact, the letter even had the 
wrong minister attached to it. If that’s the one he’s referring to, I 
can understand a delay. 
 
But in any event, the member opposite is definitely confusing the 
issues here. We are talking what our government has done on 
behalf of the senior citizens of our province . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . .I’ll try to read that letter in a moment. But in any 
event, as we were talking about the senior citizens issue, he started 
talking, Mr. Speaker, clearly about northern housing issues. Now 
admittedly, some of those northern housing issues are seniors 
living in them. Of course, we would expect that. But by and large, 
his remarks were more inclined to be with the northern housing 
problem rather not seniors. 

As we all know, the responsibility for the northern housing, Mr. 
Speaker, has been transferred to Canada Mortgage and Housing 
Corporation. We did that for a specific reason and after much 
consultation with the Northerners themselves. And they were all in 
agreement that if we could deliver these programs — they are 
mainly federally sponsored programs — and if Canada Mortgage 
and Housing Corporation could deliver these programs and we 
were just simply a government agency that went wrong with it, we 
could avoid possible duplication. The people involved would only 
have to deal with one agency. And they agreed and recognized 
that that would be a proper way to handle that. So that’s under 
control and in a different area. 
 
I might say, though, that there is no decrease in activity in northern 
housing, whether it applies to seniors or whether it applies to the 
regular northern housing programs. They will continue to be 
available through the administration of Canada Mortgage and 
Housing to avoid any possible duplication. It will be delivered by 
the federal government and will continue to provide housing for 
those most in need, and it will be maintained by a presence of 
housing authorities throughout the North. 
 
Be assured that I will continue consultation with my friends in the 
North. and in my past portfolio, when I was in Tourism and Small 
Business, then too, and the member is fully aware of that. I visited 
the North many, many occasions, many times, because I was 
concerned with economic development. Because as it relates to the 
issue at hand, Mr. Speaker, economic development in the North — 
if we can get economic activity going and we will — then it 
simply transfers into more taxes being paid. More taxes being paid 
means more lots can be serviced, more lots can be serviced, more 
homes for seniors and for our northern people. Priority has been 
given to the construction of rental accommodation for families and 
for senior citizens. 
 
And in spite of these transfers, Sask Housing continues to handle 
the repair and resale of existing homes that do come vacant with 
our Northerners in that regard. And yes, there are some problems 
up there. There are many problems there. And it’s as a result of 
these consultations and this process, Mr. Speaker, that hopefully 
we will come to avoid some of these problems in the future. 
 
But getting back to the issue at hand, and the matter of the seniors, 
I’d like to clarify a couple of issues that the members opposite 
were speaking about that really discolored a few of the things that 
we were talking about. And that simply is that the senior citizens 
repair program, yes, was originally put in in 1973, and it provided 
$200 based on guaranteed income supplement. You could get a 
little bit more. And that was the first program — $200 for our 
seniors. Then in 1978 --1978 I guess happened to be an election 
year — out of generosity in 1978 they went all the way up to 
$350, Mr. Speaker. And the member that was speaking on that 
earlier obviously has an appointment elsewhere. But I wish 
. . .maybe he’ll check Hansard to clarify that. He was quoting 
from Hansard earlier, and perhaps he could refer to this. 
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1015 
 

Then in 1984 our government came along, Mr. Speaker, and yes, 
it’s still based on guaranteed income supplement. However, 
seniors could get under that program, up to $1,000. Quite a 
difference. 
 
What happened over time, Mr. Speaker, is that the seniors simply 
used that home repair program to its fullest and there was a very 
small take-up left. So it only made eminent sense that rather than 
have another duplication of administration . . . And clearly the 
record of our government speaks for itself. Clearly, when we were 
elected in 1982, we understood that we had an administration far, 
far too large for the size of our province and we had to do 
something about it. So that as a result of very few people left to 
qualify for this program, Mr. Speaker, it made eminent sense to 
roll into our highly successful home improvement program, which 
the seniors can still quality for. 
 
The seniors’ home repair program, however, did work out well; 75 
per cent of the households that are eligible for the program took 
advantage of it. And now they probably look forward to this home 
improvement program that we have. And being that the seniors 
qualify for that, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to talk on that for a 
moment. 
 
It seems that when they have the opportunity during question 
period to question some of our home programs, they don’t do that. 
But rather on an issue such as this this afternoon, they stand up in 
debate and throw a lot of facts and figures around that they’ll get 
out of Hansard and read a half sentence and things along that line 
and kind of discolor the issue a little bit. 
 
Clearly, in question period if they would ask me, we could clarify 
a lot more. But they stand and quote from letters and the like. and I 
too happen to have a letter about the home improvement plan and 
how it pays off. 
 
And I don’t know this gentleman at all, but it says that: 
 

With regards to Saskatchewan Liberal Leader Ralph Goodale’s 
comments (“A Gimmick that should be ended”, Readers’ 
Viewpoints, (in the Regina Leader-Post) June 11), I must 
comment on his incapacity to see reality. His claim that not one 
job has been created is the epitome of bad judgment and poor 
statistics. 

 
Obviously he’s been learning form the members opposite. 
 

This firm, as a local manufacturer, (so obviously a firm was 
referred to) have created two jobs and are only employing eight 
people. I must add that all the business people I associate with 
in the Regina Home Builders’ Association, the Regina 
Breakfast Club, the Regina Salesmasters Association, and 
others, have all claimed increases in sales (increases in) 
employment, (increases in ) revenue and, needless to say, 
(increases in) expenses. 

 
We’ve spent more dollars since the program started on tax revenue 
items such as gas,  

advertising, purchasing of local services, tools, equipment and 
travel, to name a few. 
 
How is it possible for a party leader to say that thousands of 
grants, having been applied for and approved, have not created 
employment? How could any intelligent economist suggest that 
the circulation of local dollars in such vast amounts doesn’t create 
employment? 
 
I do agree with Mr. Goodale’s comments on freebies; they are 
always popular. But for once, they were helping those with 
disbursal income. If we are to slash giveaways at all, I’m in favor 
of slashing them all. Let the user pay. After all, are we so ignorant 
as to believe true socialism would work even under the Liberals? 
 
So then he goes on to say: 
 

I suggest he take a look at statistics of socialist countries and 
he’ll find their standards far below that which this government 
is trying to repair in this province. 

 
So our seniors — getting back to our seniors — they do appreciate 
what we have done for the. The enriched housing program is 
another one that I’ll speak on in a moment. But I’ll still continue, 
first of all, because it seems the topic of the day has been the 
senior citizens’ home repair program. 
 
Our home program, Mr. Speaker, as can be proven, not only be 
this letter, but by hundreds of letters that I received similar to this, 
is simply not a give-away. There is absolutely no question that it is 
an employment generator, I believe that it’s fair to say that the 
NDP perhaps, may have campaigned on a give-away. It seems that 
nobody ever understood what their 7-7-7 was. I guess maybe if 
you were luckily enough you might have qualified for some kind 
of a give-away. What it would have created is totally unknown, at 
this point in time, and what it would have cost — what it would 
have cost. You know, we have some guesses that are just 
overwhelming. 
 
But there is no question, Mr. Speaker, that our home repair 
program has created thousands and thousands of jobs. we estimate 
25,000 will be created during the life of the five-year program. To 
date it has created some 12,000 jobs so far. 
 
The beauty about our program too, Mr. Speaker, and even the 
seniors appreciate this when they go to repair their home — it isn’t 
a give-away. They have to put in 50 per cent of their money, and 
we will match it. So how can it be a give-away? They’re very 
cautious; they’re very careful with what they’re going to have 
repaired, with whom they’re going to deal, with what price they’re 
going to be paying, because it’s not a freebie. It’s not just simply a 
hand-out — here you are, do what you want. But, if you put in 
some, we’ll put in some. 
 
If it’s a low income senior, it’s no problem with that either, Mr. 
Speaker, because the beauty about the flexibility of our program is 
that the total amount that we can provide to them in assistance is 
$1,500. However, if they’ve got a  
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1016 
 

little job that they would like to get done — replacing the linoleum 
in their kitchen or the like, and it might only be 4 or $500 — that’s 
fine. They can claim for that the first time, qualify, and get that 
grant at that time and qualify for the balance later on. They’ve still 
got four years left, Mr. Speaker. It’s simply excellent. 
 
In my new seat of Regina South I’ve got thousands of seniors that 
I have visited with, and they’re just simply delighted with what we 
have provided for them in that area. There is no question that the 
Saskatchewan home program has been a tremendous success. 
 
We’ll go on to speak about another part of the motion, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s the seniors’ heritage program. Earlier one of 
the members opposite said that program was a one-year thing and 
it’s gone and never to be heard from again. We’ll very soon 
determine, Mr. Speaker, as we start going through the estimates — 
if we ever got off the one that we’re on now — that yes, in the 
budget that we’ve outlined, I’m pleased to say that our 
government again, under the leadership of our Premier, has put the 
seniors where they belong, and they do get the respect from this 
government that they rightfully deserve, and the heritage program 
will continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — During our budget process, as we were 
contemplating our expenditures versus our revenues — and it was 
a very, very difficult process, Mr. Speaker — we spent months 
and moths going through our budget, line by line, item by item, 
trying to determine how best to spend our money. And you hear 
cries over from the other side — cuts, cuts, cuts. But yet I ask you 
seriously, and I ask the people; where are these cuts that you keep 
talking about? Efficiencies, yes. And there is a dramatic 
difference. 
 
And in any event, as we went through the budgetary process and 
we started contemplating our various expenditures, certainly we 
looked at the heritage program. And the news media became 
involved in it and said, well, the NDP are starting a story that 
you’re going to cut the heritage program and you’re to be cutting 
the home program and you’re going to be cutting this and you’re 
going to be cutting that. Can you guarantee this, can you . . . Mr. 
Speaker, as you’re developing a budget, how can you possibly 
guarantee anything? You can’t. 
 
But by the same token, the Premier, myself, other ministers 
involved, as we were questioned about this, certainly every 
program in government was being looked at. Every program in 
government was being analyzed for efficiencies to see how we 
could best spend our money, to see if it would generate 
employment, to se if it would diversity our economy, to see if it 
would continue building this province. And, Mr. Speaker, as we 
get on with these estimates, we will find that yes, this budget will 
do that, and the seniors will come out of it protected as they 
always have been protected by our Premier. 
 
Now I’ll talk for a moment, Mr. Speaker, about the enriched 
housing program. And the enriched housing program, I’m pleased 
to say, is something that our government has put into place. And 
the enriched housing  

concept has been accepted from the width and breadth of this 
province — and highly accepted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1630) 
 
And it just gladdens my heart, and I could speak of opening after 
opening, of sod turning after sold turning, that I’m invited to and 
that I attend as the minister in charge of Sask Housing. And I’m 
just pleased and thrilled to see how these seniors really appreciate 
the comfortable style of living that they can now enjoy in this 
province. And as they continue on through life and the retirement 
comes along, and their homes get to be just a little bit too big a 
task for them, they want to continue their same independent life-
style, which is understandable. They’re the pioneers of our 
province. They’re the ones that have worked so hard to get this 
whole province rolling. They’ve put us where we are in 
government: to continue affording the protection to the people of 
the province — not only the seniors, but to all the people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And they just keep telling me, isn’t this lovely? Look at what we 
have here; we’re with our friends. And this new enriched design 
where, along with the enjoyment that they have of independent 
living in their apartments, they also have the added capabilities of 
a little meeting room so that they can get together and play their 
whist or play their bridge or have a little party with their friends or 
whatever the case may be — celebrate birthdays and 
anniversaries. And they’re simply delighted with it. 
 
And these enriched housing projects, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
say, are going up right around the entire province in large cities 
and in small centers and the like. And you know, it’s just amazing 
how they . . .the small town Saskatchewan where they want to 
retire in their own neighborhood, where their own family and 
where their own friends have always been. And the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation, Mr. Speaker, has generally been able to step 
forward and supply that badly needed home to the area where they 
don’t have to move away from their family and from their friends. 
 
Over the last year, Mr. Speaker, along with non-profit agencies, I 
am pleased to tell you that a new concept was designed. And in 
Saskatoon, there have been a couple of church organizations, Mr. 
Speaker, that working together with government, because of 
consultation that we so firmly believe in — because we do believe 
in talking to these people and sharing their ideas and taking their 
ideas and seeing if they can work — we did bring in a new, 
enriched type of housing program, Mr. Speaker, that the 
government supplied a one-time grant of 25 per cent. And then all 
of the volunteers in that community — they would be the ones that 
would get together and put in the hard work, and really make that 
work — they would put the project together, and they would get 
their architects and engineers to design it. They would go out and 
sell the system however they were going to do it. The government 
would be the facilitator of the grant, and it would go together. 
 
I was at one the other day in Saskatoon where they have taken it 
another step, Mr. Speaker, and they sold life interest shares in 
these apartment units to the existing  
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1017 
 

seniors. What an entirely new concept! Because what it tells me is 
that the seniors in our province, although they want this type of 
housing, they also want it to be affordable. They recognize that the 
government can’t come along and just build everybody a home. 
How can we? They don’t expect that. But with a little bit of effort 
and with co-operation, with a caring government, with a 
government that consults, we can fit all these ideas together and 
we can make these wonderful things happen for them. And they’re 
just simply outstanding. 
 
Pleased to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that for this year Sask Housing 
has introduced what we are calling Innovation ‘87, and it is 
another form of moving along. and together with the private sector 
which we firmly believe in, together with the other interests 
groups, the non-profits, and the life, the various organizations, 
we’re saying, fine. This year out of our allocation of 4486 units we 
will take 240 units and we will put them out into this new 
innovative process. 
 
And now what we’re saying is look, we’re not smart enough to do 
this alone. I suppose a government can arbitrarily come along and 
impose this kind of housing as was done previously. And they can 
built it or they can not build it, or they can freeze it and quit 
building; and then you wouldn’t see nursing homes. Next you 
wouldn’t see senior homes. Lord knows what you’d see next with 
that kind of a government that is kind of a dictatorial, selfish, self-
serving government. We’ve gone the other way, Mr. Speaker, and 
we just simply take it out to the people, and we say fine, here we 
are; we would like to facilitate these ideas; what can you do with 
it? 
 
It’s going to be interesting, Mr. Speaker, as this innovation process 
is begun, and as it starts, and as the private sector going out to do 
what I will call “hustle their business,” because that’s what they 
have to do. Those of us in business, or that have been in business, 
understand how you must keep working away to get this business 
to come in. 
 
They will come up with ideas, Mr. Speaker. They will work with 
these other sectors, with the non-profits, and the charitable 
organizations, and come up with ideas that by financing 240 units 
could perhaps trigger 2,000 units. Now if that were to happen, just 
think of how far the taxpayers’ dollars would be going. For the 
cost of 240 units you could maybe increase it tenfold. 
 
That’s what we mean by working together with the people of the 
province, the same people that wanted us to listen, that we are 
listening to, that we care about, that we are going to spend their tax 
dollars with great care and that’s why we’re back here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I listened with interest the other day, and as we come along to this 
innovative process, Mr. Speaker, I attended again in Saskatoon 
with about 70 different people in this area that would be interested 
in this innovative concept. And I was just thrilled to see such a 
large turn-out, and I have to freely admit that Saskatoon picks up 
on these new ideas and away they go, and they’re interested in 
making it work. 
 
And the business people that were there, I discussed with  

them again. And interestingly enough, as we were talking housing, 
they happened to see the House Leader of the Opposition the other 
day in his remarks claiming to be the savior of small business. 
Well, what a joke. And they said, they said, what does he mean, 
the member from Riversdale, what does he mean that given the 
proper mix, given the proper mix he can support the free enterprise 
system and small business? And how does this, you know, how 
would my housing project work out? How could we continue 
building these enriched homes, and what does he really mean by 
that mix? 
 
And I said, well I can’t, I can’t speak for him. I don’t know how 
you can really mix that, or if you looked at the Regina Manifesto 
which they declared, you know way back when, they clearly 
didn’t have any use for small business and free enterprise. And 
how he can do that now, I don’t know. 
 
But in any event I said, I’m here to talk to you about this enriched 
housing program for our seniors and I’m here to tell you that we 
are prepared, as we have been in the past, to continue working 
with small business. And so long as we are on this side you just 
simply won’t have to worry about that; you won’t have to worry 
about the meaningless statements that come forward form the 
other side. Because probably we would go back — all of the 
housing situations would go back to how they were in the olden 
days. And the olden days are rapidly disappearing now, 
fortunately. But they want to live in the past, and they just don’t 
want to be seemed to be to come forward. 
 
And housing is a typical example because it is the small-business 
community after all, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to build this 
housing. I suppose if they were here, maybe not. Maybe we would 
have the . . . .along with the Sask Housing corporation, we would 
have the Saskatchewan whatever corporation building all these 
things for people. And pretty soon that part of the free enterprise 
system would be gone too. And you know, they would be building 
their homes for everybody, and whether you’re a senior or 
whatever, whether it’s your first-time buyer or whatever, you 
might have to deal with the government to get your home built. 
 
Seniors don’t quite see it that way. and I can tell you that through 
this innovation process, Mr. Speaker, some of the proponents of 
last year’s projects were there. and they just couldn’t say enough 
good things about it. and they were just so pleased with how it was 
going. And now as they look at this new situation that we are 
trying to establish, they’re wondering if they can qualify for more 
units because they would like to proceed even further. 
 
Well we explained to them that it was going to be an innovative 
type of a concept and certainly we would be prepared to share 
their ideas along with all the other ideas that we had, keeping in 
mind that the enriched housing is necessary throughout the entire 
province, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to try and be fair about 
that. We will allocate these units throughout the province as we 
have done for the last four or five years. 
 
And strangely enough, I recall very vividly in 1982, Mr. Speaker, 
when I happened to be the caucus chairman for the government. 
And as we went out and we started our  
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1018 
 

consultations early, we held caucus outside of Regina and the like. 
And as we were going to different communities, there was a 
horrendous line-up for these senior projects all over the province, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s all I ever heard was: when can we get a 
seniors’ unit? When can we get a seniors’ unit? No matter where 
we went. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we move around, that isn’t the case. But the 
opposite is true. The seniors come up to us and say: boy, you’re 
doing a magnificent job. We’re sure happy that we’ve got these 
units, whether they be six or eight or four in the smaller centers. 
We’re just delighted that we can live with our friends. They’re 
going through all . . . there they go again, Mr. Speaker. I mean 
what can I tell you. But it’s true. As I travel around the province, 
that’s what they keep telling us, and how delighted they are, now 
when they see that they have this new opportunity. 
 
I was speaking to some administrators, Mr. Speaker, that looked at 
this new innovative process, and said, well, we only need two 
units, two seniors’ units in our little town. Can we qualify under 
your program? Certainly, you can, just come up with a good idea. 
Consult with us. Talk to us. We’re willing to listen. We’re willing 
to work with you. 
 
So, having made those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, and having 
addressed most of the problems, I believe, that originally came up, 
obviously I will support the original motion. I really can’t see the 
purpose of the amendment. 
 
And I see now this letter that was handed to me by the member 
from Athabasca originally, and it’s true, it is some four months 
old. But if you check it, you can see that I had already responded 
to it in prior correspondence. But none the less, if he needs another 
response, I can repeat the letter, and I will respond to him very 
shortly. 
 
But in any event, Mr. Speaker, I do thank you for the opportunity 
of speaking about what our government has done for the seniors, 
and what our government will continue to do for the seniors. 
There is no question that the seniors will enjoy the benefits of the 
home improvement program, whether they be on low income or 
whether they are in a position of retirement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The home program is for everybody in this province, and it 
doesn’t matter whether their budgets be large or small. It’s an all-
encompassing program that the seniors can qualify for. There is no 
question that it will go on and do the job that it’s deigned to do. It 
will help our economy; it will create jobs; it will assist the seniors 
in repairing their homes and the like. 
 
I have spoken at a little length on our enriched housing units. 
There is no question that it’s just a tremendous success . The 
seniors in our province really appreciate that. They will continue 
to appreciate it even more as our innovative ‘87 gets on. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we do go through our estimates, we will see 
that the seniors’ heritage program will once again be back in place. 
And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the seniors, throughout the 
entire province,  

will be just delighted with that news. 
 
And I can assure my member friend from Athabasca, yes, I will 
continue to consult with the people from the North. I will continue 
to visit the people from the North. I will continue to visit the 
people from the North, and I will continue to respond to your 
inquiries, Mr. Speaker, I stand in support of the original motion. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I stand in opposition to the original 
motion and in support of the amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just came in from northern Saskatchewan over the 
weekend, and I did have a good chance to talk with some seniors 
in regards particularly to the issue of housing that is being talked 
about in the motion and the amendment. 
 
(1645) 
 
And I would like to say, in a couple of minutes, what they have 
told me. And Mr. Speaker, in due respect to them, I will speak in a 
couple of minutes in the way that they have expressed to me here 
over this weekend and also in the past, you know, few months in 
regards to the housing. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
So I guess, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the translation, what the 
elders in northern Saskatchewan have told me in regards to the 
housing issue is one where that they recognize it is not a 
completely new problem, you know, throughout history, but what 
it does prove is that at particular points in history the situation 
becomes worse. 
 
In the minds of the elders that I’ve talked to, they pin-point two 
periods of time history — one in the 1930s and also in the 1980s. 
As I talked with particularly the Cree of Sandy Bay in relation to 
the housing that took place in the 1930s, for historical reference 
points, they stated that they saw the Churchill River Power 
Corporation come in to their community at Island Falls and it was 
being built, and they said the government was working close in 
hand with a big corporation, with a new corporation to establish 
the housing. 
 
They said there was brand-new houses in Island Falls, 
approximately 40 were built. They had electricity, running water; 
they had all the modern goods. And in relation to that facility, they 
had even recreation-type building. They had a swimming pool. 
They had all types of recreational facilities, including the golf 
course and so on. And there was great help, according to the 
elders, in regards to the help for people that were working at the 
corporate level, you know, versus they who had to live 
downstream from the Island Falls town. 
 
They said they were not allowed to live in those houses, and other 
people who came to live there moved into those houses. And they 
said they had to be able to take the lumber that was the remains of 
the blasting of the dam, you know, to build their houses, while 
everybody had, you know, brand-new houses, you know, from 
across. 
 
And they said that was the very first time in history that we 
realized that a government can only back up the big  
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1019 
 

business interest, not only in regards to development, but in 
regards to housing. So here it was. Just one and half miles 
downstream they had to build their own house, while at the same 
time across they had knocked off all their best forests from that 
area to build the dam. But none of those that they helped chop 
down the trees — that they chopped down — was used to build 
their housing. And as talked with the seniors from northern 
Saskatchewan, that’s precisely what they talked about. They said 
there was one way of dealing with big business as it moved into 
the North in the 1930s, and another way of dealing with the people 
when they were around, at that point in time. 
 
As I talked with them over the weekend, the seniors also 
mentioned, they said: the government says that it comes here and 
consult us. And I again, of course, overhead the minister from 
Regina South say that he comes into the North, but he must be 
talking about Regina North because the people weren’t talking 
about the minister. I don’t know where the consultation comes. 
What they said was it wasn’t only a question of consultation that 
they were worried about. As I heard the minister say, we have 
housing for everybody in this province. But what the elders were 
telling me is that, look at those fancy houses with electricity, 
running water. Even in 1980s we don’t have electricity and 
running water in a lot of our housing in northern Saskatchewan, 
and they’ve been having this since 1930s. 
 
So what they have been telling me was an important lesson in 
history. In 1980s again the same situation occurs, they said. Now 
they say, they’re just big-shot that is moving in from the United 
States, you know, taking over our forests. They took over our 
forests here, in around Island Falls, in the 1930s. Now they’re 
taking over our forests again. 
 
That lumber they’re using, you know, helps them out more than 
we. They’ve got big fancy buildings in P.A. and all that, but what 
are we left? Some of us are still living in slab housing in northern 
Saskatchewan. We have to work very hard to build our log cabins. 
But what do they give the large-scale corporations? They give 
them big fancy buildings. They say we can see them from miles 
and miles as we go into P.A. or elsewhere. 
 
And they said, we wouldn’t feel so bad because we could get jobs 
from that. But they said, we haven’t got jobs from those. Very few 
of us are working, you know, in the forestry industry. Very few of 
us are working at the pulp mill. They said, they promised us jobs. 
They said they would encourage this new boss called 
Weyerhaeuser to encourage us for employment. They said, we 
don’t see too many of that. 
 
The other thing in regards to the housing, as the member from 
Regina South has said, is that it’s affordable. Of course it’s 
affordable when you give it free to the multinational corporations. 
But in many cases as I talked to the elders they were saying, our 
families were being pressured out of their homes in this past year. 
 
And I had letters. They were being threatened to be removed from 
their housing. Three families in one house moving in and the 
government wants them to keep paying for them on a daily basis. 
But the seniors said,  

what is wrong here? what is wrong with this government that has 
one law and one method of dealing with housing for big-scale 
corporations and other one for dealing with seniors and our 
children. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — As I looked at the senior repair program that was 
cut — $5 million was cut back. And the effect, of course — 
whatever little that had come into the North is even greater for us 
in the North. In many cases that home repair program and 
programs like that, the housing program, which was virtually 
stopped in 1982, is something that is very important for our 
children but it doesn’t . . . it has been terminated and eliminated, 
virtually. 
 
What the seniors have told me is this; if only this government 
could treat us fairly. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — If only they could provide the support services 
right in the North, and not only for the people who live . . . from 
United Sates or elsewhere who come into our area. 
 
We want the support, you know, right for our children in the 
North, is what the people are saying. 
 
As I talked to one other senior, they said, did you know that one of 
our seniors died in P.A. last year? The senior had died in a home 
in P.A. They said, why don’t they bring those homes into the 
North, right in northern Saskatchewan where we can take care of 
our elders right in the community level? Whey do we have to 
move them into P.A.? Why does this government not change its 
policy and work with us in the same way that they say they will 
work for everybody? And by everybody, they mean only big 
business. If they did that, we would be dealing with it, and felt that 
we were justly treated. 
 
But right now the way it is, Mr. Speaker, the way it is . . . This 
government brags, but I’ll tell you something. As a person coming 
from northern Saskatchewan, they can’t brag nothing. In the past 
five years we’ve been just cut back and sliced back on everything, 
including seniors’ housing and all kinds of housing. We expect 
jobs from that, and we get nothing. 
 
Just slowly but surely, everything is being knocked back. And the 
seniors are telling me, make sure that that message is heard to the 
government that is in power; make sure that they have a little bit of 
sympathy, a little bit of justice and fairness for us and our children 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So that’s the message I leave with the government, Mr. Speaker, I 
support the amendment, and go against the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will have a 
good deal more to say on this at a later point in time, and as such I 
would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
  



 
July 7, 1987 

1020 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


