













































August 20, 1987 Debates


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 20, 1987 

 

 

1925 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, 

and through you, an honourable gentleman sitting in the Speaker's 

gallery. I'm referring to Steve West, who's a member of the 

Legislative Assembly from Alberta, for the Vermilion and district 

constituency. 

 

And I might also say, Steve is a personal friend of mine and a 

colleague who practised the art and science of veterinary medicine 

for a number of years before he came the PC member for 

Vermilion in the last Alberta election, a very fine gentleman doing 

a very fine job for the people of Alberta in his constituency. 

 

And I would ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to join 

with me in welcoming Dr. West to the Assembly here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and 

through you to the members of the Legislative Assembly, a 

delegation from the R.M. of Sliding Hills, headed by their reeve, 

John Gorchynski, and accompanied by their administrator, a man 

well known to every, I believe, every member of this legislature, 

the former hon. Adolph Matsalla, who is the administrator . . . or 

their retiring administrator of their R.M. 

 

And I would like you to all express a real welcome to the 

delegation, and I'd ask them to stand, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Collection Agents for Sask Power 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for Tourism and Small Business, and it deals, Mr. 

Minister, with your government's decision to dump the 

Saskatchewan drug stores and other small businesses as collection 

agents for SPC. This anti-small-business decision will mean, and 

I'm sure you know, lost revenue for many retailers involved, as 

well as lost convenience for SPC's many customers. 

 

Mr. Minister, surely you're aware that as collection agents, 

small-business people were able to draw many customers to their 

stores. And I want you to answer the questions that the minister 

took notice of yesterday, and I want to know: why did your 

government dump them with less than a month's notice? And I 

also want to know why your government didn't consult with those 

business people before you made that decision. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it's very evident 

that the question that the member is asking should be directed to 

my colleague, the minister in  

charge of Sask Power. They made the decision to change. I heard 

the minister in the House yesterday explain that in areas where 

there is an access to a bank or a credit union, that arrangements 

would be made. 

 

I hear the members on the other side of the House mention to the 

minister the other day about an overpayment to the Moose Jaw 

Times-Herald, or something of this nature, at one hand saying: 

SPC, watch your costs; cut back on any excessive costs. And 

when the minister comes forward with some type of an 

explanation and a type of new agenda that will, in his words, save 

about $200,000, it seems that the members opposite are against 

that. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask the members opposite: which 

way do you want it? Do you want SPC to be spending more 

money, or do you want them to be saving money? That is the 

question. I'd like the member to address that. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the same 

minister. Mr. Minister, your responsibility is to protect and to look 

after the business community, and you sit around the same cabinet 

table with the Premier and with the minister that made that 

decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I want you to answer to this House, when 

$200,000 worth of revenue is pulled from the hands of the 

small-business community, you sit there and say nothing; you 

justify the decision. I want to know how you can justify it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I'm very pleased that the member asked me 

the question of what we are doing in regard to small business in 

this province. And I will indicate to you, and I will indicate to you 

some of the initiatives. 

 

I heard him ask the minister in charge of Sask Power yesterday: 

what are you doing for small business? Well I'm pleased to tell 

you what we're doing for small business. I will tell you that this 

government has brought in, and the Leader of the Opposition can 

pay attention to this, a regulatory reform commission that has 

stricken over 1,400 useless regulations off the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Final supplementary. Mr. Minister, you 

have not answered the question. I asked you how you justify your 

cabinet and your government's decision, as the Minister of 

Tourism and Small Business, the taking of $200,000 of income 

from the small businesses, that you as minister are supposed to be 

protecting, and which clearly you aren't. We want an answer; we 

don't want a speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I'd be more than pleased to answer. I 

will tell you what we do with the decisions that  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1926 

 

we make at the cabinet table. This government has decided, in the 

interest of small business, to peg the interest rates in this province. 

That's what we did to help small business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — This government instituted business 

resource centres, street-side centres where small businesses can 

come in and get the help that they need to run their businesses 

correctly. Those are the things they we do. Those are the kind of 

decisions made at the cabinet table of the Devine government. 

 

I know he doesn't . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Next 

question. 

 

 Licensing of Saskatchewan Power Corporation's Vehicles 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). And, 

Madam Minister, your government keeps claiming that SPC 

(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) has to cut expenses, whenever 

possible, so these commissioned collection agents had to go. 

 

My question to you, Madam Minister, is: can you confirm that 

SPC fleet of vehicles, which used to be licensed through SGI's 

head office so there would be no commissions, are now being 

licensed through a private insurance firm, McAra/Olson, where 

there will be commissions? Can you confirm that? 

 

And if you can confirm that, Madam Minister, why do those 

commissions cause your government . . . why do they not cause 

your government the same problem as the commissions being paid 

to Saskatchewan drug stores and Saskatchewan small-business 

men and women? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I can neither confirm nor 

deny whether or not SPC is still getting their licenses from head 

office or from a private insurer. I'm sorry. 

 

Proposed National Beef Stabilization Plan 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Agriculture and it deals with the announcement earlier 

this year that the government would phase out the Saskatchewan 

beef stabilization plan and join the national tripartite beef 

stabilization plan. While we certainly, in principle, support the 

idea of a national beef stabilization plan, we feel there are some 

shortcomings to the plan. A couple of the main ones that the beef 

producers are concerned about would be the cost of production 

formula that isn't reflected in the national plan, and where the 

administration offices are going to be, whether it's going to be 

done from Ottawa or some place in western Canada, and 

preferably in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I was wondering, have you convinced the federal  

government and the other provincial governments of these 

shortcomings, along with others, and will you announce the terms 

and conditions of entry into the national beef stabilization program 

in this legislature before you commit Saskatchewan producers to 

the national beef stabilization plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is 

accurate in terms of the broad support for a national stabilization 

plan. The pork producers have joined, basically across the country, 

and certainly in the province of Saskatchewan, with about a 

five-year phase-in of the federal plan and a five-year phase-out of 

the provincial plan. 

 

The beef one is a little bit more complicated. In the last ministers 

of Agriculture meeting in Quebec City about a month ago we 

made two agreements. One was that we set up an agreement that 

we would work towards a fair set of programs in Canada that 

would respect our international obligations under GATT (General 

Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) and OECD (Organization for 

Economic Co-operation and Development) principles. 

 

Now while that was nice in theory, and we all wanted to work 

towards that, it was recognized that in the interim we have some 

provinces joined the national program and some haven't, and 

because of some of the concerns that you have raised in terms of 

various provinces provide different kinds of income to their 

farmers — there's top loading and bottom loading and various 

kinds of cost things that they do with respect to grain, and we have 

some tax advantages, and so forth. 

 

We agreed that by November of this year we would put all the 

provinces together and then we would strike a method whereby 

we could all join the program, knowing that there would have to 

be probably a little bit of water in everybody's wine to get 

everybody on board and then move towards the gradual consensus 

that we agreed that we should have as a national body and as a 

country. 

 

So we're in that process now, and each province is looking at 

different ways that it can support its producers, yet we want a 

national plan. Each province defends its own way to protect their 

producers. So it's to find that balance and that compromise that 

would allow us all to work towards a national plan but to get us on 

board so in fact we don't have major provinces, producing 

provinces, outside the plan altogether. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned, 

two shortcomings that are of particular concern are the cost of 

production formula, and where the administration offices are 

going to be for the plan. And certainly producers don't want the 

administration offices to be in Ottawa or Toronto or in Halifax or 

Charlottetown; they want those offices to be in western Canada, 

and preferably in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: what representations 

have you made to the federal government and to the other 

provinces in support of those, at least  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1927 

 

those two shortcomings? What have you done on behalf of 

Saskatchewan producers in making that representation known? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — One of the most difficult problems, as I'm 

sure you're aware of, is the arguments about cost of production. 

And when we deal with provinces like Quebec and Ontario versus, 

say, the West, they strongly support cost of production formulas, 

say, in the province of Quebec, that said that their costs are higher; 

therefore they have to have a higher stabilization and higher 

subsidies. And I say to them, we have some comparative and 

competitive advantage here in western Canada. 

 

We could make the same argument for, I suppose, some place, 

you know, in the Northwest Territories. We could say the cost of 

production is very high; therefore, we need very high subsidies 

and we should encourage cattle production outside the major areas 

where, in theory and reality, we know that they should be. 

 

So what I'm saying to you is: we've got to be careful with this 

argument about cost of production. Because once we put it in and 

lock it in, then somebody can drift along outside of Montreal and 

say, my costs are very high because of real estate and urban 

pressures; therefore I deserve more subsidies — and all the beef 

and the hogs get produced in Quebec as opposed to in the West 

where they should be. 

 

So we've got to be careful with that. We're trying to deal with it, to 

make sure that we can get as much basic fundamental economics 

in this national program so that the beef and the cattle are 

produced here where we have the feed grain supplies. 

 

With respect to the administration, I agree with you. The more 

administration we can have here, as opposed to central Canada or 

eastern Canada, the better it is. We have, as well, had some pretty 

interesting discussions about where that should be. The federal 

government, obviously, is most comfortable with the 

administration around Ottawa. The provinces are more 

comfortable in the regions, so that debate continues. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Well we do have a cost production formula 

under the Saskatchewan beef stabilization plan and I think that 

Saskatchewan beef producers are quite happy with that cost of 

production formula. And what they're saying to you, I'm sure, 

because they're saying it to me and members on this side of the 

House, is that they don't want you putting them into a national 

program that is not as good as the provincial program they're 

already in even though, in principle, they support the national 

program. 

 

My question to you is that before you disestablish the 

Saskatchewan beef stabilization plan is: will you assure beef 

producers that you will report, through this legislature, a detailed 

comparison of what producers would receive under the 

Saskatchewan plan as opposed to the national tripartite beef 

stabilization plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'd just remind the hon. 

member, we can have a cost of production here and farmers may 

like it here. But if you allow the same sort of formula to apply 

across Canada, you are going to get tremendous incentives to 

produce beef in other parts of the country because they'll wade in 

with their cost of production, which is much higher, which 

encourages them to have more subsidy and therefore, as we saw in 

the pork business, frankly they stole a whole bunch of the pork 

productivity in production from the west into the province of 

Quebec and in Ontario and so forth. So it's a two-edged sword. 

 

When we have that formula, we can be comfortable with it here. 

But if we say those are the rules and then they applied the same 

rules, obviously you get treasury fighting treasury. And we don't 

want the Quebec treasury taking on the Saskatchewan treasury 

when it comes to livestock production. 

 

So I would say that we're familiar with those. We want to be 

careful when we state these are going to be the rules because 

obviously you know that other provinces can play by the same 

rules. You have to be sure that you are going to make sure that this 

province and other jurisdictions are going to play fairly when you 

start to put those rules into place. 

 

Grants to Buffalo Narrows Pharmacy Ltd. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I direct my 

question to the minister in charge of Tourism and Small Business. 

And it has to do with your government's heavy financial support 

for a company called the Buffalo Narrows Pharmacy Ltd. which 

received a number of government grants to open and operate three 

small drug stores in northern Saskatchewan at Buffalo Narrows, 

La Loche, and Ile-a-la-Crosse. In just over three years this 

company has received more than $300,000 in grants and other 

payments from your government. 

 

Now the company has pulled out of Ile-a-la-Crosse. But your 

government says it won't have to give back any of the money 

Saskatchewan taxpayers gave it — money specifically to open and 

operate the three drug stores in northern Saskatchewan, and one is 

now closed. Can the minister tell us how, in a period of 

government restraint, this one small company was able to collect 

more than $300,000 in government grants and payments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I recall when I was the 

minister of Health in the government, that there was a request 

brought by the member opposite and many of the people in that 

area for pharmacy services of the north-west side of 

Saskatchewan, mainly Buffalo Narrows, La Loche and 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. 

 

And there was a company that was willing to come in there and 

start a pharmacy and a dispensary, which they did do. Now there 

were certain grants that they were available for, and I know that 

they accessed those. I'd have to take notice of just the exact 

amount and where the grants came from and get back. I don't want 

to mislead  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1928 

 

the member or the House. I think it's only reasonable that one 

would look at where all these grants came from if they . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The member's taken notice. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — New question, Mr. Minister, to the Minister 

of Tourism and Small Business. Most certainly they would be 

willing to come in with the type of financial assistance that you 

gave them. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, in 1984-85, Public Accounts show the 

Department of Tourism and Small Business provided $120,000. In 

1985-86, Public Accounts show the Department of Tourism and 

Small Business provided the company with $60,000 in northern 

economic development grants, while the Department of Health 

provided more than $30,000 in operating grants. A letter you sent 

to me on August 5 — and this is a letter I received from the 

minister of Health, Mr. Minister, now — shows that the 

Department of Health, that they gave them another $30,000 in the 

past two budget years. 

 

Can you explain how this small company was able to collect more 

than the $300,000 in taxpayers in a period of restraint, especially 

when these pharmacies created only three new jobs in total? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said to the member 

previously, there's an awful lot of figures and grants here, and I 

will look into those and report back to the member. I think it goes 

without saying though, if the member realizes, having represented 

that area for a long time, that there have been many businesses in 

the North, if we look back in the last 10 years, that had 

considerable seed money and then failed. So I'd like . . . 

 

Threatened Railway Work Stoppage 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

Premier. Mr. Premier the movement of Saskatchewan grain and 

other commodities is being threatened at the moment by the 

possibility of a work stoppage as a result of a dispute between the 

two railways and their employees. The Premier will know, Mr. 

Speaker, how devastating to our farmers and others in 

Saskatchewan a work stoppage in our rail system would be, and 

Saskatchewan agriculture obviously cannot stand that additional 

problem. 

 

I'm sure the Premier is following the situation closely and I 

wonder if he could tell the House: what is the nub of the issue that 

is dividing the parties in their contract negotiations? As of today, 

how far do they remain apart in their respective positions? And 

what useful assistance is being offered to the parties, or provided 

to the parties, by the Government of Canada to bring that dispute 

to a settlement without a work stoppage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that question would be 

best answered by the Minister of Labour for Canada who is 

probably involved to some extent in the negotiations. I  

haven't been privy to the negotiations. I can say that I have written 

to the Minister of Labour advising him how serious it is to have a 

strike, and I can read the letter, but I won't at this time, but I have 

done that. 

 

I have talked with the Deputy Prime Minister about it, Minister 

McKnight, and they are all fully aware of the fact that we cannot 

have a sustained strike in this country when it comes to the 

movement of grain, because not only farmers, but many, many 

people in the whole food business have a livelihood that depends 

on transportation. 

 

So we have made solid and continual representation to the 

ministers at the national level with respect to the details of the 

negotiations. I can only say that the best person to contact would 

be the Minister of Labour for the federal Government of Canada. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, because of the gravity of this issue 

for Saskatchewan, because of the gravity of this issue for 

Saskatchewan, I wonder if the Premier would undertake to contact 

counterparts in the federal government to determine for this House 

a detailed report on where this situation stands. Hopefully that 

information could be available by tomorrow. 

 

And in terms of the representations that the Premier has made to 

the Government of Canada, has he also indicated that in the event 

that the negotiations should fail, that the province of Saskatchewan 

would be anxious to see the Government of Canada assume its 

responsibilities and be prepared to move with legislation if that is 

the only possibility of resolving this matter, and keeping the grain 

moving for our farmers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — To address the last question first, I would 

certainly, and I have recommended to the federal government, that 

they take whatever action is necessary to keep the grain moving. 

I've encouraged them to do exactly that, to take every effort to 

make sure that we don't have a strike. 

 

With respect to the negotiations, I'm sure we could have a report 

this hour and then we could have a report another hour, and 

another day, because it's a fluid situation. There are two or three 

issues that the people are bargaining about, and it is a fluid 

situation. I can certainly attempt, if you like, to get an update as to 

where the negotiations are. 

 

I'm not so sure that either side will provide us with a great deal of 

statistical evidence, but if there's something that I can get from our 

federal counterparts that would provide any insight, we could. At 

the same time, I don't want to inflame the situation by speaking 

about something that perhaps we don't have all the information 

about. 

 

Disturbance at Pine Grove Correctional Centre 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that we'll give 

the Minister of Justice an opportunity finally to be recognized, as 

he's trying to do today. 

 

My question concerns the disturbance at the Pine Grove 

Correctional Centre for women which took place on  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1929 

 

Sunday night. One of the problems that I've been trying to impress 

on the minister for the past several months is the extent of the 

overcrowding that has been taking place at Pine Grove. A facility 

that's designed for 52 people has had occupancy up as high as 80, 

and this of course creates a real problem, not only for the inmates 

but for the correctional workers who work there, and for their 

safety. 

 

My question for the minister is: what do you plan to do about it, 

and when do you plan to do it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I referred to the hon. member's question 

when we were dealing in estimates, and yesterday as well, Mr. 

Speaker, I took notice of a question from the hon. member from 

Saskatoon Fairview . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I must . . . Order, please. Order, 

please. I think that the minister first of all has to address the 

question. And I don't feel that the reading of a notice of a previous 

question . . . that may or may not address it. So I ask the minister 

first to address that question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with regards to the question 

posed by the hon. member from Saskatoon Fairview, I undertake 

to the House, Mr. Speaker, that we have been looking at the 

overcrowding situation; we have been looking at perhaps building 

some half-way houses in the province to cover some of that 

situation, and we will deal with it hopefully in those terms. 

 

While I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I took notice yesterday of a 

question by the hon. member from Saskatoon Fairview. Among 

those questions that he asked was: was the disturbance caused by 

the fact that the inmate at Pine Grove was the mother of the two 

young children who were killed in a house fire at Vibank last 

week. 

 

The answer to that question is no. And let me further add this to it. 

A week or so ago in this House, with such indignation, the 

members opposite criticized the Minister of Social Services for a 

statement he made. I think you obviously should apologize to this 

House, but also to the mother or a person who has just lost two 

children in a fire. To then on province-wide television somehow 

suggest that she was in jail at the time of the fire, it's tough enough 

for a mother to lose two children in a fire without also being 

accused of being in jail at the time when she wasn't, when she was 

home with her children who unfortunately died. And I think that is 

a poor way to deal with questions in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, the minister feigned a good deal of 

indignation there which I don't think he felt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — He knew that I asked him to confirm whether or 

not that was the fact, and he's confirmed that that wasn't the fact. 

And I'm glad to hear it. 

 

But while we're on the subject, let's talk about the lack of  

any kind of meaningful training or educational or recreational 

facilities at Pine Grove, again a prime cause for tension because of 

the boredom and the frustration felt by the inmates there. I'd like to 

ask the minister: when are adequate training and educational and 

recreational facilities going to be provided for the Pine Grove 

Correctional Centre? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the same question was posed 

in estimates the other night. I indicated to the hon. member that in 

fact the Pine Grove inmates are now able to go to the men's 

institution to study carpentering and to study motor mechanics. 

There is also a part-time secretary there. 

 

And while I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a second 

question yesterday from the hon. member, that somehow the 

disturbance was caused by overcrowding. The disturbance in this 

situation was caused by the fact that four inmates had about a 

month earlier taken some people hostage. That was dealt with. 

They were dealt with by the court and the court extended their 

sentence. 

 

The institution further indicated to them that they would serve 20 

hours in lock-up. These particular four people along with four 

others decided that that was being unfair to them, and as a result 

they once again took the law into their own hands. They caused 

some damage to the facilities there. 

 

Now I would suggest to you that you should not say that is the 

cause of a shortage of people working there or an inadequacy of 

space. People that do that, that take hostages, that do not respect 

the law, that are dealt with by authorities, I think we should stand 

in support of the authorities and not stand always in support of the 

criminal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure-Vote 20 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Would the minister introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I have 

with me today, seated to my left, the deputy minister of the 

department, Phil Richards; the assistant deputy minister of Human 

Resources and Employment, Judy Moore, to my right; the director 

of administrative services, Pat More, my extreme left, I guess; the 

assistant deputy minister of the department with respect to labour, 

Gerry Meier, directly behind me. We also have in the Chamber, 

Janet McGregor, director of the women's . . .  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1930 

 

women's director; Carol Klassen, assistant director, occupational 

health and safety; Dave Argue, executive director, policy planning 

and research; Rick Pawliw, director of youth services; and Leah 

Siebold, the employment equity co-ordinator. 

 

As you can see, Mr. Chairman, we have a new department here 

which is composed of five divisions: the labour division — which 

is more or less self-explanatory, and covers the former department 

of labour with the exception of the safety services branch which 

has been moved to Environment. In addition, we have the 

Indian-Métis affairs branch which deals with the aboriginal people 

of Saskatchewan. We also have the women's division which deals 

with women's issues. We have the senior's division which was 

formerly in the department of social services and has now moved 

into the Human Resources department. And we have the youth 

and employment division. 

 

So we have five divisions or branches of this new department. It 

has been interesting in the past six months or eight months to get 

this new department started. It has been quite a challenge for my 

staff. You can see that we have a good mixture of both men and 

women in management in this new department. And we have been 

able to get the department rolling. We hope to do more in the next 

few months. Initially, in the first eight months, we have spent time 

organizing the department from an administrative point of view, 

and we expect to take some new initiatives in many of the 

branches in the next year to come. 

 

With that, Mr. Chairman, we are prepared to answer the questions 

of the opposition. And we expect that today should be a fruitful 

day, and not . . . there should be not be too much acrimony in the 

Chamber. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Chairman, I'll be directing my questions in 

regards to the division, the new division that was changed from 

Indian and native secretariat to the . . . I suppose a division . . . I 

don't know precisely the new name they may call it. 

 

First of all, a bit of historical background in regards to the 

establishment of the Indian and native secretariat by the PC 

government in 1983, and its disestablishment in 1987, this year. 

The whole process of this establishment and disestablishment, to 

me, is a re-creation of the traditional colonialism that we thought 

we were getting away from in the 1960s and the '70s. That, in fact, 

this period in history from 1982 to '87 marks a period of the return 

of colonial policy as far as provincial relationships go in regards to 

Indian and Métis people in this province. 

 

One must look at the history of the province of Saskatchewan in 

regards to the policy development . In the late '60s the Liberal 

government created a bona fide department, an Indian-Métis 

department. At that time they were intent on trying to resolve 

some of the outstanding issues in, especially, the socio-economic 

realm. A lot of the people during that period in time saw a tiny bit 

of progress being made, especially in regards to the establishment 

of the supernumerary program and trying to get Indian-Métis 

people into at least the civil service of the system. And I think they 

utilize words such  

as "shadow positions", and so on. 

 

But when you look at it in '87, and you turn back the clock back in 

'83, one looks at the PC approach to the problem. Some of the 

reaction during that period in time, in the late '60s, was that we 

were trying to create an Indian affairs at the provincial level. And 

many people were dissatisfied with that approach. 

 

Then in '83, without any consultation, or with very little 

consultation of Indian-Métis people, the Indian and native 

secretariat was established by this government. And when you 

look back at that Act which was basically, again, for the 

socio-economic development, one looked at key phrases in there 

and basically it was one where people could only give advice but 

not be involved in the real decisions, you know, that affected their 

lives. 

 

The Indian and native secretariat, the PC approach, became to be 

not only a provincial Indian affairs motto, it became to be a poor 

Indian affairs motto, basically because it did not only have real 

departmental status, it had a sub-status. It became only a 

secretariat. A secretariat does not have the same impact as a 

department. 

 

But to make things worse, in 1987, again without the consultation 

or with very little consultation of people, of Indian—Métis people, 

you not only bring down the stature of the relationships out of 

your dealings with Indian and Métis people, you now make it into 

a subdivision. You make it into a part of the division of Human 

Resources, Labour and Employment, which gives it a very 

different view. 

 

At least in the other prior approaches there was recognition that 

the Indian and Métis issue was not only one of Human Resources, 

Labour and Employment — that we were not only a cheap source 

of labour in this province, that in fact there was also the substantial 

issue of self-determination, Indian government and Métis 

self-government that was missing by the downgrading of the 

significance in regards to the PC approach. 

 

When I mentioned at the beginning that indeed this 1987 

approach, when you look at the historical development of federal 

and provincial relationships with Indian and Métis people, one has 

to look at it with extreme suspicion; that when I said that it was a 

colonial approach, I meant it with the deepest sincerity. When it 

was formed at the initial stages in '83, there was a reluctance to 

deal with the provincial Indian-Métis organizations. There was a 

lot of rhetoric in going to the grass roots level. The facts that I will 

provide for you today will show you that that has not indeed 

happened. 

 

The approach that I saw in the early 1980s, when you first came 

in, and in relationship to this '87 approach that you've taken, is one 

where you used the same old colonial strategy of divide and rule. 

And you've tried to do it, as I will point out later on, in your 

economic development approaches and also in the funding 

systems that you have taken away. 

 

(1445) 

 

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1931 

 

So this whole era of the PC form of colonialism at a time when we 

have recognized certain basic principles in Canada, and even its 

recognition in the constitutional talks — although very little had 

been done — is that the 1987 downgrading of your approach to 

making Indian-Métis people just a division of Human Resources, 

Labour and Employment is a reflection of your own contempt that 

you've shown and that you've practised in your relationships to 

Indian-Métis people in this province. 

 

My first question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: in light of the 

developments, and of course being part of this developmental 

process yourself, what did you see in this new division that you 

have created as just a division? In what ways is this new division 

to be a more effective strategy in dealing with the issues of Indian 

and Métis people? Could you tell me that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite refers 

to a colonial policy, and if there ever was one, and I expect there 

might have been at some time in the past, certainly our 

government has done everything possible to avoid that type of a 

policy. 

 

Our government has placed a great emphasis on economic 

development. We have done a great deal to help Indian and Métis 

people be self-sufficient, self-reliant, and help themselves. And we 

will do everything possible to assist your people in finding ways 

of helping yourselves to become self-sufficient as you once were. 

And that has many elements. It has money for economic 

development, it has education, and it has changes in the way the 

province and the country of Canada deal with Indian and Métis 

people. 

 

Now, it's examples of the changes that have been made to allow 

your people to run their own affairs. The first example that comes 

to mind is the Lebret Métis farm, which is in my constituency. 

And this is a large tract of land north of Lebret which has been 

given to your people, to the Métis foundation, to run for the 

benefit of your people. 

 

And this was not unanimous in my constituency. There were those 

people who felt that it should be sold. And I took a very strong 

position, before I was minister, that that land belonged to the Métis 

people of the area, and that land should go back to be used for 

their benefit. And I said that we had to do what was fair. So I did 

not do what maybe was popular among all of the people, but we 

did what was fair. 

 

And when you look at the community of Lebret, it is taking a 

while for the people of Lebret to realize that this is a fair and 

reasonable thing to do, but gradually the attitudes are changing. 

And they're changing their view from government dependency to 

self-sufficiency. And this was not totally expressed in Lebret in the 

last election, but we did the right thing anyway. And you can 

hardly say that the Lebret Métis farm was any form of patronage 

when we gave the Métis farm to people who do not ordinarily 

support me politically. But we did it because it was the fair and 

correct thing to do — an example in my very own constituency. 

 

In addition, the federal government and the provincial government 

are co-operating with the treaty Indians to move toward 

self-government for your people. And you know very well that at 

Ochapowace reserve, which borders my constituency, and is in the 

constituency of Indian Head-Wolseley in the Qu'Appelle valley, 

that this reserve is now, at this very time, taking over the operation 

of their finances. and this year they will receive $1 million which 

the Department of Indian Affairs would have ordinarily spent on 

that reserve for services - -for roads, for education, for all the other 

things in administration of that Ochapowace Indian reserve. 

 

And the federal government is at this very time giving the band of 

Ochapowace reserve the million dollars and saying: here, you 

operate your reserve, and you spend that money as you see fit. 

You pick your priorities. You pick whether you're going to spend 

it on roads, or education, or welfare, or administration, or 

economic development within that reserve. 

 

That is a first example of how the future will be with respect to 

Indian people. And you will see Indian people deciding for 

themselves how they were going to spend the money that used to 

be decided by officials from Ottawa and, to some extent, 

provincial officials. So you are going to see changes. We are 

making changes, and you want to talk about the old ways of 

colonialism, then I suggest you are living in the past. We have to 

look at the future. And future is a partnership in this province 

between Indian and Métis people and all of the other citizens of 

this province so that we all work together for the benefit of the 

province and we will all benefit. 

 

With respect to Indian and Métis employees, for example, with the 

provincial government, you raised an indication that this 

government was not doing very much in that regard. Well on the 

contrary, first of all you have to take into account that there are 

qualifications for serving in the civil service and that in recent 

years the educational level of Indian and Métis people has been 

increasing at a very good rate. 

 

And therefore, from 1981 to the present, we've been able to double 

the number of Indian and Métis people working in the civil 

service. In 1981 it was 2.4 per cent. Today, or in June, the most 

recent statistics we have, it was 5.2 per cent in the civil service. 

And these are the people who are qualified to work in the civil 

service, and I think you will have to admit that a doubling during 

our administration of the number of Indian and Métis people 

working within the civil service is a very good record. 

 

In addition, you raised the question of self-government. And I 

think since we may be here for some time, I'll go into that later 

because I know you will want to speak about that more 

specifically. But certainly that issue is not dead as I've given you 

examples already of some self-government having started already 

as we speak. 

 

The question you are asking is: how will the new Department of 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment benefit Indian 

people, and why are they included in this particular department? 

Well this department generally covers groups of people in our  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1932 

 

society that have some special needs — that need some special 

attention; that need some special assistance: people who have 

peculiar circumstances that need to be addressed by the 

government, other than the circumstances of the public in general. 

 

And so in this case we have Indian and Métis people who need 

some assistance in their education, in their educational directives, 

the directions. Indian and Métis people need some assistance in 

acquiring jobs within the government, jobs in general, because 

there is a certain network of people out there, citizens in general, 

who have over generations acquired skills in how to look for a job, 

how to acquire a job, who to talk to. 

 

And there are special needs. And I think you will agree that this 

department that we now have that looks at the special needs of 

senior citizens, which includes Indian and Métis people; that looks 

at the special needs of women as a group, half of society, which 

includes, I presume, half of Indian and Métis people; that Indian 

and Métis people specifically, that the Department of Labour 

where Indian and Métis people are workers like anyone else, that 

is a very logical place to have the Indian and Métis branch in a 

department called Human Resources, Labour and Employment. 

 

And you will acknowledge that unemployment is a considerable 

problem among Indian and Métis people, more so than it is in the 

general population. So it seems to me it is a logical place, a 

department that pays particular attention to particular needs, that 

the Indian and Métis people of Saskatchewan should be in this 

department. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — You mentioned that one of your key goals in 

regards to this . . . to the working relationship with Indian and 

Métis people, in regards to this new division, was economic 

development. Why is it, Mr. Minister, that you have cut the budget 

of the Indian economic development program from 3 million to $1 

million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well this situation cannot be taken in 

isolation, of course. As the Indian and native . . . or Indian and 

Métis affairs branch of the provincial government, we are really 

only a tip of the iceberg of the whole area of Indian and Métis 

affairs. And I do acknowledge that the federal minister is much 

more powerful, has a greater responsibility in this area, and a 

considerably greater budget. 

 

And so what we do with economic development in Saskatchewan 

is we try to supplement and use the money in the Saskatchewan 

budget as seed money. And recently, in the last few years, the 

federal department has put much more money into economic 

development. The federal department has budgeted $375 million 

for Indian and Métis economic development and, you know, 

recently have given over to the Saskatchewan Métis people $9 

million for economic development — a considerable sum of 

money. 

 

We have budgeted this year $1 million for economic development 

for treaty Indians, which are primarily a federal responsibility, but 

we wanted to provide some local assistance. And in addition we 

have a new half  

million dollars for the Métis people, which never existed before, 

which can be used to complement the $9 million that the federal 

government has put into this. 

 

All told, we have spent $7.7 million on economic development 

since we changed from paying money for Indian administration 

and local and provincial Indian politics to putting money into 

economic development. And when . . . I know you weren't part of 

the government, but I know that you were deeply involved in the 

NDP in the past and followed that closely. And I think you will 

find that the provincial government did not put money into 

economic development, but instead it was used for administration. 

 

And that may be money, and it may be $3 million, but I submit to 

you that economic development money is lasting money. 

Administration money is operating money that is spent from day 

to day and there's nothing to show for it. And what is there to 

show for the money that the NDP spent on administration in the 

old Indian department? There's nothing left to show for that 

administration money. Maybe there are books and records of 

account, and things of that nature, showing how the money was 

spent, but there was really nothing physically there. 

 

(1500) 

 

Now throughout the province you have Indian projects all over on 

Indian reserves, and we're trying to get some developed into the 

urban areas. And you have these projects that are in operation; you 

have sand and gravel companies; you have construction 

companies; the list goes on and on as to Indian economic 

development projects that are ongoing. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — You make a fairly big deal, Mr. Minister, about 

your one and a half million dollars for Indian and Métis economic 

development in this province. That figure amounts to $15 for 

every Indian and Métis person in this province. You're expecting 

an economic development fund of $15 per person — $15 per 

person. You make a big deal about this $15 per person. But that's 

what that one and a half million amounts to. 

 

You've just been through question period where your government 

just gave $300,000 for one person in getting a pharmacy going in 

northern Saskatchewan — one person. But yet for all of the Métis 

people in the province, as you state, you're only going to give 

500,000. 

 

Also the strategy is a lot more than meets the eye. One of the 

approaches of this government, as I mentioned earlier, was a 

divide and roll strategy. They took . . . my contention is this. There 

was $3 million in the Indian economic development program. You 

took $500,000 from that budget and put it under a native economic 

development fund, a provincial NEDP. Your strategy is one where 

you figure that Indian-Métis people will be fighting over the 

pittance that you're giving them throughout the province. When 

you look at the aspect of even Weyerhaeuser — you give 

Weyerhaeuser $8 million to build roads in northern Saskatchewan 

so that they can drive their trucks through the bush. You give them 

$8 million, just building roads, and yet a lot of  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1933 

 

Indian-Métis people will lose their lives travelling the roads of 

northern Saskatchewan. The roads have gone downhill in the past 

five years. 

 

When you look at the impact of your policy, it is not only one of 

trying to play your dividing role strategy, it's one of demeaning 

people at such a low rate. You talk a great line about what the 

previous . . . you seem to imply that the previous NDP 

government had a department or something. I must remind the 

minister, if he looks at the historical . . . since the NDP came in 

from '71 to '82, that there was no such thing as an Indian-Métis 

department, or an Indian-Métis secretariat, or an Indian-Métis 

subdivision of human resources, labour, and employment 

department. There was no such thing. 

 

You asked me whether or not the NDP provided grants to 

Indian-Métis organizations. You will have to know that during the 

period in time when the NDP came in, the policies to help 

Indian-Métis people formulate their own self-determination was 

the essential strategy of the NDP. They put money directly to the 

establishment, for example, of the Gabriel Dumont Institute under 

Métis and non-status Indian control, that very budget which you 

cut by 20 per cent this year. You're slowly tearing apart every 

major development that took place in the past 15 years. 

 

You ask me: how much on education? There was a budget put out 

during that period in time, and by the time '82 rolled around there 

was approximately four, five, six million being spent on education 

alone, from both federal and provincial funding systems. If you 

look at all that has happened within . . . something that was 

controlled by an aboriginal organization. There was definite 

development. In a period of a few years, I will remind the 

minister, that when aboriginal people do the initial formulations of 

self-government, whether it's through education, there is 

tremendous development. 

 

In a year, last year for example, the Saskatchewan Indian 

Federated College had approximately, through their Saskatchewan 

Indian Community College and Saskatchewan Indian Federated 

College system, they had about 700 students, both from the federal 

and provincial system. And that came out as a result of providing 

dollars to Indian-Métis organization so that they can directly 

control the funds and do their development . . . that is real 

self-sufficiency. 

 

What you propose, Mr. Minister, is to take that money away from 

the Indian-Métis people. You took $2 million alone from the 

Indian economic development fund this year, and that's the fact — 

two-thirds of it. If you took two-thirds of the economic 

development money that you give to all the businesses in this 

province, it would be an extremely tough situation. If you cut 

agricultural production in this province by two-thirds, we'd be in a 

worse mess than we already are in the way that you operate this 

province. 

 

The very basis of self-sufficiency, and I mean real self-sufficiency, 

where you put, number one, resources wherein aboriginal people, 

wherein Indian-Métis people, can make a strong, strong economic 

stand is something that you have taken away from Indian and 

Métis people. 

 

I will ask you a question, Mr. Minister, in regards to this Indian 

economy: how do you expect the 70 bands and about 100 Métis 

communities to be able to do proper economic development with 

$1.5 million? Could you tell me that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — First of all, Mr. Chairman, I should point 

out to the member opposite that the money that is spent by my 

department for economic development is different than other 

money spent by the government in economic development, in that 

all of it is paid out in grants, not loans, not forgivable grants or 

anything, but in outright grants as seed money to assist Indian and 

Métis people to establish businesses and create economic 

development on their reserves, in their communities, and 

throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

The member opposite is suggesting that somehow we have 

abandoned Indian and Métis people. I'm sure the member opposite 

is familiar with La Loche, Saskatchewan, as an example. This is a 

community in which last year the provincial government spent 

$13.2 million in a community of about 2,200 people for health, 

education, social services, municipal government, and all the 

needs of La Loche, Saskatchewan. 

 

The provincial government spends a considerable sum of money 

in many, many ways. And certainly when we continue to spend in 

health and education, and the costs of operating a community like 

La Loche at $3.2 million last year, certainly that is far from 

abandoning Indian and Métis people. 

 

Education is not specifically my department. However, this branch 

monitors all matters with respect to Indian and Métis people, and 

we feel that we are doing a very adequate and honourable job — 

in education, for example, where the provincial government spent 

on education and training $40 million last year on Indian and 

Métis people. 

 

And you have to keep in mind, Mr. Chairman, that treaty Indians 

and the education of treaty Indians is a federal responsibility, and 

they spend a considerable sum, in addition, on a per capita basis. 

This government has treated Indian and Métis people very well. 

I'm not saying that we won't try to do better in the future, but we 

feel that we have treated them very well and fair with respect to 

money. 

 

We also think there is room for improvement in assisting Indian 

and Métis people in education, in the education of administering 

their own affairs; in the education of production, of producing 

goods that they can sell. The members opposite have a great — 

and I think it's not too strong of a word to say that they have a 

great hate for Weyerhaeuser corporation. I can just see the looks in 

their eyes and the looks on their faces when they mention that 

word Weyerhaeuser corporation. It is a focal point for their anger. 

For no reason, Mr. Chairman, for no reason at all. 

 

Maybe they do not know that when a paper mill is finally 

completed in Prince Albert, in addition to the Weyerhaeuser pulp 

mill, that half of the wood used there  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1934 

 

will be what we call in southern Saskatchewan, poplar — but I 

suppose the technical term in the paper business is hardwood. And 

this aspen, which will be half of the lumber used there, or the 

wood used, will be a new market for trees that are now either 

going for firewood or rotting. They're not being put into any 

substantial use. And I believe the member will be familiar with the 

west side of the province where the Canadian Shield runs up 

higher, there is less of the pine and there is more of that type of 

lumber. 

 

And therefore I have met with, as the Minister of Labour . . . and 

you ask the benefits of having the Indian and Métis Affairs branch 

in this department. As Minister of Labour I met with 

Weyerhaeuser executives from Saskatchewan and Canada-wide, 

and we discussed future employment possibilities, labour 

situation, and the possibilities for Indian and Métis people. 

 

(1515) 

 

And there are good possibilities there for economic development, 

where Weyerhaeuser will be buying on contract — not from large 

operators, but from small operators. They're prepared to buy small 

lots of trees — ready cut, ready for their paper mill — of the aspen 

variety. And they don't necessarily have to come out of their lease. 

They're prepared to deal with wood lot operators, with people who 

own land, and it's not suitable for agricultural purposes but grows 

trees very well. They're prepared to deal with these people — buy 

a two-tonne truckload per week, or whatever kind of a contract 

they can make. 

 

And that is a very good opportunity for the Indian and Métis 

people of northern Saskatchewan on the forest fringe to make 

contracts with Weyerhaeuser. And I think rather than the 

leadership — as indicated by the members of the opposition — 

and rather than the leadership of the Indian and Métis people 

trying to suggest that Weyerhaeuser is some sort of an enemy of 

theirs, the potential for them to sell trees to Weyerhaeuser and earn 

income and earn their own living is phenomenal. 

 

And I think the leadership should encourage the people to jump on 

this opportunity. it's going to be coming up in the next two or three 

years as soon as that plant is completed. The leadership — that's 

what's important, Mr. Chairman, the leadership. People are only as 

good as their leaders. 

 

And the member opposite, I challenge him as a leader of Indian 

and Métis people, and other leaders, to lead their people into 

economic development and into self-sufficiency and to explore 

these possibilities — to go and see Weyerhaeuser corporation and 

say: how much timber will you need? How much could we 

supply? In the economic development side, then, we in our 

department are prepared to assist them in the purchase of trucks 

and in the purchase of saws. 

 

And surely the member opposite cannot suggest that lumbering is 

demeaning — surely he cannot suggest that. So I challenge the 

member opposite, as a leader of Indian and Métis people, to show 

example, to lead his people into the 21st century. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I'm glad that the minister brought in the issue of 

Weyerhaeuser, and I would like to respond by pointing out the PC 

government's relationship to Weyerhaeuser, as compared to the 

PC government's relationship to Indian-Métis people. 

 

I will point this out by first talking bout the land issue. 

Outstanding treaty claims in this province are estimated to be 

anywhere from one to two million acres. And that would 

approximate the size of the P.A. National Park in this province. 

When you look at the amount of land that was given to the control 

of Weyerhaeuser wherein land claims could not even proceed in 

that area — for example with La Ronge and Peter Ballantyne 

Band having close to 300,000 acres outstanding — they could not 

proceed with the land entitlement claim without first going to 

Weyerhaeuser and giving them a 180-day notice. 

 

The other thing too is that on file at Weyerhaeuser is supposedly a 

letter which outlined what areas were permissible and what areas 

this land entitlement could clearly go to. In other words, a PC 

government, in only one-and-a-half year's negotiations, have given 

pretty well a give-away situation for Weyerhaeuser which 

amounted to the tune of land which is larger than the area of all the 

treaty reserves combined in Canada. 

 

That in fact when people get a little bit uptight about the PC 

government and the sweetheart deal that you made with 

Weyerhaeuser, it is because you have not lived up to dealing 

effectively with the outstanding treaty claims in this province. You 

go out of your way to make a legalized document with 

Weyerhaeuser that gives them — they don't have to pay no money 

down. If they don't make a profit through the 20 per cent, they 

don't have to give anything — pay anything back. But yet when it 

comes down to Indian-Métis people and you having to deal with 

them in a straightforward manner, what you do is stall and stall 

and stall; that in fact Indian bands are talking about taking this 

provincial government to court in regards to a land entitlement 

issue; that in fact the La Ronge band late last fall started and 

proceeded with litigation in regards to the outstanding land 

entitlement issue. 

 

Maybe you are saying to me, yes, we are against Weyerhaeuser. 

But it's not Weyerhaeuser per se that people are against, it's your 

policy that people are against; that in fact when you give away 

more land than all the treaty Indians in Canada in a one and a half 

year agreement with Weyerhaeuser, and in five years you cannot 

do anything with Peter Ballantyne band or La Ronge band in 

northern Saskatchewan and many other bands in the South, then 

people get a little bit perturbed about the situation. 

 

I am glad that you mentioned Weyerhaeuser, basically because it 

shows that you bend over backwards where it comes to big 

business, but when it comes down to Indian-Métis people, you cut 

and slash and beat them up. That's the basis of your policy. And 

that's the reason why a lot of people bring up the Weyerhaeuser 

issue because it shows very clearly the unequal treatment that the 

PC government has when they compare their relationships 

between big business and the relationships with Indian-Métis 

people. 

 

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1935 

 

With Indian-Métis people you will call economic development 

grants, grants. You call big business development, economic 

incentives. There's even a difference in terminology. But the same 

is still true, that there is a great big unequal treatment in regards to 

the amount of dollars that flow to large-scale corporations versus 

the amount that goes to Indian-Métis corporations. 

 

The other fact that you brought in regards to the Weyerhaeuser 

deal that a lot of people are worried about is this. People have 

access . . . Indian people have access to hunting in Crown lands, 

and there's a lot of Crown land in northern Saskatchewan, 

especially. But in light of that, the Weyerhaeuser agreement has a 

clause in there which would provide for the closure of access to 

some of these roads into the hunting areas. While the roads are 

there to exploit the resource, to make Weyerhaeuser rich, the same 

roads may not be there for somebody to go and get firewood to 

heat the home of their grandmother or to cook a meal for their 

children. 

 

And that is the unequal treatment that people talk about, and that is 

why Weyerhaeuser becomes a favourite topic, because it is one 

agreement that you have just done in the past year and it's fresh on 

people's minds. No doubt, with your policy in the past five years, 

there will be another Weyerhaeuser next year. 

 

We talked about Pocklington, Manalta Coal before, but there 

always will be another one. But when it comes down to Indian and 

Métis people, your strategy is to give tiny little seeds of economic 

development which you know in many cases are bound to fail 

because they do not provide the necessary support services to 

make a tough economic development strategy an effective one. 

 

And that's the essence that people are talking about. People bring 

up these issues of Weyerhaeuser not only in relation to land, not 

only in relation to the inequality of the amount of money given, 

not only in the fact that the corporation, the private corporation, 

introduces new laws and new regulations that may in fact infringe 

on treaty rights. That's the reason, Mr. Minister, that people bring 

these up. It's not because of some innate hatred of Weyerhaeuser, 

as you seem to imply. That just is not the case. 

 

If Weyerhaeuser would have come out with an affirmative action 

strategy on employing Indian and Métis people in northern 

Saskatchewan, a lot of people would have said, yes, that 

Weyerhaeuser is doing something in regards to the employment of 

Indian and Métis people in our area. Instead, what you see, Mr. 

Minister, is this — that the employment strategy of the PCs which 

was reminiscent in this year's budget, in '87, the same wording 

applies. What you say in the Weyerhaeuser document is the same 

thing that you said when you brought in your budget. And the key 

word that you use there is Weyerhaeuser will encourage 

Indian-Métis people to be employed. 

 

(1530) 

 

The government in this year's budget said, oh, we encourage. Well 

to me, that's the most discouraging word that I've heard in this 

year's budget and in also in relation  

to the Weyerhaeuser agreement, because it signifies a word to 

mean you're going to do nothing, or very little. Just a little tiny 

seed to make people feel that you are actually doing something. 

Your seedling approach to economic development is, to me, a real 

slap in the face to the women, the children, that are forced into 

welfare situations on a daily basis because of the policy of this 

government. 

 

I would ask you, Mr. Minister, in light of the information that I've 

given you on a comparative view of Weyerhaeuser, its treatment 

on land, the issue on employment, and the issue on regulations: do 

you feel at all that there is an unequal treatment between the way 

you work with big business corporations like Weyerhaeuser and 

with Indian and Métis corporations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, first of all, I 

don't mean to be nasty about this or anything like that, but the 

member knows, you know, that there are millions of trees in 

northern Saskatchewan and I'm sure he's never — he will admit — 

never seen any money growing on those trees. 

 

And the question then is: who pays the bills in this province? And 

it's agriculture and business, mining and forestry, the oil industry; 

that's what pays the bills in this province. It's big business and 

small business; agriculture. It's a lot of people working, and a lot 

of big and small businesses that pay the bills. And to have an 

attitude that there's something wrong with this business, whether it 

is big or small, that this business and agriculture is not important 

or not desirable, is a self-defeating attitude, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

 

And clearly the member opposite knows that the first corporation 

of the world, the Hudson's Bay corporation, the oldest corporation 

in the world originally came here and his ancestors did business 

with that big business corporation and felt that it was very good 

business at the time. As a matter of fact, it still can be, you know. 

There are more beaver in Saskatchewan now than there were 

when the Hudson's Bay Company came. So there is potential for 

this kind of business and all kinds of business. 

 

On treaty claims and the land claims situation, I could tell you that 

I am very much committed to getting those claims settled as fast 

as possible. And you know, the members of your party criticize 

me for being blunt at times — like to have a little fun, tell a few 

stories and laugh a little because I use direct words. 

 

But I'm using direct words to you now. I mean that. I have no 

patience for fooling around, negotiating for ever and ever. I want 

to get this problem solved so we can get on with life in this 

province — your people and all the other people. And I'm serious. 

And I say it to you bluntly: I have no patience for foot-dragging 

and time-wasting on land claims. And we're trying our best. And 

since I've taken over as minister, we've tried to push it along as 

much as possible. 

 

However, we are hindered by many things when it comes to land 

claims. And the first hindrance is that the country has been 

preoccupied with constitutional talks about  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1936 

 

self-government. And some parties in the self-government 

discussions and debate have found this to be an emotional debate; 

some have found that they still possess hard feelings and some 

ill-will. And it's taking a little time for the parties to get over this. 

And so that has distracted from the land claims. 

 

And we on the government side, as the Premier committed us in 

Ottawa when we last met, was that when we get back to 

Saskatchewan, regardless of whether a constitutional deal was 

signed or not, we will get down to the business of solving the 

problems. And that's what we would like to do. 

 

But some of the hindrances in trying to solve the treaty claims, of 

course, are the complicated matters of law, the matters of 

regulations, of conflicting interests. And we try to settle this 

without too much conflict, without too much controversy. 

 

If we can convince people with conflicting interests that they 

should take other interests and move to other parts of the province, 

or do their business elsewhere so that the land can be turned over 

to the Indian band, then that is a better way of doing it than simply 

having the government grab the land and having a controversy. 

 

And your people will get that land that you are entitled to. You 

have that commitment as long as I am in office. And I hope to 

have that accomplished long before I ever retire from politics. 

 

But the second problem is the politics. And there are some . . . 

You know there are some internal politics among the bands, 

among the band members, among the chiefs. And that tends to 

delay things from time to time. 

 

But what's even worse, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is the partisan 

politics that gets involved in this. And I sometimes wonder about 

the advice that the members of your party . . . you remember now 

that you are a leader of the Indian people, and you're a member of 

the NDP party and at some time . . . There are times when I think 

you have a conflict; you have a problem in deciding who you 

should serve, your people or the NDP party. 

 

The problem arises that the NDP party does not wish to have these 

matters settled. They would rather have these matters dragged out 

in court, and the party gets very much involved. And you referred 

to the Lac La Ronge band. I'm not going to comment on that 

because there's a lawsuit before the courts on that. 

 

I don't know if your new leader has told you this, but the lawyers 

for the Lac La Ronge band, the people that are suing the federal 

and provincial governments and will drag this out in the courts for 

years and years rather than negotiate it out and solve it, are 

Mitchell Taylor Romanow and Ching. I'm sure you may be 

surprised to find out that your new leader, your potential new 

leader, is acting for the Lac La Ronge band. And here you have 

probably the Leader of the Opposition involved in the courts in a 

land claim. And here you have members of your party involved in 

acting as legal counsel for the Lac La Ronge band. It's 

questionable then whether they really want it settled in a hurry, or 

whether they want to go to  

court, and how they go about this process. 

 

So I submit to you that you have a conflict within yourself. It's not 

a legal conflict but a conflict of whether your party is trying to 

serve your people or whether these claims could not be settled if 

the politicians from your side did not meddle with the land claims. 

 

Now that's something you'll have to consider. But that's one of the 

problems that is holding up land claims is the NDP party's politics 

and their meddling, their partisan meddling, in Indian politics. 

 

The next matter that you raise is the amount of money that's 

required for economic development. And I'm prepared to listen to 

your suggestion as to what is necessary, how much money it 

would take. You know that the department of northern 

Saskatchewan spent millions of dollars in northern Saskatchewan 

and it didn't seem to solve the problem. Now if it was a matter of 

money, if money could solve this and it could get the economy of 

northern Saskatchewan rolling, get the Indian reserve economies 

rolling, then if we had a particular sum that would solve that, with 

that particular sum I think we could probably go and borrow from 

the people or from the banks or from whoever has the money, 

enough money, run up the deficit and get this problem solved for 

once and for all. But I would need some guidance from you as to 

how many million dollars would solve the economic development 

problem. So I am prepared to listen to what you think should be 

spent on economic development. 

 

We get back to Weyerhaeuser. I don't think you really dislike 

Weyerhaeuser; it's just your party's line of approach that you 

should dislike Weyerhaeuser even though they can do good for the 

Indian people and the Métis people of northern Saskatchewan. 

You personally know that they can. And you may know, you may 

know that on the construction project right now at Prince Albert, 

14 per cent of the construction workers there are of Indian and 

Métis origin. Weyerhaeuser corporation is trying their best to 

assist Indian and Métis people in finding employment in the 

North. 

 

And I think you should really stand up and acknowledge that 

Weyerhaeuser corporation has had a good record at 14 per cent, 

that you're getting in the range of the Saskatchewan average as to 

the number of Indian and Métis people there in Saskatchewan as 

compared to the total population, and 14 per cent is in that range, 

you know. 

 

You and I know that the statistics vary a bit as to how many Indian 

and Métis people there really are in Saskatchewan, but you know 

that 14 per cent is in a close range. And in contrast, look at the 

problem we're having at the upgrader in Regina where it's total 

union, and I can't get Indian and Métis people into the unions with 

enough seniority to get jobs there. 

 

And this is quite a problem for us, and we've tried to have special 

people there to try to get Indian and Métis people in on the biggest 

project in Saskatchewan — the upgrader in Regina. And you 

know there are a lot of Indian and Métis people in Regina, and you 

know that they could use  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1937 

 

jobs out there. And we are having a difficult time getting them in 

on the upgrader because of the structure. 

 

At Weyerhaeuser the structure is different; there are union workers 

on site and non-union workers. And you know that, for the most 

part, your people do not have seniority in the unions, and that's a 

problem for them on a big construction project. And on the 

Weyerhaeuser site, it's approximately half the workers are 

unionized and half are non-unionized. And that has allowed that 

project to bring in Indian and Métis people to the extent of 14 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I'm glad that you did raise the issue of 

employment and so on, but I would like, first of all, to reply back 

to a comment that is very reminiscent of the strategy of the PC 

government. Whether statements in the past five years have been 

made in this legislature by members from across in regards to 

native people on the lowering of property values, I find your . . . 

the tenor of your statements to be highly paternalistic. 

 

The extreme paternalism that is again made by off-the-cuff 

remarks such as AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) 

and native people — off-the-cuff remarks. The same paternalism 

is the same paternalism that I hear coming from your mouth, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

You see, you are implying that I could not think for myself; that I 

could not be able to differentiate between party policies and also 

Indian self-government and treaty claims; that I could not know 

the difference between Métis self-government and the 

governmental structure of the province of Saskatchewan. I find 

that type of attitude not only paternalistic, but something that is 

bordering on racism. 

 

(1545) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — That, to me, Mr. Minister, shows your contempt 

for aboriginal people when you can make a statement to say that 

Indian or Métis leaders are guided by the NDP. Indian and Métis 

leaders, Mr. Minister, can make decisions for themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — They don't need the PC or the NDP to speak up 

for them; that in fact Indian and Métis people formulate their own 

positions in the strongest, most forceful way, and you know that. 

And to think that you can stand here and state that I do not know, 

or other aboriginal people do not know, the difference between 

party policies, is an outrageous piece of paternalism in 

Saskatchewan's history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I will ask the minister on that very issue of 

whether or not Indian-Métis people were able to distinguish 

between NDP policy and their self-government. Name me an 

Indian and Métis person in this province that cannot distinguish 

that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, or Deputy Chairman, 

I don't really know the member opposite. I acknowledge he can 

think for himself and speaks well in the Assembly. I really don't 

know what the member from Lakeview had to give him as far as 

advice, but certainly it has changed his whole tone. And I wasn't 

listening that close; I don't think the member opposite called me a 

racist. I heard him talk something about racism. It seems to me 

that when citizens of this province discuss the problems of Indian 

and Métis people, that simply because they may not necessarily 

agree, or because they may have differences of approach, that 

people should start using words like racism. I think we have to be 

realistic and look at the problem that is here. I am far from a racist. 

I am a problem solver. And I'm sure the member opposite will 

admit that there is a problem to be solved here; that Indian-Métis 

people need assistance in becoming self-sufficient, and that 

economic development is important. 

 

I have approached you in a matter of respect, and you accuse me 

of being paternalistic. I've acknowledged that you are a leader of 

Indian and Métis people. Are you not a leader of Indian and Métis 

people? Are these not your people? They are my people, as being 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. But I would consider 

that the members of my German Lutheran church are my people. I 

am one of them. I have given you respect, and I believe you are a 

leader of your people. Are you not a leader of the Indian and Métis 

people? 

 

Certainly you have to hold yourself out to be a leader. And I give 

you that respect. A leader of your people, I mean nothing 

demeaning about it. I challenge you to lead your people, even if 

you insist on following the socialist ways. I still challenge you on 

leading your people to a better life. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I sense again, Mr. Minister, that you seem to 

imply that my statements — and I made these statements — of the 

racism, the fact that the budget, you know, promotes racism 

before. I'll remind the minister that the member from Regina 

Lakeview wasn't here to guide me to make whatever statements 

that I wanted to make. 

 

The member, for the record, Mr. Minister, is for her to state that 

the policy of the PCs in regards to employment of Indian and 

Métis people has been very poor in the Weyerhaeuser agreement, 

had also implied that the policies of taking away a lot of the 

experienced Indian-Métis women from the department on 

affirmative action in hiring of Indian-Métis people in government, 

the employment equity program. 

 

The precise statement, for the record, she wanted was on the issue 

of contract compliance. When the NDP government was here we 

made sure that large-scale corporations operating in northern 

Saskatchewan would have to hire Indian and Métis people, it was 

part of the contract compliance, part of the affirmative action 

strategy of the NDP government. 

 

There was approximately 60 per cent of the people from northern 

Saskatchewan hired in the Key Lake mine. After the PCs have 

been in power for five years, the record of  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1938 

 

the Key Lake mine is hovering around 20 per cent, because you 

refuse to even, you refuse to even follow the law in regards to that 

affirmative action lease agreement which states that there should 

be 50 per cent. You refuse to even follow your own laws. It's not 

only a question, Mr. Minister, of the fact that you want to work 

with contract compliance; it's a question of not even following the 

law of contract compliance in the form of the affirmative action 

lease agreement in the Key Lake agreement. 

 

I'll have you know, Mr. Minister, in regards to your implied 

paternalism again, that I can think of that very clearly in my head. 

I have thought for that in the past five years since you've come 

into this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — The minister laughs. The minister laughs. He 

figures that putting Indian and Métis people out of jobs in the Key 

Lake mine or in other areas is a laughing matter. The minister 

laughs. He laughs. That in fact, he does not have a solution to the 

issue that I'm presenting. Weyerhaeuser, and I'll show you . . . one 

other member says that that's a lie. 

 

Last year when the Weyerhaeuser agreement came into place, 

Indian and Métis people, a native woman, presented you with the 

need for an affirmative action lease agreement in regards to 

Weyerhaeuser. But did you comply to that? No, you wanted to 

make sure that in the long run very few Indian-Métis people 

would be working there. 

 

An Hon. Member: — So he could blame it on the unions. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Now you turn around, Mr. Speaker, and you 

blame the fact of Indian-Métis employment on unions. Take a 

look at Key Lake. The union was there. The union backed up the 

affirmative action lease agreement. The union backed up the idea 

that there was 60 per cent employment for Indian-Métis people in 

Key Lake during that phase. But in 1984 the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour also presented you with a brief and pointed 

out the fact that you were not complying to the affirmative action 

lease agreement at Key Lake. Mr. Minister, you were in charge of 

dealing with Indian and Métis issues in this province. The issue of 

employment is indeed an issue that a lot of people want to see 

resolved. 

 

I want to know, Mr. Minister, what is your strategy for 

development in large scale development? Are you going to have 

affirmative action lease agreement strategies which the law of 

Canada provides for, and which the law of Saskatchewan provides 

for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I want to advise the 

member opposite that the reason I was laughing was because he 

was taking advice from the member from Lakeview. And I don't 

think the member opposite should take advice from the member 

from Lakeview, and nor do I advise that he not support her in her 

leadership bid, you know, if that's what she's trying to do. And I 

thought it was rather funny that he was taking advice from her 

when she was running for leader. So she's not your leader yet. You 

don't have to do what she says, you know. I don't think she will be 

your leader. 

 

The question really here, Mr. Chairman, is: if the member 

opposite, as the critic on Indian and Métis affairs, could give us a 

figure on how much we should be spending on economic 

development, we could take it into account. But in the absence of 

him being able to give us a figure, we will have to stick with the 

amount that is currently in the budget and see what can be done 

next year with respect to how progress is made in economic 

development and how much money the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan could allocate to this sum. 

 

With respect to your complaint about Key Lake, this is the first 

time that that has been brought to my attention by any members of 

your party. And I will look into the matter on Key Lake and try to 

see why the numbers are down, if they are down. And I will look 

into that matter. The real question is: how do you explain, if our 

government has no desire to assist Indian and Métis people, if our 

government has no desire to take firm action . . . And affirmative 

action, I suppose, is useful, but it is very much a quota system, and 

I think a quota system would be paternalistic. 

 

But very much so, we're prepared to take firm action. Tell me, that 

increasing the number of Indian and Métis people working for the 

government in the civil service from 2.4 per cent to 5.2 per cent, if 

that is not firm action and if that is not for the benefit for Indian 

and Métis people. But tell me that — you know, how that is 

wrong. And tell me how much money should be spent on 

economic development. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I'm glad now that the minister is asking me the 

questions. Maybe I should be the minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — In regards to the issue that you raise on the 

question, on the issue of employment. A lot of your economic 

development approaches require a consideration of numbers or 

quotas, as you say. There is no such thing as affirmative action 

without any numbers. You need affirmative action with numbers, 

otherwise the historical record of systematic and institutionalized 

discrimination is such that the record will be down to 5 per cent. 

You need employment at about 15 per cent in this province. When 

you look at the facts of 2.4 to about 5 per cent employment of 

people in the civil service, that was done mainly in the period of 

the New Democratic Party. Most of that increase was done in that 

period. 

 

I looked at your specific strategy, the affirmative action strategy 

that was started and continued through the employment equity 

program. I looked at the employment equity program, and many 

of the questions in regards to employment equity need to be asked. 

But before we get into that, I will ask you why it is that you 

choose to do away with the employment equity program which 

would hire more Indian and Métis people, women and the 

disabled, in the civil service. Why did you do away with that? Can 

you tell me? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the argument of the  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1939 

 

member opposite is self-defeating here. He is suggesting that the 

employment equity branch was not doing a good enough job, and 

then he wants to know why we did away with it. Well first of all, 

we didn't do away with it; we've moved it to my department, to 

this department. And all the better, because this department has 

responsibility for Indian and Métis people, has responsibility for 

women's affairs, and so it's logical that it be moved to my 

department. But his argument is self-defeating. He's saying it's no 

good; why did you do away with it? 

 

Well I'm not saying it was no good. I'm saying that it can be 

improved and should properly belong in the Department of 

Human Resources, Labour and Employment. And the member 

opposite suggests that the improvement in the number of Indian 

and Métis people working for the provincial government took 

place under the NDP. The figures I gave were from March of 1981 

to June of 1987, so it seems to me the election in 1982 was on 

April 26, so that it would have been about one-month period of 

time that the NDP would have had to double the employment of 

Indian and Métis people in the civil service, and we would have 

had to have done absolutely nothing for six years thereafter. 

 

And I don't think anyone is going to accept that in one month the 

NDP doubled from 2.4 per cent to 5.2 per cent the number of 

Indian and Métis people working in the civil service of 

Saskatchewan. As a matter of fact, now if you simply extrapolated 

that 100 per cent increase over all of the months, you can see that 

very, very little of it would be during the NDP period. 

 

There was a doubling of the number of Indian and Métis people 

working for the provincial government in the civil service in 

accordance with the figures that I have available to me, since this 

government took office. And the members opposite don't like to 

hear that, and want to diminish that and won't accept that. And that 

does not matter because the people of Saskatchewan know that 

that is correct. That is the information I have, and unless someone 

has not calculated correctly or didn't add right, that is the fact. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, the many of your statements, you 

know, to date show that there's a lot of factual evidence that is lost, 

you know, in regards to your own statements, so I will have to go 

to some very specifics. In regards to the employment equity 

program, how many people were let go when they moved to your 

division? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in answer to the 

question, those people were employed in the Public Service 

Commission, and how many they had or how they had them 

allocated is not within my knowledge. I don't know how many 

people were reshuffled, retired, or laid off as a result of the 

change-over to my department, because those people did not work 

for my department. 

 

At present in our department we have one person engaged in this 

activity, and because it's fairly new to our department we're just 

getting it rolling and we expect to have more results in the next 

year or so, because we're going to put a greater emphasis on it now 

that . . . I'm not saying that there wasn't a good emphasis before, 

but I'm saying that now that it's under my jurisdiction I am going  

to keep an eye on it. And I certainly couldn't keep an eye on it 

before because it wasn't under my jurisdiction, and I don't know 

how many people were working at it. 

 

And the question is: are you saying that it was doing a good job 

before and should have been left as it is? Or even if it was, I'm 

submitting to you that we will do a better job having it in the 

department with Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

where the department also has branches with respect to women, 

has branches with respect to Indian and Métis people, and that's 

the appropriate place for it to be. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, the reason why I asked you a 

specific question is because you say you have facts, and then when 

I ask a question you don't know the facts. You seem to throw 

around facts which you don't know anything about. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Figures. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Figures. I don't know where you take them from. 

 

I will remind the minister that in regards to the employment equity 

program, five women lost their jobs. Five women lost their jobs. 

The evidence also shows that out of the five women, three were 

Indian and Métis women. One had been transferred elsewhere, but 

was still being paid through that department. So in actuality there 

would have been two, but the record shows that she had been there 

and had worked. What that showed me when I talked to the 

woman, here were people with tremendous amount of experience 

and knowledge. 

 

One person, an Indian woman I talked to who had 18 years of 

experience, knew the system thoroughly. She was the most expert 

in regards to employment equity. She knew about not only the 

policies from the previous government, she knew the Liberal 

program of the '60s. She had such tremendous knowledge about 

the pros and cons of each one of these different programs that had 

developed through the years. So you knew what was effective and 

what was not effective. Her other two colleagues which I've talked 

to, were also highly effective in not only doing the administration 

work, but also the field co-ordination along with it. These are the 

types of people that this government decided to take it out on. 

They have decided to just eliminate them. Highly experienced 

staff were eliminated. 

 

You say you are trying to employ Indian-Métis people. This 

particular case shows very clearly that that wasn't the case. That 

wasn't the case when it came down to the woman either. That is 

the factual record that is there. 

 

I've also pointed out the other one in regards to Key Lake, where it 

goes from 60 to 20. I also pointed to the fact that you didn't want 

to do anything about the Weyerhaeuser thing except create 

short-term jobs for six weeks and so on, and then you . . . and in 

your last statistics of 14 per cent. But out of that 14 per cent that 

you talk about in Weyerhaeuser, my bet is very few of them are 

long-term permanent jobs. 

 

And I will tell you this much also. One of the key things in  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1940 

 

affirmative action strategies has been to put in managerial 

positions. How many of those 14 per cent are in managerial 

positions, I would ask? And I would say that is probably a small 

percentage of that 14 per cent that are in that capacity, but I would 

say that it is probably more of a short-term economic strategy, and 

not a long-term permanent job approach in that Weyerhaeuser 

agreement. 

 

You will like to present me facts, Mr. Minister. Could you put on 

the table for me the facts that you have in regards to the 

employment figures of Indian-Métis people in this province, and 

also in regards to Weyerhaeuser, and also in regards to Key Lake, 

and many other corporations? Can you provide me with those 

facts, Mr. Minister, since you didn't seem to know them when I 

asked a specific question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — With respect to the total employment 

figures for Indian and Métis people, they are being updated right 

now and will be available on August 31. All right? So I can't give 

you the most up-to-date figures on that. If you'll send me a memo, 

or if we're still in estimates and you ask after August 31, I can give 

you the most current figures on that. 

 

There is a reason that they can't be ready until August 31, as far as 

the most current figures. With respect to Key Lake, I indicated to 

you that we would check and see what the circumstances are there. 

 

On Weyerhaeuser, I've already advised you that 14 per cent of the 

construction workers there, and I don't believe they've hired very 

many people in the mill because the regular staff stayed when it 

was sold, but of the construction workers, 14 per cent are Indian 

and Métis. 

 

You deal with unemployment and the employment figures, and I 

can give you the figures that I do have available. These are the 

figures for native people in the employment of the government: 

March 1981, 2.4 per cent; March 1983, 3.1 per cent; March 1985, 

3.4 per cent; March 1986, 5 per cent; March 1987, 4.2 per cent. 

You will note that at that time the government did reduce its 

work-force. However, we have made a full percentage point gain 

since March and we are now at 5.2 per cent in June. That is the 

spread I had given you earlier, and that gives you the continuous 

progress that was made from March 1981 to now, June of 1987. 

 

For physically disabled people: March 1981, 0.7 per cent; March 

'83, 1 per cent; March 1985, 0.9 per cent; March 1986, 1.3 per 

cent; March 1987, 1.4 per cent. So by March of 1987, in our term 

of office we had doubled the number of physically disabled people 

working for the provincial government. It slipped just a little from 

March to June and we are now at 1.2 per cent. These are the most 

current figures I have available for physically disabled people 

working for the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

With respect to women in management in the Government of 

Saskatchewan, I think this is the key figure you wish to have, not 

how many women or what percentage of women . . . what 

percentage of civil servants are women. I think it was over 50 per 

cent, is it not? Yes, my officials indicate it's in the 50 per cent 

range  

or slightly over 50 per cent of civil servants are women. 

 

(1615) 

 

But I think the key figure that you would really want to know is 

that the percentage of women in non-traditional jobs, or as it 

stands today, the percentage of women in management and 

professional positions in the civil service of Saskatchewan is 21.3 

per cent. And you can see that we are doing our utmost to give 

women a fair chance to be promoted and to take over management 

positions, and women are moving up. 

 

I do acknowledge that at the very top levels we would like to see 

more women. And we see many, many women in the civil service 

with potential, moving up through the provincial civil service. And 

my new assistant deputy is a good example of that, someone 

having started with the government some years ago — I won't say 

how many years ago; some years ago — and having worked her 

way through the government, acquiring management skills, and is 

now the assistant deputy minister of this new department. 

 

So you can see that our record has been quite good with respect to 

employment equity, if you compare it to only five or six years ago, 

and your party is the party that speaks long and loud on the merits 

of these issues. And I submit to you that our party, the Progressive 

Conservative Party, which does not speak as long and loud, but 

has acted, and we have acted very fairly for these groups of 

people, my department is proud of the progress that has been 

made, and we will continue this kind of effort. And now that we're 

responsible for employment and the affirmative action type 

programs, we will do our best to continue in that regard. 

 

I do not know what the people in the Public Service Commission 

were doing before I took over this function and this responsibility; 

that is not my responsibility. I do not know what they were doing 

or how successful they were or if any of this success can be 

attributed to them. I can tell you that the people in my department 

are trying to get this up and rolling and showing further 

improvement, and I expect when we are back next year and the 

year after, you will be satisfied with the improvement that is made 

year after year. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — One of the specific things, Mr. Minister, I've 

noticed in the past, since '81 to '86, has been an increase in the 

incarceration rates of Indian-Métis people. It has jumped from 61 

per cent to 64 per cent. What that indicates to me, Mr. Minister, is 

that because you lack a solid social and economic development 

program, and because you have been cutting back in the past five 

years, that indeed the rates of incarceration tend to increase. And 

that's what sociological statistics usually point out. 

 

I would like to know, Mr. Minister, what you are going to do in 

regards to dealing with this situation? What type of goal are you 

going to have in accordance with the Department of Justice to be 

able to resolve, you know, some of this issue? Do you have any 

ideas about this issue, and what would you do about it? 

 

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1941 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is where you run 

into the line of using terms like paternalist, paternalism. The 

question is, what is the government going to do to change this 

situation? And the government will do what the Indian people and 

the Métis people think will help assist the situation. 

 

And what we are doing is, for example, most of the crime 

problems are related to alcohol, and we have spent a great deal of 

effort in assisting with alcohol treatment. We are building a new 

Whitespruce centre for youth and alcohol problems in the Yorkton 

area. There is the New Dawn centre which is . . . and there's 

co-operation with the federal government. The federal government 

is assisting, realizes that this is also the problem. There's the New 

Dawn centre at Fort Qu'Appelle, very close to my constituencies, 

four constituencies more or less joined there in an area that has 

many Indian reserves. 

 

We just opened a new centre in Regina. I was at the opening. It's a 

very good centre for alcohol treatment. The problem is not so 

much a matter of economics as life-styles. And many people in 

our society — and it's not limited to Indian and Métis people — 

have problems with drugs and alcohol. We're trying to help with 

all of those people as in any way possible. And the leadership of 

the Indian people have many ideas and have come a long way in 

trying to help solve these problems. So we will continue to work 

in co-operation with the leadership of the Indian and Métis people. 

 

And this is where you haven't really raised the question of where 

are we going on self-government. You raised it earlier and I think 

I should give you some information on that right now. 

 

We are meeting with the treaty Indians and we have a special 

government committee to meet with the committees designated by 

the chiefs. And we have started a process of negotiations with 

respect to how the province can co-operate in self-determination 

for the Indian bands in how they can do. As an example, the 

Ochapowace Band that I've described, manage their own money, 

their own affairs, decide whether the money should be spent on 

education or whether it should be spent on roads or whether it 

should be spent on recreation. 

 

And then Indian . . . We are not paternalistic, and don't use terms 

like "colonialism." We are going in the direction of saying: here, 

you decide. And you can hardly criticize that, can you? I think that 

is the solution. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan, the Government of Saskatchewan, 

cannot solve all of the problems of the Indian and Métis people. It 

has to be internal and there has to be co-operation between the 

government, all the citizens of this province, and the Indian and 

Métis people, and the leadership has to be there. And that's where 

I've already thrown out the challenge to you, and other leaders, is 

to use this leadership wisely. 

 

I've recently read some of the treaty documents from 1874, the 

original treaty, and I was impressed with the wisdom of the 

Indians who signed those treaties. You may say they made a bad 

deal. But at the time — you have to  

consider that we're talking with hindsight — at the time those 

Indian leaders who did not have a formal education, but they had a 

great deal of wisdom and they were trying to look after their 

people in the best way they felt possible, in the terms of 1874, and 

that's the treaty I was looking at in my area of the province, 

southern Saskatchewan. 

 

And yes, they did not take into account inflation and things of that 

nature. But I'm sure you will appreciate that federal government 

spending has taken into account inflation. And when we're talking 

now of a total sum of, I believe, the provincial government 

spending in Indian and Métis affairs, I believe it's $375 million per 

year, we have taken into account inflation. 

 

And your leaders of a hundred years ago did show great wisdom, 

and that's the kind of leadership you need now. When you 

combine the education that your leaders have now, with the 

wisdom that their ancestors had, we can solve most of these 

problems. I'm not saying it would be easy. I'm not saying it will be 

done immediately, but if we go on to a settlement, a solution mode 

rather than a confrontation mode, I think these problems can be 

solved. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, over 10 years ago, 1976 if my memory serves me 

correct, the province entered into an agreement with natives, the 

Saskatchewan federation of Indians, to be precise, to settle Indian 

land claims. 

 

That agreement should have been unnecessary. The Queen, in the 

right of Canada, had entered into an agreement with them about a 

hundred years before that, which has never been honoured. 

Nevertheless, passage of . . . there had been a century pass, the 

province entered into an agreement with the FSI (Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indians), which provided a formula for the 

settlement of land claims, established the broad terms in the 

number of acres that they were entitled to. Then the process was to 

begin in settling those land claims. 

 

I think I'm correct in saying, Mr. Minister, that since you've taken 

office in 1982 not a single land claim has been settled. I wonder, 

Mr. Minister, how it is that your government can justify to itself 

ignoring a contractual and legal obligation to native people which 

plainly seems to be what they're doing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — We were making some progress on treaty 

entitlements, and I have to correct you there. There have been 

settlements since our government took over. Fond du Lac was 

settled, at which time they received more land than the 1976 

formula that your government agreed to had implemented. So 

Fond du Lac was settled actually for more acres than that formula 

would indicate. 

 

I was at the Star Blanket Indian reserve, No. 83A. Now No. 83 is 

in my constituency, and so is 83A. The Star Blanket band, or the 

Star band, received the residential school which they took as a 

selection in Fort Qu'Appelle. That was their choice, so they've 

received some further settlement there. I think they still have some 

entitlements coming to them, and that hasn't been satisfied in full. 

 

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1942 

 

We are working on . . . we are fairly close on two other bands right 

now, Lucky Man and Canoe Lake — just a few technical 

problems, and I think those can be settled. You've heard, I've 

given a commitment that I have no patience for dilly-dallying with 

this problem that has gone on for years and years, and I would like 

to get them settled as fast as possible. And as we get into further 

discussions with the treaty Indian bands on the follow-up of where 

we go from here after the constitutional conference, we are dealing 

with three main areas with them — treaty land entitlement, Indian 

self-determination and self-government, and economic 

development. And those are somewhat tied together. 

 

But the 1976 formula is a good guide-line, but I've been trying to 

convince the bands not to insist on exact acres because in many 

cases they have not chosen land that is of great economic value. 

And I know it is of significance to them. They indicate that that 

particular piece of land is of historical significance, but they have 

not taken or chosen pieces of land that are of great economic 

value. And in some cases they would be better to take less land in 

acres of more value — of more economic value. Rather than insist 

on the specific number of acres, they should look at the quality. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I take it though, Mr. Minister, that the '76 

agreement you regard as binding on the government, and it's your 

intention to settle these, reasonably speaking, and as quickly as 

possible. Is that what I understand to be your position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — We haven't really checked on to what 

extent it would be binding on the government. We are proceeding 

with the 1976 formula as a guide-line, then working out an 

individual agreement with each band. And if the band is satisfied, 

then there's the settlement. And if they're not satisfied, we continue 

the negotiations. 

 

And in some cases where there seems to be a legal dispute, the 

band takes legal action. And I won't go into the details of the Lac 

La Ronge situation. As far as we're concerned there, they have 

been settled; but they have a dispute with the federal government 

as to whether they're entitled to more land or not. And your 

colleagues would know probably as much about it as I do; they act 

for that band. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the sympathy with native land 

claims which you feign isn't shared by the Premier. He seems a bit 

more honest. I want to quote, for your benefit, an article done by 

Earl Fowler of the Star-Phoenix on May 12, 1987 referring to the 

agreement: 

 

Premier Grant Devine, who declined an invitation to address 

an assembly taking place at that time, said in an interview he 

does not regard the agreement as binding. Devine said land 

claims could be best settled through flexible negotiations. He 

said the province is willing to provide assistance in resource 

and economic development. 

 

The Premier indicates he doesn't regard the agreement as binding 

at all. Instead he's offering them something as vague and indefinite 

as resource and economic development. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Indian land claims in this province has totally 

and completely stalled. If you were honest, you'd admit it. Your 

government has neither the will nor the desire to deal with this 

problem. Indians are considering legal suit, Mr. Minister. Your 

government has just done nothing on the subject. If you have some 

sympathy for it, which I may say you haven't been very vocal in 

expressing, if you have some sympathy for it, the Premier clearly 

does not. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, that whatever you say, you haven't any 

intention of honouring these agreements. You know that, Indians 

know that, and that's why they're considering legal action against 

the province. You've done nothing, Mr. Minister, apart from the 

settlement of Fond du Lac, which represents a minuscule portion 

of this problem. And the rest of it, Mr. Minister, as you well know, 

has totally and completely stalled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it should be 

pointed out to the member opposite that his party was elected in 

1944, and that wasn't long after 1930 when the province received 

its resources and the obligation to make available unoccupied 

Crown land in treaty settlement. 

 

The position of our government is that we do owe the Indians' 

various bands land in accordance with the law and the resources 

agreement of 1930, and that we will pay to the Indians every acre 

of land that we owe them, or if they wish to take something else in 

lieu of land, if they wish to take something of economic value that 

will give them a lasting income, we are prepared to be flexible 

about it. We will not hold them to land that they have chosen 

which may not necessarily be of much economic value. And if 

they're prepared to take some other form of compensation, we are 

prepared to consider it. 

 

But I take the position very clearly, it is not a matter of sympathy. 

I would not give land to anyone out of sympathy. This is a 

question that we, in law, and morally, owe the land that was 

agreed to in the treaties. Now it's to be negotiated and worked out 

as to how it's to be delivered. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the fact is though that you're 

going nowhere with these claims. Frustration has reached the point 

where it's boiling over, and they are considering . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . that's one thing I find so charming about the 

member from Weyburn, every line is a new one — every line is a 

new one. 

 

Mr. Minister, the process has stalled. You have neither the will nor 

the intention to do anything with these land claims. I wonder, Mr. 

Minister, if you can point to any accomplishments at all in this 

area? 

 

Mr. Minister, you say you don't regard the 1976 agreement as 

binding; I'd be interested in knowing the  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1943 

 

basis for that. That was an agreement which was entered into by 

the Queen and the right of Saskatchewan. It was regarded as 

binding by her representatives, and it was regarded at that point as 

a binding contract by the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians. On 

what basis, Mr. Minister, do you now tear up the agreement and 

say it's not binding — instead you offer it as economic 

development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well whether the agreement is binding or 

not is really a moot point, because if we can reach settlement with 

the bands, and if they're satisfied, and if they may believe it's a 

better deal than us following strictly what might be the letter of the 

law, surely we can settle for what we think is fair and what the 

bands agree is fair, rather than the letter of the law. And the 

question then arises, you know, was your decision in 1976 a wise 

decision? That is the question: was it a wise decision? 

 

But we are making considerable progress. I've indicated . . . To my 

knowledge, in the 10 years prior to your defeat, your government 

settled one land claim. I've already indicated to you that Fond du 

Lac was settled; the Star Blanket reserve made progress; Lucky 

Man band is very close to being settled-and I say very close, as 

that the land has been set aside, everything has been done except 

there is a dispute over the one technical point. The band will be 

meeting soon to decide whether they will accept the settlement or 

not, and they will have a meeting and a vote and decide. So that 

one is to the voting stage where the band has to decide now if 

they're going to make the final settlement or not. 

 

In addition, the Piapot band received a section of land out of the 

Lebret Métis farm towards their settlement. Flying Dust is very 

close to being settled. Peter Ballantyne is making progress. We are 

constantly working on this situation. I would like to move faster 

on it but, as I've indicated earlier, there are forces working against 

settlement. And we will move as fast as possible with the 

commitment that the Indians have, that they know they have — 

that there is no need for them to get involved in five- to eight-year 

legal battles. It would be simpler to spend a year or two in 

negotiation, and we will settle with them, and it won't be necessary 

to tie the matter up in the courts for five to eight years. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if the natives, the Indians 

agreed that you were offering them a better deal and you agreed, 

that would be one thing; you'd then have a new agreement 

superseding the old. But they don't agree. They recognize the 

obvious, Mr. Minister, that economic development is too vague to 

mean anything at all. An acre of land is an acre of land. A promise 

of economic development in the future, they know full well what 

that is — it's hot air. 

 

I want to quote for you, Mr. Minister, Chief Crowe's reaction to 

this better deal of yours: 

 

Devine said land claims could be best settled through 

flexible negotiations. He said the province is willing to offer 

assistance in resource and economic development. This 

position is unacceptable to Chief Roland Crowe, head of the  

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, who Monday 

accused the wildlife federation and some native politicians 

about spreading false information. 

 

Mr. Minister, this new and better deal is not satisfactory. They 

know full well it will never amount to the price of a bottle of milk. 

You'll do nothing except promise economic development which 

won't happen. A promise of 1 million acres of land is something 

definite. A promise of economic development is nothing at all. 

They'll never get it, and they know it. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you again, how you can pretend to tear up an 

agreement entered into in good faith by the province's 

representatives and by the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations)? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I think time will be the 

test. This government has another four and a half years, or at least 

four years in office, and we will see how progress is made over 

those four years. 

 

The members of the opposition will spend those four years trying 

to frustrate settlement of treaty claims, and this government will 

spend the four years trying to accomplish something in the 

settlement of the claims. And should there not be too much 

political interference from the NDP party, I expect progress will 

be made in those four years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I would like to remind the minister that we are the 

ones that are posing the question as to when he will be resolving 

these outstanding land claims issues, and also the economic 

development questions. 

 

I would like to look at the issue, Mr. Minister, in regards to the 

health question. The treaty people when they move off the reserve, 

sometimes have a problem in getting help from both the federal 

and provincial levels, because basically, because there's always 

talk about the jurisdictional problem and the one-year deal, you 

know, that has been made. 

 

Are you moving towards a more specific type agreement which 

will at least provide temporary assistance? Whether it comes 

provincially or federally is beside the point. But are you working 

towards a specific mechanism that will resolve this question? 

Because many people are left there, you know, with health issues 

or social welfare issues that are . . . their problems are not being 

resolved. What type of negotiations are you doing at the present 

time to resolve this so-called jurisdictional hassle? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I met with the 

federal minister yesterday afternoon, and meetings of that nature 

go a long way to resolving some of the jurisdictional hassles, as 

the member calls them. 

 

There are two key things happening right now. First of all, the 

federal government does not have to have any kind of treaty 

amendment in order to deal with the Indian tribes of Canada on 

resolving matters of self-government with respect to issues 

between the federal government and the  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1944 

 

individual band. There is no need for any constitutional 

amendment on that. They can simply go out and go to work on it, 

and that's what they're doing. And as I've given you an example, 

they're doing that already in the first band, the Ochapowace band. 

 

Now the province has certain jurisdictions, and we have given a 

commitment to Chief Crowe that the province will work out the 

details of how we will go about co-operating. But the province 

will co-operate in our jurisdiction. 

 

For example, we are working right now on child care agreements 

because the province has jurisdiction over adoption, over children 

in general. We are working on agreements so that the bands can 

then take over the administration of child care, rather than have 

our Social Services officials go onto Indian reserves and deal with 

the children on the reserves. So we will give the bands the 

responsibility, and the federal government is co-operating with 

respect to the necessary money involved. So we are just about 

there with some agreements on child care with some bands. 

 

We will co-operate with respect to our jurisdiction, and we have 

formed a government committee to negotiate with Chief Crowe 

and his chiefs. It is composed of myself as chairperson and 

members of the government, so that they are dealing directly with 

the political people in charge. The negotiations are directly from 

the provincial point of view, that the minister, the elected members 

of the government and the chiefs and the bureaucrats will work out 

the details. But they've finally got themselves where we're sitting 

at the same table face to face — the leaders of the Indian people 

and the leaders of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Just a question in regards to an economic 

development issue, again, Mr. Minister. At the opening of the 

legislature this past year, at the throne speech, there was talk about 

a five-year plan on tourism — you know, a $60 million plan. And 

you talked quite a bit about your intentions to involve 

Indian-Métis people in economic development. 

 

(1645) 

 

On a specific area like tourism, what have you done? What has 

your division done so far in regards to making headway into the 

tourism grant on dealing with Indian and Métis entrepreneurs? 

Have you done anything in this situation so far? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the question is rather 

broad. I'll try to answer it as best possible. Specifics of tourism, of 

course, are the responsibility of the Minister of Tourism and Small 

Business. There is a federal-provincial agreement on tourism 

where federal-provincial money is available to assist in the 

development of four-season resorts. 

 

Some of the bands have made application for economic 

development money from the province of Saskatchewan and from 

the federal Department of Indian Affairs, and are in a position to 

access some of that money if they go ahead with their projects. I 

can't tell you exactly how far  

their projects are down the road, but that money is available to all 

people. 

 

But there is that $375 million Indian economic development fund 

that the federal government has got, plus the tourism joint fund 

and the provincial economic development money. And they can 

access it in the same, or maybe even more so, than all other 

elements of society. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I want to get back on to the issue of land 

entitlement. And recently I read in the paper about the land 

entitlement claim that goes to Treaty 4, and I heard you mention, 

you know, the fact that it was signed in 1874, and so on. 

 

Now there is this outstanding land entitlement at Fort Qu'Appelle. 

And I was wondering what you are doing to resolve this specific 

case in the light of the statements that you've made previously in 

regards to land entitlement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The situation where the district chiefs of 

Treaty 4 are, I guess it's planning to take legal action. They haven't 

started yet. The legal action that they have announced they're 

planning on taking would be, I don't know . . . the report I heard 

would be asking for about one-half of Fort Qu'Appelle or $60 

million, is not really within the jurisdiction of this department. 

 

I know you hear a lot about jurisdiction. Everybody passes the 

buck and says it's not my jurisdiction — but it's not. It is not a 

recognized land claim. It is a dispute between the federal 

government and the treaty Indians of Treaty No. 4, and is not a 

part of the provincial land claim situation where the province has 

to provide that land. 

 

And you know, in the land claim situation, that land claims have 

to be established and proven and accepted before they are an 

actual land claim. That is a potential claim, but is not part of the 

province's responsibility; has some different circumstances 

surrounding it, outside of the usual land claims type situation. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — But, Mr. Minister, because of the land transfers 

agreement of 1930, the land would have been transferred to the 

province, and of course there would also be the problem of 

municipal lands, you know, which I recognize. But I would 

imagine that although it is a specific dispute between the federal 

government and the Treaty 4 band, that there would still require 

decision making, especially in regards to the land question; 

especially also, how it relates to 1930 land transfers agreement. It 

would still involve you at some point in the future, is that not 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well as we lawyers say, without admitting 

liability, I suppose at worst we could owe another 1,300 acres at 

some stage, but certainly the province would not have to ante up 

half of the town of Fort Qu'Appelle. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I would like to go back to the fact that when I 

look at the estimates, the staff cut-back has been from 32 to 25 

positions — that there's been a cut-back of seven positions on page 

55 of the estimates. 

 

I would like to know, Mr. Minister, how many people  

  



 

August 20, 1987 

1945 

 

were transferred; how many people are indeed working in native 

affairs secretariat. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — At present we show 24 and a half, and 

that's not a half a person, but you realize there are some part-time 

jobs. So the total number would total up to 24 and a half. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Okay, there is a loss of seven staff. I am 

wondering how many of those positions are people of Indian 

ancestry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I don't know if I have the information, but 

I didn't follow the question. Are you talking about how many of 

the ones that left were of Indian ancestry, or how many of those 

that remain are of Indian ancestry? 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I'm talking about how many Indian-Métis people 

do you have working presently of that 24 and a half figure that 

you've got? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — We're trying to count up for you. I'll take 

notice of that and then try to answer it for you right after we have 

dinner. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Could you also, Mr. Minister, provide me with 

more information in regards to the division? There was 32 staff 

last year. How many of them were of Indian and Métis ancestry? 

 

And the first question I asked is: of the existing staff today, how 

many of them are of Indian and Métis ancestry? 

 

The third question, Mr. Minister, is: how many Indian and Métis 

people do you have in the management positions — last year and 

also this year? 

 

I would like to know a more specific question, you know, before 

the clock runs out for this part. Who was the person that was 

working for land claims? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, last year we had Marian 

Dinwoodie, Bill Calder, and Doug Drummond working on land 

claims. We'll try to get the information right after dinner on who's 

working on things right now. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, while I'm on my 

feet, if I might ask for leave to revert back to government motions 

at 7 o'clock to deal with item no. 1, Mr. Berntson, respecting the 

Ombudsman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


