


















































November 4, 1987 Hansard Morning


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 November 4, 1987 
 
 

3919 
 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Speaker: — By special order of this House, question period 
will be at 2 p.m. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 97 — An Act respecting the Control of Distribution 
and the Consumption of Beverage Alcohol in Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Control of Distribution and the Consumption of 
Beverage Alcohol in Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 10 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. What I would like 
to do this morning, Mr. Chairperson, is just to review the events of 
the last year. When we take a look at the events of the last year, we 
see a pattern of anti-democratic decisions by the Premier and by 
the PC government. So if I take us back to the opening of the 
legislature in November, one of the first things that came on the 
floor of this House was a motion to change the quorum of 
committees in this House. It was a motion that was brought 
forward by the PC government without any consultation 
whatsoever with the opposition. It was a decision that was made 
by the government unilaterally and arbitrarily. 
 
Mr. Chairman, there wasn’t even any problems with the quorums 
in committees in the past. That was my understanding. There was 
no problem with the quorums. But they came forward with this 
decision unilaterally, and we suggest the reason for doing that, Mr. 
Chairman, was because the government wanted to stall the 
business of the committees when the heat was on, because if the 
quorum was changed in the fashion they wanted, they would have 
been able to do that. 
 
It was only after vigorous opposition by the opposition party, by 
the New Democrats, to this unparliamentary decision on the part 
of the government, to a decision that was against the traditions of 
this House because the parliamentary tradition dictated that the 
government would consult with the opposition when it was 
changing  

rules of the House, only after vigorous opposition to this 
anti-democratic, unparliamentary decision on the part of the 
government did the government back away from it. But that was 
the first indication that they were prepared to take anti-democratic 
decisions. 
 
The next thing they did, Mr. Chairman, is they came forward with 
Bill 5, the reorganization Bill. This Bill was designed to remove 
decisions from the floor of this House and to put them behind 
closed cabinet doors so that decision that were formerly made in 
public would now be made in secret. And that’s what that Bill was 
designed to do, therefore becoming an obvious anti-democratic 
decision by the government because what they were trying to do 
was avoid accountability to the public. They did not want to have 
their decisions with respect to reorganization of government being 
reviewed by this Assembly. 
 
The House then adjourned, and March 31 passed us by and there 
was no budget forthcoming by this government — absolutely no 
budget — notwithstanding the fact that the fiscal year ends on the 
31st of March. And there was no good reason for the delay in the 
budget because the government had had since October of 1986, 
October 20, to put together a budget. So there was no good reason 
for the delay. 
 
And while this delay was taking place, while we were waiting for 
the session to be recalled, the Premier and his government 
engaged in a series of very anti-democratic decisions that were 
destroying families across this province, Mr. Chairman. They 
were slashing programs, they were destroying families, and they 
were spending millions of the taxpayers’ dollars. And they were 
doing this, Mr. Chairman, with no mandate —no mandate 
whatsoever. 
 
They had not campaigned on the fact that they would be slashing 
programs in government. They had not campaigned on the fact 
that they would be delaying the budget until some time in June 
and spending in total, I believe, over $900 million by special 
warrants, which we suggest was illegal spending on the part of the 
government. They had absolutely no mandate to do that, Mr. 
chairman, but nevertheless they proceeded in that anti-democratic 
and unparliamentary tradition, and, we would argue, in that illegal 
fashion. 
 
And I suggest, Mr. Chairman, that the Premier of this province 
cannot escape responsibility for what happened in those periods, 
in the periods preceding June 17 and shortly after. He cannot 
escape responsibility for all those families whose lives were 
destroyed because of this government’s insensitive and 
anti-democratic decisions. 
 
He may try to escape responsibility and say it’s other people in 
cabinet who were doing this, and he wasn’t spearheading this 
group, but the fact of the matter is, Mr. Chairman, the Premier is 
supposed to be the leader of the PC Party and of this government, 
and he accepts full responsibility for everything his government 
does, including the dumb statements of the minister from Melville, 
and he accepts full responsibility for all the actions of his 
government. 
 
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3920 
 
 

But while they were going around the province and destroying 
programs and destroying people’s lives, Mr. Chairman, they were 
also hiring friends of the Tories, and hiring some, I might say, at 
very handsome salaries. Meanwhile other people’s lives were 
being destroyed, Mr. Chairman, and to me this showed incredible 
insensitivity on their part. There was incredible insensitivity in the 
manner in which they conducted themselves before June 17 and 
shortly after, and there’s absolutely no question that the people of 
this province were appalled by this government’s right-wing, 
extremist decisions. 
 
And yes, the decisions were extremist, Mr. Chairman, because the 
methods they employed were extremist. When one walks in to an 
individual and says, you’ve got one hour to pack your desk and 
leave, Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that that’s insensitive, and 
the approach that was taken with respect to the firing of people 
was extremist, in some cases. 
 
People were very, very disgruntled and upset with this 
government. They were very dismayed at the actions that were 
taking place and a hue and cry arose across the province which 
culminated in one of the largest demonstrations that we’ve ever 
seen in this province, Mr. Chairman. Nevertheless, the Premier 
undermines the demonstration by refusing to recognize the 
numbers that were there, and I suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, that 
that shows his insensitivity to the people of this province who 
were trying to send a message to him and tell him that they didn’t 
agree with what he was doing, and they didn’t agree with his 
government’s anti-democratic tactics. 
 
But we saw the same display from the Premier in the health care 
petition. We had some, approximately 100,000 signatures across 
this province when all the health care petitions came in, and yet 
the Premier belittled the individuals who signed the petition by 
simply saying they were NDP hacks, or words to that effect, trying 
to connote the fact that it was just a political reason for them 
signing. That showed his insensitivity, Mr. Chairman, because 
there were thousands of people that signed that petition who had 
absolutely no connection whatsoever to the New Democratic 
Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — But one of the most striking examples of this 
government, and the Premier’s incredible insensitivity and 
incompetence, was the manner in which they dealt with the dental 
workers and the dental program, the cruel manner in which they 
destroyed the dental program — privatized it, I should say — and 
in which they dealt with dental workers. 
 
And I believe the Premier knows, he knows that he was insensitive 
and cruel in that situation, and that was evidenced by the fact that 
he made himself scarce when the dental workers filled the 
galleries of this Legislative Assembly. He wasn’t here on that day, 
and that’s an acknowledgement, Mr. Chairperson, that he realized 
that this decision by his government was an insensitive and cruel 
decision, not to mention the fact that it was also incompetent 
because they went for a program that in  

effect will end up costing the taxpayers more on a per child basis. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Gary made him do it. Right, Gary? 
 
(1015) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well that . . . The member from Riversdale here 
said, “Gary made him do it.” But, Mr. Chairperson, the Premier 
cannot use that excuse. He is responsible for every single decision 
made by his cabinet ministers. He can’t use that excuse, and the 
people of this province don’t accept that excuse. 
 
And I might say on the dental program, Mr. Chairperson, that I am 
already getting complaints, not just from the rural area but from 
others in my constituency who are having difficulty leaving work 
to take their children out of school and take them to a dentist to 
have them looked after; not to mention the problems that mothers 
are going to have in rural Saskatchewan where they have to drive 
a considerable space in order to have access to a dentist. 
 
And so, Mr. Chairperson, the session then finally reopened on 
June 17 with the latest budget ever, I believe, in the history of this 
province. And the public accounts weren’t even forthcoming at 
that time. They weren’t available at that time. 
 
So there we were listening to the government’s inadequate 
rationalizations for their cruel and heartless and anti-democratic 
actions over the preceding months. There we were listening to that 
on June 17, Mr. Speaker. The preceding months when cut-back 
after cut-back was dribbled out to the public of Saskatchewan, not 
unlike, I might say, an ancient method of torture whereby a 
technique is employed where you drop water drop by drop on a 
person’s head. And so drop by drop, cut-back after cut-back, lost 
program after lost program, lost service after lost service, lost job 
after lost job, lost security after lost security, was slowly dribbled 
out to the public. 
 
And there it was on June 17 — it was June 17 before this 
government had the courage to come forward and attempt to 
justify their actions of the preceding months. It was June 17, Mr. 
Chairperson, before this government had the courage to come 
forward and confront the people of this province. 
 
And you know why I think they left it till June 17? Because they 
thought, Mr. Chairperson, that if they left it that long, if they 
dribbled out these cut-backs, dribbled out these firings over a 
period of months, that the impact on the province would be less 
than if they came down with a budget, in one fell swoop, that did 
the same thing. They felt the impact would be less. 
 
And so they were prepared, they were prepared to spend some 900 
million of taxpayers’ dollars over a period of several months in an 
illegal manner in order to meet the goal of their political strategy 
and their political agenda. 
 
They were prepared to do that, Mr. Chairperson — to deny a 
forum, to deny the legislative forum to the public of Saskatchewan 
as they continued to go across this  
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3921 
 
 

province and fire one person after another. They wanted to do it 
when the legislature wasn’t open. They wanted to reduce the 
impact of these cut-backs. They hoped that it would lessen the 
impact by not having the legislature sitting and by not coming 
down with a budget in one fell swoop. 
 
Well I suggest to you, Mr. Chairperson, that their political 
judgement was wrong, and because they’ve so enraged the people 
of Saskatchewan, that they will never be able to recover from their 
actions preceding June 17, from their heartless and cruel approach 
to the public of this province. 
 
And I believe that there was another reason why this government 
delayed the opening of the session to June 17, and I believe that 
was because they felt that if they sat into summer that there would 
be very little publicity, that people would not be interested, and 
they would be more interested in going away on holidays or doing 
other things. 
 
But once again, Mr. Chairperson, they miscalculated, because that 
was not the fact. People did care, people were interested, and we 
had a very lively session over the summer. 
 
But they were trying to avoid, by calling the session on June 17, 
Mr. Chairperson, they were trying to avoid public debate and 
public accountability. And that is an example of the 
anti-democratic methods and the anti-democratic manner in which 
the Premier and his government are prepared to operate. 
 
Another example of this government’s anti-democratic approach 
was found in the appointment of the Ombudsman. That was 
another example. Parliamentary tradition, Mr. Chairperson, 
dictated that there should be at least, at the very minimum, 
consultation with the opposition on the appointment of the 
Ombudsman. In fact, in Alberta they set up an all-party committee 
to look into it, which . . . and there are other provinces that do the 
same. 
 
But there was absolutely . . . Even though we had asked for an 
all-party committee, even though the former Ombudsman had 
suggested an all-party committee, there wasn’t one iota of 
consultation with the opposition, not even a telephone call. And 
out of the blue they appointed an Ombudsman — out of the blue, 
without once consulting with the opposition. Not once. And I say 
to you, Mr. Chairperson, that that is anti-democratic, and that’s 
unparliamentary, and it goes against the traditions of this House. 
 
But did you hear the Premier stand up and apologize for the 
appointment of this Ombudsman in that fashion? Did you hear the 
Premier explain why the Ombudsman was appointed in that 
fashion, Mr. Chairperson? Not once. He did not come forward 
with an explanation. But as I said earlier, Mr. Chairperson, he 
takes responsibility for these decisions. He takes full 
responsibility. 
 
And let’s take a look at health care very briefly, Mr. Chairperson. 
We’ve seen some of the largest changes in history, in recent 
memory, in the area of health care in this  

province, some of the largest changes, Mr. Chairperson. The 
health care system is being cut and wrecked, and yet there has 
been absolutely no discussion, before these cuts were made, with 
the public of this province. In fact there were promises made by 
the PC Party that medicare would be enhanced and preserved. And 
we have even shown ads in the . . . from election campaigns that 
the deterrent fees on prescription drugs would be withdrawn. So in 
spite of the promises that were made by the PC Party to preserve 
and enhance and improve upon medicare, this government, in its 
anti-democratic fashion, without a mandate from the public, has 
proceeded to cut and destroy and undermine the health care 
system. And I say that’s anti-democratic and unparliamentary and 
totally unacceptable by the public in this province. 
 
And let’s just briefly take a look at the Public Utilities Review 
Commission which was a PC promise, Mr. Chairperson, in 1982, 
that there be a Public Utilities Review Commission for the 
purpose of obtaining public input into the setting of utility rates. 
And it was introduced into this House with a great deal of fanfare 
and with very fancy and elaborate statements on the part of the 
government about the need for a Public Utilities Review 
Commission and the need for public input. But in 1987 what 
happens is the Premier’s government sets out to destroy the Public 
Utilities Review commission — sets out to destroy that, 
notwithstanding their promise of 1982, notwithstanding their 
promise of 1982. 
 
And they had absolutely no mandate to do that, Mr. Chairman, 
without coming forward with an alternative to embody the concept 
of public input into setting utility rates; without coming forward 
with some alternative because that was their promise in 1982. That 
was what the public wanted. For them to backtrack on that 
promise, Mr. Chairperson, without coming forward with an 
alternative, is anti-democratic and totally unfair on the part of this 
government. 
 
Bill 46 is another example, Mr. Chairperson, whereby the PC 
government destroyed the collective bargaining agreement 
between the employees of community colleges and the institutes, 
technical institutes, as a part of an attempt to centralize control; 
destroying a collective bargaining agreement, an agreement that 
had been negotiated over a long period of time and had been 
agreed upon just unilaterally. Destroy the collective bargaining 
agreement — totally unthinking on the part of this government, 
Mr. Chairperson, and highly anti-democratic. 
 
There’s absolutely no question, Mr. Chairperson, that the record of 
this government has been one — over the preceding months — 
one of incompetence, mismanagement, insensitivity, and one of a 
series of anti-democratic decision. And there’s no question there’s 
been a hue and cry across this province, as evidenced in the 
demonstration, as evidenced in the health care petition. And the 
people are still talking about the spring, and they’re still talking 
about the heartless and incompetent budget, and they’re not going 
to forget, Mr. Chairperson. They fell they cannot trust this 
government. And one cannot blame them for those feelings 
because what we’ve seen over the past few months is one promise 
after another being broken by this government. 
 
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3922 
 
 

And I only have to name a few. The tax increases, for example — 
notwithstanding PC promises that sales tax would be eliminated, 
personal income tax would be reduced, we have an increase in tax 
— PC promises that never again in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan will there be a gas tax as long as there is a PC 
government. Well, Mr. chairperson, I hope you’re keeping your 
receipts, because I’m keeping mine. Promises that the health care 
system would be improved. 
 
The member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden is chirping from his seat, 
Mr. chairperson. The fact of the matter is the gas tax is being paid 
by municipalities and by school boards, and every person in this 
province who’s a taxpayer pays it through their taxes. To suggest 
that the public of this province is not taking responsibility for gas 
tax is very dishonest on the part of the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 
 
Health is another example, Mr. Chairperson. Health is another 
example. Promises whereby the health system would be improved 
— totally ignored, promises broken. There’s absolutely no way 
they followed through on their promises with respect to the health 
care system. 
 
So it’s absolutely no wonder, Mr. Chairperson, when we look at 
one broken promises after another by this government, by one 
anti-democratic decision after another, by one unparliamentary 
decision after another, that the public of this province is saying 
they can’t believe what the PC government says, and they don’t 
trust them. 
 
And it’s very important, Mr. Chairperson, and Mr. Premier, that 
we don’t ignore democratic principles in our system. It’s very 
important. We mustn’t engage in illegal expenditures. The 
government shouldn’t delay calling the House solely for political 
purposes and a political agenda. The government shouldn’t ignore 
parliamentary tradition and just barge ahead like a bull in a china 
shop doing its own thing. 
 
These things are there for a reason. These traditions, these 
customs, these democratic principles, Mr. Chairperson, are there 
for a reason. We have lived by them for decades and decades, and 
they have served us well. But democracy is a very fragile thing 
and it can be easily eroded. It can be eroded in the manner in 
which this government has been proceeding in the last few 
months. It can be eroded by the intimidation of people, people 
who are afraid to speak out. And I hear this repeatedly, people feel 
uncomfortable and afraid to speak out because it may have 
financial repercussions for them. that’s an erosion. When we do 
that, when the government does that to people, intimidates them to 
that extent, it’s an erosion of our democratic principles. And we’ll 
all suffer some day as a result, if this erosion continues. 
 
(1030) 
 
And so I therefore want to urge the Premier, I want to urge the 
Premier, and I want to urge this government to reconsider its 
tactics of the past few months, to reassess the road on which it has 
been travelling, and not to make in the months to come decision of 
the nature and in the  

manner . . . decisions in the manner in which they did in the past. 
 
I want to urge the Premier and this government to uphold our 
democratic traditions, to respect freedom of speech on the part of 
individuals, to respect freedom of association on the part of 
individuals, and to discontinue its anti-democratic approach to 
governing this province. And therefore, I would like to ask the 
Premier, when this House adjourns, whether he is going to be 
continuing the sorts of decisions and cut-backs, cut programs, lost 
jobs, as he did prior to June 17 and shortly after. Is he going to be 
continuing with that method and manner of governing this 
province when this House adjourns. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, thank you for the 
opportunity to respond to the hon. member from Lakeview. She 
raises the point about not having her democratic rights exercised in 
Saskatchewan under this administration. She’s on television free 
for over half an hour to speak on anything she likes. 
 
These are Executive Council estimates; she never asked a question 
for over half an hour. She had never referred to the things that we 
normally go through, and she spoke to the people of the province 
with no regard for what we normally do in Executive Council, 
with complete disregard for the kinds of things that normally are 
the questions here. And after 30-some minutes she asks a question 
about, in a general sense, what’s going to happen next year. 
 
Well I can say to the hon. member, I mean, if people don’t think 
that you have your democratic rights being exercised, I mean, we 
just let you talk and talk and talk and put you on television across 
the province on anything you wanted to talk about. I mean, if 
anybody’s ever stretched the rules of the democratic process in 
this legislature, it was you just now. 
 
So I mean, for Heaven sakes, let it be known that you have your 
democratic rights to free speech in this Assembly, and you can 
peruse, at length, all the things that you want to talk about. And I 
don’t think you’ve fooled anybody in saying that you don’t have 
your democratic rights — the process isn’t democratic; I mean, 
you went on for some time. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Chairman, I also find it interesting that the social 
democrat would stand up and talk about rights when world-wide 
we know that socialist countries reduce rights — they remove 
rights, there’s no freedom. 
 
The member from Quill Lakes, the member from Quill Lakes, Mr. 
Chairman, would you ask him please to respect the legislative 
Assembly. He wants democratic right . . . If you want democratic 
rights, let me speak. The member from Quill Lakes is just like 
they are every place else where they have a radical socialist, that 
he can’t sit in his place and let me have freedom of speech — he’s 
got to bark, he’s got to bark from his place. 
 
Well I’ll say, Mr. Chairman, in all respect, throughout the socialist 
world there are not rights to free speech and free  
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3923 
 
 

democratic association and free . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I would ask members to allow the 
Premier to make his comments. The member from Lakeview 
made her comments. I would ask members to allow the Premier to 
make his comments in return. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I make the point, Mr. 
Chairman, that we allowed these people, the member from 
Lakeview, to speak for a half an hour and she wasn’t really 
supporting the government, and she stretched the truth, and she 
wasn’t accurate, and we sat here and let her speak. And when I 
stand in my place, in the first 30 seconds they’re hollering because 
they don’t respect the democratic process because they’re so 
hypocritical all the time — classic hypocrites, classic hypocrites. 
World-wide, Mr. Speaker, they don’t let people speak. They don’t 
give them freedom of the press, or freedom of religion. When they 
stand in the legislature and speak for half an hour, we don’t say 
anything. And when I get up to speak, they try to interrupt me. 
The member from Quill Lakes is the classic one. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Speak the truth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The truth is, socialism world-wide restricts 
rights. You don’t have the rights that you do in an open society. 
You don’t have the rights. You stand . . . Look it! Mr. Chairman, 
we have in this Legislative Chamber a process where we respect 
each other and allow each other to speak. And she’s talking about, 
the member from Lakeview, about democratic rights. When I get 
up on my feet, Mr. Chairman, they bark from their seat. I mean, 
they have no respect for the rights. They never did, and they never 
will. That’s the way it is. 
 
I will point out to the hon. members that one-half hour of free 
television to say anything you like is about an open democratic 
system as you can have. And the member from Lakeview 
exercised all that open democratic opportunity, spoke on anything 
that she liked, didn’t get into Executive Council estimates at all. 
And that’s about as free as you will find it. 
 
I can say to the hon. member . . . and she talks about the fact that 
we have a deficit, and she talks about the fact that there’s not 
enough money. And I can say to her, I wish we had more money. 
Doesn’t everybody in the country wish that wheat prices were 
higher. It’s difficult for farmers at $2.50 wheat. I mean, I 
understand that, and that’s why we spend money on farmers to 
help them. It’s extremely difficult. 
 
For people who have cancer disease, they want some help, so we 
build new cancer facilities. People who are going through 
rehabilitation want new facilities, and we build new cancer and 
rehabilitation facilities in the province. And we obviously would 
like to have more money to do that. 
 
We don’t like to see the price of oil go down. We don’t like to see 
the price of wheat go down or the price of potash go down. We 
would like to see it higher. 
 
And the hon. member says, well wouldn’t it be better if we had 
more money to spend on it? I agree with her.  

Wouldn’t it be better if we had had more money? And she says, 
well it’s not easy to raise taxes. It isn’t easy to raise taxes. It’s not 
easy to make choices with respect to how you’re going to spend 
the money, and the hon. member knows that. Nobody says it’s 
easy. 
 
If you want to build more nursing homes, 2,000 more spaces for 
senior citizens, Mr. Chairman, it takes some time. And it’s not 
easy. But we’ve asked people: do you need more nursing home 
capacity? And they say yes. And we have built more nursing 
home capacity. We’ve added expansion on City Hospital. We’re 
building a new City Hospital, a new University Saskatchewan 
Hospital, an expansion on St. Pauls’ Hospital, because people 
asked for that. 
 
They want drought payments. You have to have some compassion 
for people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And they want some 
help. Exactly. then we provide that kind of help. It’s not easy 
when you don’t have the money. People understand that. They 
would like to have as much assistance as possible when they have 
high interest rates or when it’s dry or when it’s flooding or when 
they are ill or when they have all kinds of problems. 
 
And it’s our intention to continue to provide that kind of support in 
interest rate protection, building new senior citizens’ 
accommodations, removing extra billing, Mr. Chairman, for the 
kinds of things that people want to see. And that’s very important. 
 
And if you want to look at the various kind of choices we have to 
make with respect to young people . . . You talk to senior citizens 
today, and they’re worried about their grandchildren when they 
hear about the AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) 
epidemic. And they’re worried about their grandchildren when 
they learn about the drug epidemic, and they want society and the 
government to help these young people get through these social 
problems of drugs and chemicals and alcohol and facing the AIDS 
epidemic world-wide. 
 
They want us to help them. And it’s not easy. I wish it was easier, 
but we have to address those kinds of things. We have to provide 
the money. We have to build those facilities. We have to build a 
new drug and rehabilitation centre for young people and the senior 
citizens worry about their grandchildren, and they worry about 
their children on the farms, their sons and daughters. 
 
And they, Mr. Chairman, would like to see us provide those goods 
and those services and those facilities to people across the 
province, and that’s why we’re building, Mr. Chairman. 
 
It takes a great deal of work in difficult times. Families know that. 
And members opposite would like to see us raise the price of 
wheat or raise the price of oil or not raise taxes and balance the 
budget all at the same time. Well it’s pretty difficult. It’s pretty 
difficult, and we know that it’s difficult. It’s difficult in Manitoba, 
it’s difficult in British Columbia, it’s difficult across the country to 
be able to do these kinds of things for people all at the same time 
so that we can provide the goods and services for people when 
they need them on time. 
 
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3924 
 
 

I can say, Mr. Chairman, if I might, the opposition raised the 
whole question of the democracy and providing the information as 
accurately as possible. They were wrong last night when it came 
to declaring Medicare Day. And the member from North 
Battlefords was obviously mistaken with respect to the pulp 
company, PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) in Prince 
Albert, the $91,000 a day. They won’t admit that, and I was right, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
I just want to remind hon. members that in 1981, when the hon. 
member mentioned Peat Marwick Mitchell had recorded a $24 
million profit, the interest cost was not charged against that, Mr. 
Chairman. So the company lost $11 million in ’81; $39 million in 
’82; $49 million in ’83; $15 million in ’84; and lost another $51 
million in 1985, because the interest was never paid. And so if you 
take $167 million and divide it by five years — 365 days a year — 
it’s $91,862 a day, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And they didn’t even include the interest rate expenses, and they 
wouldn’t even charge it to the company. So, Mr. Chairman, I just 
make that point that they were wrong on both accounts. And when 
they make mistakes and when they lose all this money, they won’t 
acknowledge it anyway. 
 
So I will just say, Mr. Chairman, when they talk about their 
democratic rights, they don’t let union members vote, Bob White 
won’t let union members vote, the NDP don’t let union members 
vote. The NDP won’t even let people vote against . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. In estimates all members have 
their opportunity to stand in their place and speak, so I would ask 
members to allow the Premier to make his comments when he is 
speaking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Obviously they 
don’t respect the democratic process. They won’t let me speak. 
They holler form their place because they can’t stand to hear the 
truth. 
 
I’ve just pointed out that, Bob White, the vice-president of the 
NDP across Canada won’t let his union members vote on a very 
important issue about separating out a Canadian union from an 
American union. They’re not allowed to vote — not democratic at 
all. It’s consistent with socialism world-wide. They won’t let 
people vote. There’s not freedom of speech, freedom of religion, 
freedom of press, freedom of association. And you can go all 
through the countries that are socialist, and that’s the case. 
 
And it’s the same here with respect to the union members. They 
won’t let them vote whether they want to be part of a union in 
Canada or be part of a North American union. They stand in their 
place and they talk about rights, but when we sit here and talk 
about them, they interrupt me because they don’t believe in free 
speech. They are so inconsistent, Mr. Chairman. I think people 
have to acknowledge the fact that world-wide they’re this way, 
and they treat people that way, and in this Assembly they treat us 
exactly the same way. 
 
And the children that come in here know it as well. And  

they look at the opposition and they say, you know, you talk about 
democratic rights but you won’t live by democratic rights. You 
don’t even let your own memberships vote. 
 
Well I point out, Mr. chairman, that we have the ability, we have 
the ability and the talent and the capacity and the compassion to 
help people across the province of Saskatchewan in difficult times, 
whether it’s because of high interest rates, whether it’s because of 
drug problems, whether it’s because of cancer clinics that we have 
to build or rehabilitation centres, new facilities for education, new 
facilities for health care. It takes money, and it takes a great deal of 
work. And it’s not easy, Mr. Chairman, but we are quite prepared 
to make those decisions. 
 
(1045) 
 
I will say, Mr. Chairman, as a case in point — the opposition 
members would say, well yes, Mr. Premier, you’re spending a 
great deal of money on health, much more than we did. But I think 
you should fix teenagers’ teeth as opposed to a new drug 
rehabilitation centre. That’s a fair argument. But we would choose, 
Mr. Chairman, to help young people address the drug problem, 
and they would choose to fix their teeth, free. Now there’s a 
classic difference of opinion. 
 
The problems of this decade and the next decade and the next 
century will be linked to chemicals and drugs and problems 
associated with the social pressures, and we are going to address 
those. Others might say, Mr. Chairman, that they want to address 
their teeth, and they can argue about that. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, again I will come back to the decisions. 
There’s no doubt that we spend more money on health and social 
services and agriculture and education than they did. We can argue 
about where it’s spent, and I think that’s fair ball, but not the fact 
that we are spending more for people when, in fact, they need the 
kind of help that is provided even in difficult times. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. The Premier had 
said that socialism restricts rights. Well I don’t agree with that. 
Communism may, but so does Fascism restrict rights, and as far as 
I’m concerned there’s not much difference between the two. But 
there are many socialist countries, and he knows it. He had Mr. 
Mitterrand here this winter, who is a socialist president in France. 
And we only have to name Sweden and Austria as examples. And 
the Premier is not being fair with the public of this province when 
he makes that statement. And he knows it, and the public knows it. 
 
I just want to ask the Premier whether he thinks the decision in the 
electoral boundaries Act to eliminate opposition consultation in 
setting up the commission and putting in a Chief Electoral Officer, 
which is a political hack, and taking out a non-political person, the 
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, is a democratic decision on the 
part of his government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that there was 
recently an editorial in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix,  
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3925 
 
 

for example. It said nobody could question the impartiality of the 
appointments, and they are impartial as can be, and they’re 
appointed from people from the bench, and it’s precisely the way 
we should be able to appoint them. And they do the same across 
the country, Mr. chairman. So, as the editorial said, nobody could 
question the impartiality of this boundaries commission, and I 
agree with them. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Premier, what do you have to say 
about Dr. Norman Ward’s comments, the head of the political 
science department at the University of Saskatchewan, who 
commented on the lack of impartiality in the way the commission 
was set up, and said he wouldn’t even sit on it if he was asked. 
What do you have to say about his comments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve just said that we’ve had 
a major editorial in one of the leading newspapers that endorsed 
this, that said nobody can question it as being impartial. So if you 
question nudges . . . are you questioning the judiciary? I mean, if 
you want to find people who may agree or may disagree with the 
various opinions, we can go into Meech Lake, we can go into 
trade, we can go into agriculture policy — all kinds of different 
policies — where you can find somebody that says, well, I would 
do it some other way. 
 
But I mean, clearly there will be differences of opinion, but this is 
as impartial as you can see any place in the country, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Premier, why do you give less credence to Dr 
Norman Ward than you do to the editorialist to whom you’re 
referring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve just pointed out, 
we put together a package in Meech Lake and some members of 
the NDP vote against it. Every political party in the country 
supported it; the premiers supported it; the Prime Minister 
supported it. And members of the NDP voted against it, and they 
found people in the academic community who said it wasn’t any 
good. And it’s good for the country. It knits us all together, brings 
Quebec into the country, because the NDP didn’t bring them in 
when they signed the constitution in ’81 — they failed. And 
they’re finding all these people who would now support the 
position that they took, and they say, well, what about this? 
 
It was right to give Saskatchewan a veto. Finally we’ve got the 
same power as Quebec and Ontario. And you can find academics 
in other places that say, well, I don’t think that this is exactly 
perfect; I don’t think this is right. And you can go dig them up. 
 
Well on Meech Lake, it’s right, and not the whole country agrees, 
and you can find academics that disagree. And I’m sure you can 
find academics that would disagree with things that happen in the 
legislature. You may find academics in parliamentary procedure 
who would question the member from Lakeview being able to 
stand here and talk about everything she wanted to for half an hour 
and never get into estimates. I mean, I don’t even know where 
that’s included in the rules. So I mean you can probably find 
people who would question her  

behaviour and say, well, it’s a little bit . . . it’s stretching. 
 
So Mr. Chairman, I would say, you can find your specialists; other 
people can find their specialists. Okay? You want me to respond 
to the question; I’ll respond to the question. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairperson, the Premier obviously doesn’t 
want to hear from me today because he’s looking for some 
technicality to say that I shouldn’t have made the comments that I 
made. 
 
The fact of the matter is, he is Premier of the province, he is 
responsible for the decisions of this government; he’s responsible 
for all the policies, and these are Executive Council estimates. And 
so we are talking about his government’s policies under these 
estimates, and it’s very relevant to the topic. He may wish to argue 
it’s not relevant, because he doesn’t want to account for his 
policies, Mr. Chairperson. 
 
With respect to The Electoral Boundaries (Commission) Act, I 
think that it’s just facetious to suggest that when the Chief 
Electoral Officer is appointed to the commission that it’s not a 
political appointment and it’s total impartial. Nobody’s going to 
believe that out there, Mr. Chairman, absolutely nobody. 
 
but I want to ask the Premier with respect to the Public Utilities 
Review Commission — in 1982 he spoke in favour of a Public 
Utilities Review Commission and talked about open government 
and public input into setting utility rates. Why was PURC good in 
1982 and no good in 1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the NDP had voted against 
PURC when we initiated it, and then when we cancel it they say, 
well, gee, are you sure that you wanted this. I mean, are you for or 
against PURC? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Look at the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well tell me so that I can know. Are you for 
or against it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well you just said you knew. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well you campaigned against it. You said it 
would be expensive. And when it comes to becoming expensive 
and we cancel it, then you say, well we should have it. Well which 
way do you want it? 
 
We set it up to monitor utilities and the cost increases to 
consumers, and we found out because of the hearings and because 
of the legal people that you had to hire, that it wasn’t saving any 
money. So we cancelled it because we can save more money by 
regulating the rates. And so you weren’t for it when we set it up, 
and you’re against it when we take it down. So I mean, I wish 
you’d make up your mind. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairperson, just for the record, and this is, I 
think, at least the third time I’ve said this in the House in this 
Assembly. The NDP voted for the Public Utilities Review 
Commission on third reading. Either the Premier doesn’t know his 
facts and have them straight, or  
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3926 
 
 

he has decided to twist the truth on the matter. But the fact of the 
matter is that it was their promise in 1982. They promised a Public 
Utilities Review Commission, they were elected in 1982, they 
promised open government, and in 1987 that promise has been 
broken by this government. And they are now shutting the doors 
to public input into setting utility rate. And that’s anti-democratic, 
and the Premier has not been able to give an adequate explanation 
here in the House today. 
 
And I would like to ask the Premier, Mr. Chairman, what he 
thinks about the appointment of the Ombudsman and the fact that 
there was absolutely no consultation with the opposition? Does he 
not agree that that was an anti-democratic approach to take on the 
part of his government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. chairman, let me say that the record 
shows that the NDP argued against PURC day after day. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re wrong. Go look at the records. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, the record. And you argued against the 
principle, you argued against the principle of it for a long time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We would have done a cost study, at least. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well okay, he said he would have done a 
cost study. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. The member from Quill Lakes 
is continually interrupting. He has every opportunity to rise in his 
place and make speeches or debate or ask questions in committee, 
but when someone else has the floor, I would ask him to give him 
the opportunity to express his views. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
appreciate the co-operation from the members opposite. 
 
I said that we introduced PURC to help regulate utility prices and 
charges. It was found to be too expensive, Mr. Chairman, and so 
we removed the agency because people were literally spending 
millions of dollars to monitor the rates, and we were not saving the 
kind of money that we thought we’d be able to save for the 
consumers because the taxpayer ended up paying more and more 
money. 
 
Secondly, with respect to the qualifications of the Ombudsman, I 
don’t think anybody can question the qualifications and the 
professionalism of the Ombudsman that has been appointed — a 
man who has served in many capacities: he’s served in 
government; he’s served in his community; he’s served in a law 
firm; he’s served on volunteer organizations and . . . tremendous 
qualifications. So I believe the province will benefit to a very large 
extent and is fortunate to have a man of these qualifications serve 
in that capacity. 
 

Ms. Simard: — Why didn’t your government consult with the 
opposition in accordance with parliamentary tradition, Mr. 
Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we advised the 
opposition early in April, I believe, of the appointment of Mr. 
McLellan as an Acting Ombudsman and of his intention to be 
appointed permanently. And we got some response in the media 
from the opposition, and it wasn’t favourable; it was negative; that 
this man was not qualified; he was just an anti-NDPer or a pro-PC 
supporter. And I mean it’s the classic response. So I mean, the 
opposition was advised, and advised of an acting position, and 
then they complained. And obviously at the appropriate time, 
when the legislature came back in, we made it a full-time position 
and a permanent position. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairperson, the reason why the 
Ombudsman was appointed as Acting Ombudsman is because you 
had to come to the House, because the government had to come to 
the House to appoint this individual as a permanent opposition. 
But the Acting Ombudsman position was in effect a fait accompli 
for the appointment of the Ombudsman, and there was absolutely 
no consultation with the opposition in that regard whatsoever. 
 
The tradition in other provinces, Mr. Speaker, is to set up an 
all-party committee, or at least to consult with the opposition 
before any names are put forward. In fact, and that has been our 
tradition as well in this province, and as well it’s been our tradition 
to advertise for positions, not to just pick somebody out of Estevan 
for the job. So I think that I’ve . . . There’s absolutely no question, 
Mr. Premier, that the decision was made contrary to parliamentary 
tradition, and it was an anti-democratic decision. And you can say 
what you like, Mr. Premier, but you haven’t given us an 
explanation. We wrote to you on more than one occasion asking 
for input and an all-party committee. And we never received a 
reply, and your appointment was announced before we even heard 
anything about it. And I say that flies in the face of parliamentary 
tradition of this House, and it’s another peg in the coffin of this 
government and its anti-democratic traditions. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I would like to know, when this House 
adjourns, whether you are going to be engaging in further 
unthinking and heartless cuts to programs and further heartless and 
cruel cuts to jobs of the people of this province. Will you be doing 
that after this House adjourns, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, as the hon. member knows, 
the job record in the province of Saskatchewan is the best in 
western Canada, and has been for the last five years, and it ranks 
second now in all of Canada, because our concern is particularly 
for young people and providing them full-time employment. And 
it’s not perfect, but it’s obviously the very best in western Canada 
and second in all of Canada. 
 
And we are increasing our diversification on processing and 
manufacturing, broadening, deepening the economy. The Minister 
of Tourism announced expansion of a whole thrust in that area this 
morning, or yesterday, Mr. Chairman, to increase jobs. 
 
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3927 
 
 

And if she is referring to jobs only in the public sector, I will say 
to the hon. member, yes, we have limited the size of growth in the 
public sector. In fact, government is about 2,000 people smaller 
than it was when we took office, and that’s to save the taxpayers 
some money. 
 
(1100) 
 
Now I know as a socialist she’d rather have more people in work 
for government. That’s why they bought mines, and they bought 
farm land, and they bought pulp companies, and they would buy 
packing plants, because they want everybody working for the 
government. 
 
I’m a capitalist, and I don’t believe in that. I believe as much as 
possible should go to the private sector. and world-wide, Mr. 
Chairman, more and more people, even in China, even in the 
Soviet Union, even in the real hard-core socialist countries, they 
are moving towards more free enterprise and more private sector. 
Even in Australia, in Great Britain, the Labour Party, for Heaven 
sakes, supports privatization. but not here in Saskatchewan, and 
not in Canada. They are still quite strident. 
 
I would say most new jobs, almost all new jobs come from small 
business. And we encourage small business, and that’s why we 
have a good record, reasonable record here in Saskatchewan in 
terms of employment. 
 
So the hon. member wants to know if I will maintain my concern 
for protecting people against high interest rates, protecting them 
against drought, protecting them against disaster at the farm level. 
I will be concerned about jobs; I’ll try to provide as many new 
jobs as possible for young people, and I think that’s a good idea. I 
will increase my expenditures on health, education, and social 
services. They will be increasing, to a large extent, new facilities 
for cancer patients, new hospitals in Saskatoon, a new City 
Hospital, expansions there, new rehabilitation centre. Yes, yes, yes 
to the hon. member. 
 
We will continue to provide good employment, good protection, 
and to have the largest expenditures any place that you would find 
in Canada, except for Alberta, on health care, education, social 
services, and we will continue to make those very large priorities. 
 
And I can say, not only for young people, but indeed senior 
citizens, and that’s why, because we cared a great deal, Mr. 
Chairman, we provided $500 per person for senior citizens and up 
to $700 per couple for those senior citizens that have low income. 
Now nobody else is doing that in the country, Mr. Speaker, and 
certainly the NDP didn’t. But for senior citizens out there that are 
watching this morning, I can say, if you make below $25,000, you 
get $500 cash every year from the government, and if you live as a 
couple, you get $700. And that, plus the removing of extra billing, 
saves thousands and thousands of dollars for people who have 
formerly had to pay. 
 
So I say yes to the hon. member, we will continue to be 
compassionate and care, and spend more and more and more 
money on education and health care and social services so, in fact, 
young people and seniors and farmers  

and others throughout the province can benefit from the fact that 
we can provide good and excellent service even in difficult times. 
And we all know that it isn’t easy, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairperson, Mr. Premier, you indicated that 
the civil service was some 2,000 people smaller, but what you 
failed to state was the fact that some of the people who were fired 
were actually hired back as temporary employees and may not be 
included in the overall picture when you state your figures as to 
the size of the civil service. You’ve also failed to indicate that a lot 
of this work is being contracted out as well. So the money is still 
being spent but in different areas. 
 
You had said that you want to send as much as possible out to the 
private sector. Well I would like to suggest to you that when you 
talk private sector, you talk friends of the Tory party. That’s what 
you’re referring to as private sector. A lot of the business that 
you’re contracting out is going to friends of the Tory party. And 
we’ve received a number of complaints that the tendering 
procedures of this government are unfair and that people aren’t 
being given an opportunity to fairly tender on some of these 
government contracts. So let’s give the public the complete 
picture. 
 
Now you didn’t answer my question, Mr. Premier, and my 
question was: are you going to be firing more people when this 
House adjourns — firing more people in the public sector when 
this House adjourns? Are you going to be doing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, it’s true that most people in 
business are free enterprise, and they support the PC government, 
and make no mistake about it. So if they want to say all the Tories 
in the province and all the business men that are free enterprise are 
our friends, I will say that. So they call it patronage because the 
free enterprise people and the small business support the PC 
government, and that’s the time . . .  
 
She talks about everything that the government does is patronage. 
Could I say to the hon. member, I think it’s true that the member 
from Lakeview sought the nomination for the NDP in Regina 
North West in 1979. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Regina North West? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Regina North West. And she received 
$7,100 from the Attorney General’s department in ’81-82 for legal 
services rendered. Now were you NDP? did you run for the NDP, 
and did you get $7,000 in legal services from the NDP from the 
Attorney General? Did you? Is that the case? Have you ever heard 
of . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll bet you it was public tender. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, was it public tender? There’s a Mr. 
Alex Taylor who was a minister of the United Church, a defeated 
NDP MLA and former cabinet minister. In 1975-77 this fellow 
was appointed chairman of the Workers’ Compensation Board; 
1977-79 he was appointed special adviser to the assistant deputy 
minister of Health, at the same time; and chairman of a task force 
on rehabilitation in 1980; then received special  
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3928 
 
 

permission for a leave of absence to conduct a study for Sask 
Housing. Well I ask the hon. member from Lakeview whether her 
$7,000 gift had anything to do with the fact that she was NDP 
when the NDP government was in power. Is that the case? 
 
We could go through quite a number of these, Mr. Chairman, if 
they want to get into this. Margaret Fern, I think Margaret Fern 
was an NDP candidate and sought the nomination prior to ’81, and 
she received $9.700 honorarium for special services and from the 
Department of Labour — 1981-82. I think she was an NDP 
candidate, as far as I can tell. 
 
We looked at former NDP MP, Mr. Bill Knight, who was 
appointed to the government of the NDP. His last salary was 
something like $4,972 a month times 12 was 59,000 . . . $60,000 a 
year in 1982 — 1982 equivalent dollars. 
 
And we can look at . . . well, if you want to look at the list of the 
Koskie family that was appointed by the NDP to the 
administrations, I mean, it would almost fill the entire department 
of . . . well, at least . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Telephones. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The Department of Telephones, that’s right. 
Koskies, Koskies, and Koskies, and Koskies, and I’m sure that 
they weren’t NDP, I mean, they couldn’t have been NDP if they 
were related to the member from Quill Lakes, but obviously 
appointed. 
 
But I think it’s very interesting to note when the hon. member 
talks about patronage from Lakeview, and I’m sure all her 
constituents are going to know because I’m going to make sure 
that they do know, that she received $7,100 after she ran as an 
NDP from the NDP government of that day. 
 
So if she says that all small business in Saskatchewan that receives 
economic incentives to encourage people to grow, all the people in 
tourism, and all the farmers, and all the other people who 
appreciate the government because we are free enterprise and 
because we are not socialist, are all patronage, well I guess you’d 
have to say that all these people support the government and that’s 
why small business invariably doesn’t support socialism because 
the government wants to take them over — they want to take them 
over. 
 
Free enterprisers say, you go operate the business; and the 
socialists say, no, we’ll tell you how to run it. Try to set up a small 
business in Czechoslovakia or in Poland or in the U.S.S.R. and see 
how far you get. Try to set up a small business any place where 
the socialists have control. Do you know what happens, it’s 
impossible. 
 
I will say to the hon. member . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — There’s lots of small businesses in 
Czechoslovakia. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I want to put it on the record. 
The member from Regina North East and the member from 
Regina Rosemont are saying, there’s lots of good small businesses 
in Czechoslovakia and in Poland.  

They’re defending it right now. Let the record show their heads 
are going up and down. They defend the system in 
Czechoslovakia and in Poland. I knew eventually they would 
because they can’t stand to hear the truth. They want to live just 
like it is in Poland and Czechoslovakia and say, look at all the new 
businesses. 
 
Well, you stand in your place, you stand in your place and say 
how much you like the life and the freedom of speech and the 
freedom of religion and the freedom of association and the 
freedom of press in Czechoslovakia and Poland, and how the 
small businesses like it. 
 
Do you know what they . . . Well you can look at it in Poland, you 
don’t even have freedom of religion. Well, Mr. Chairman, they 
can take a Catholic priest and they can dig him out of the trunk in 
Poland. And you can defend that system. You defend that system. 
Okay, you talk about freedom of religion and freedom of the press. 
 
Okay, you want to talk about patronage. The NDP wrote the book 
on patronage, and the book is pretty deep. And, Mr. Chairman, I 
will just say, and finally, small business supports the PC 
government because small business believes in free enterprise and 
so do we, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairperson, this hilarious display is just an 
example of what I’ve been saying all morning. He refused to 
answer my question, and that’s very typical about the way this 
government operates — question and answer period has 
deteriorated to a question period. We ask a question and we never 
get any answers, and that’s one of the reasons why this House has 
been delayed because we have to ask questions a dozen times 
before we get an answer, and in many cases we still don’t get an 
answer, because they refuse to answer questions because they 
don’t want to be accountable to the people of this province. And 
that’s another example of their anti-democratic approach to the 
governing of this province. He refused to answer my question. 
 
And with respect to their whole approach while they’re going out 
and paying George Hill some $200,000, and giving money away 
to Peter Pocklington, and Weyerhaeuser; while they go around the 
province paying Paul Schoenhals and other Tory hacks tens of 
thousands of dollars, they are cutting back programs, they’re 
cutting back people’s jobs, firing people left, right, and centre, and 
destroying families. But they’re lining their pockets and they’re 
making sure that the friends of the Tory party are very well looked 
after. And I say that that’s anti-democratic and the public of this 
province are not going to put up with it, Mr. Chairperson. 
 
And with respect to the inhumane manner in which many of the 
firings took place before June 17, one of the individuals who lost 
his job, who had formerly lived some time ago in a communist 
bloc country, said to me that this system here in Saskatchewan 
was not unlike the country he had come from except in the country 
he came from he would have at least had two weeks notice. And 
that’s what this government has deteriorated to in their tactics. 
 
Mr. Chairperson, there’s absolutely no question that this 
government does not want to change its tactics in spite of the fact 
we’ve brought it to their attention on numerous  
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3929 
 
 

occasions, in spite of the fact I’ve brought it to the attention of the 
Premier this morning. He does not recognize the fact that his 
actions have been anti-democratic and unparliamentary. he doesn’t 
recognize that. He won’t admit that, and by not recognizing it, and 
not dealing with it this morning, he is sending a message out to the 
public of Saskatchewan that he intends to continue in this 
inhumane, cruel, and anti-democratic fashion. 
 
And I wish to warn him once again that the public is not going to 
stand for that. All he has to do is look at the polls to see that they 
do not appreciate it. And I challenge him, I challenge him, if he 
thinks he’s right in doing the things that he’s done, to call a 
by-election in Saskatoon Eastview so we can see how the public 
really feels about his government’s policies. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we were through this before. 
The NDP asked us to call a by-election in Regina North East and 
we did. And they said, oh look it, the people are saying this is 
going to be a big change. And then we had a general election and 
they lost again, and now they want another by-election, and they 
keep calling for elections. 
 
I mean, they are governed by polls because they have no 
principles. They have no principles. If the poll told them to do this, 
they’d do that. If the poll told them to do this, they would do that. 
They don’t believe in any principle. They’re all over the place, Mr. 
Chairman. That’s precisely what they do. If they didn’t have polls, 
if they didn’t have polls to talk about, what would they talk about? 
 
All they could say is that . . . well their leader was in town last 
night for his big wrap-up. What he said in town was different than 
what he said in the country. Did you see that? The polls in the 
country say privatization is popular in the country. The polls say in 
town privatization is not. So when he’s in town he says, we won’t 
change our principles. That’s what he said. When he’s out in the 
country he says, we’ll have to be more progressive; we’ll have to 
try to find new ideas for the people. 
 
I mean, these folks are governed by polls all the time. They go in 
front of the unions and they say what the union wants to hear and 
they get two standing ovations, and then they go downtown in 
Estevan where Rafferty damn is popular and they say, oh, we’d 
build Rafferty here. They come back to Regina and say, oh, we’d 
never build Rafferty. I mean, we see it all the time. It’s the same 
hypocritical stuff they’ve been doing for years. 
 
They will say whatever is necessary to any person, whether it’s 
inconsistent or not, rural or urban, downtown or uptown. They’ve 
been doing it for years. Nobody believes that. So now they say the 
polls are up. And they say, well, call a by-election and we’ll show 
you. Well, we’ve already done that, and you won a little 
by-election and we won the general election again, because people 
know when it gets to the bottom line, why would you want to give 
it to that bunch? 
 
(1115) 
 

I mean, they don’t really care. They didn’t spend half the money 
we did in health. they weren’t spending the money in education. 
They weren’t protecting people against high interest rates. They 
didn’t care about seniors — they put a moratorium on nursing 
homes. Their leader right now says, ration technology for seniors. 
Keep them out of nursing homes, and he’s on the record. I mean, 
you could just about . . . anything you’d want to write, you could 
put it in front of them, and they’d say it if they thought the polls 
would be right. Okay. 
 
Mr. Chairman, let me just say this. This administration knows 
exactly where it’s going. We are going to defend families; we’re 
going to defend families’ rights; we’re going to defend children; 
we’re going to defend young people, we’re going to look after 
senior citizens; we are going to take whatever’s necessary even if 
it means short-run deficits, Mr. Chairman. We are prepared to take 
that to protect families, and protect people. And you ask those that 
have faced high interest rates, or want to see new cancer facilities, 
or rehabilitation centres, or a new college of Agriculture, or new 
technical schools in Prince Albert, or new facilities across the 
province — that’s what we’re prepared to do. 
 
Not just chatter about it, like you chatter and peep-peep along, like 
you’ve been doing for years and years, but actually deliver — 
actually deliver. Then, Mr. Chairman, we are prepared to do that 
because we’ve got direction. We do not govern by polls, we 
govern by principle, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Premier, in 
the Speech from the Throne on December 3, you announced the 
establishment of a potash institute. Where is that institute now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The potash institute, Mr. Chairman, was 
announced that it would be built and located in the province of 
Saskatchewan in the city of Saskatoon. It is the appropriate place 
for it because we are the potash capital of North American and 
indeed in the free world, and supply about 80 per cent of the 
potash, in fact, to the United States. So the Canpotex is 
headquartered there for world-wide marketing arms. The Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan and the potash institute will be right 
therein the critical mass of expertise that his necessary for 
domestic mining and international sales. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Where is the potash institute in Saskatoon, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We’ll get you the address for the potash and 
potash and phosphates institute that is in Saskatoon. I don’t have 
the address but we’ll provide it to you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Sir, where is the potash institute you announced 
would be established in the Speech from the Throne? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I said that the potash and 
phosphate institute is there now and there will be expansions 
associated with a world-wide potash institute. We have made the 
changes with respect to  
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3930 
 
 

Canpotex coming here and setting up its head office; the potash 
and phosphate institute coming here for research. And we’re 
setting up a larger potash institute which builds on that critical 
mass. 
 
You would say to me, well, Mr. Premier, where is the new College 
of Agriculture building? We’ve allocated the money to build it, the 
plans are there, the architects are doing the things, but I can’t show 
you the building yet. But obviously you said the same thing about, 
well, where’s the upgrade in Regain? Where’s the paper mill in 
P.A.? Same story, go ask your friends from P.A. They said, well, 
Mr. Premier, where’s the paper mill? right? That’s what you were 
saying all during the election. Well the paper mill is now being 
built and you see it going up. 
 
You will see in Saskatoon, I mean you can watch, the fact that 
there will be a potash institute, because I said there’s going to be 
one and there will be one. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Sir, when do you expect this potash institute to 
be built? Can we expect it to commence, construction to 
commence, within the next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I can only say to the hon. member, in the 
near future. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, sir, it’s been, with all respect, it’s been a 
year since you announced the establishment of that institute — 
just a month under a year. I don’t think that is the very near future. 
People have waited almost a year now for it. They’re anxious to 
know when it will be established, when construction of this 
building will begin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I know this is the hon. 
member’s first term in the legislature, and I don’t know who got to 
him in terms of getting him to run for the NDP, but he should go 
back and look at the history of promises undelivered by your 
colleagues. I mean the Meridian bridge was offered, I think, five 
or six . . .  
 
The member from Quill Lakes, Mr. Chairman, has finally woke up 
again. We should send him another cup of coffee, because every 
once in a while he jumps up. 
 
The NDP have a litany of promises that they have not delivered 
on, undelivered. You take the Meridian bridge —how many years 
did you . . . How many years . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’ve asked members to allow the 
member on his feet to make his comments. Everybody in the 
committee gets an opportunity, so I would ask members . . . Order. 
Order. I would ask members to allow the member that has the 
floor to make his comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member asks me 
about the timing of a new facility. I could say, the Potash & 
Phosphate Institute (of Canada) is 704 CN Towers. The phone 
number is 652-3537. 
 
Now we are going to be expanding the potash institute to make it a 
world-wide research . . . with some research capacity. And we 
have already got the phosphate institute that is there, the potash 
and phosphate institute, plus Canpotex. I say to the hon. member: 
look, when we say  

we’re going to build an agriculture college, or we’re going to build 
a co-op upgrader or we’re going to build a new bacon plant, we 
have built them — or the paper mill, and he knows that. 
 
I just remind the hon. member when he starts to look at the NDP 
record of building, they didn’t build one potash mine, they didn’t 
build one pulp mill, they didn’t build one packing plant and they 
didn’t build one upgrader. They promised the Borden bridge for 
election after election and the Meridian bridge election after 
election; the P.A. technical school, I don’t know how many 
elections they promised that, and they didn’t build them. So, you 
know, before you get a little too sanctimonious, I mean . . .  
 
Even if you had built one mine, one new mine, but you didn’t 
even build one. And you’re asking me about a potash and 
phosphate institute that has moved there since we’re here — we 
brought it here, and we’re going to expand it. I mean, how can you 
expect me to accept the criticisms that we’re not building when 
you’ve never seen so much building. 
 
Three weeks ago the Market Place of the Leader-Post had to say: 
a building boom going on in Regina, for Heaven’s sake. We’ve 
got a new trade and conference centre, we’ve got the upgrader 
being built, we’ve got a rehabilitation centre. I mean, tremendous 
economic activity. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I just point out that the Potash & Phosphate 
Institute (of Canada) is at 704 CN Towers in Saskatoon and we are 
going to . . . the phone number is 652-3535, for the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Sir, where might I find the budgetary allocation 
for the expansion that you are going to be doing in association 
with making this institute a world-wide institute? Where is there 
provision for that in the budget? I am new to the legislation and I’d 
appreciate it if you could detail that for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we have people . . . and I 
know that you expect government to run everything, and why you 
supported the unilateral purchase of the potash mines by 
government. You didn’t call an election to do that, you just bought 
all those mines. Let’s put that on the record. 
 
Secondly, the private sector would like to invest in a research 
institute, in potash, that would give us expertise and the critical 
mass of that expertise to be associated with Canpotex, with the 
university, with engineering and the world-wide marketing of 
fertilizer here. And the private sector is interested in doing that. 
 
I mean, the private sector developed North America. People built 
the farms, built businesses and everything, and you keep going 
back and saying, well what about government? Well government 
wasn’t here. Government facilitated in allowing people to come 
into this country to build. 
 
So I mean, there are a large number of people involved in the 
potash industry and the fertilizer industry in the  
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3931 
 
 

private sector, and they are very excited about the possibility of a 
research institution and a potash institution that they could allocate 
funds for research in China on productivity and looking at the 
whole question of fertilizer demand and growth for years and 
years to come. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Sir, in this same Speech from the Throne, you 
announced the establishment of a biotechnology institute. I’m 
wondering if you could tell me where that biotechnology institute 
is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the biotech institute is being 
planned for the University of Saskatoon, and it is to be fitted into 
the research critical mass that is there among specialists. And we 
are consulting with the western diversification thrust by the federal 
government and our own educational thrust, plus the research and 
technology in high tech, and putting together the best package that 
is possible for the University of Saskatchewan and the private 
sector and others that are doing high-tech research. 
 
As you know, we are moving more and more towards an 
information-based economy and a technology-based economy. 
And the biotechnology research that is going on now at the U. of 
S. is some of the best in Canada, and certainly some of the best in 
western Canada. And we are accessing as many federal funds and 
provincial funds and private sector funds to knit them together 
with what the university is doing now, and particularly in 
agriculture and in biology, and in the combination of new tech, 
biotech, and the combination of things that we’re doing there. So I 
would say that it’s the U. of S. A combination of funds are being 
accessed, which is local, provincial, private sector and federal. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Sir, when will we see the establishment of this 
institute in terms of it actually beginning to become operative. It 
was announced on December 3. We sit here today on November 4 
— almost a year later. When will we see the operative 
establishment of this biotech institute on the U. of S. campus? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, the Science and Technology officials 
tell me that it will be up and running in 1988, which is next year, 
and I believe that that’s about on track and about on schedule, with 
respect to research institutions that you put together when you’re 
accessing various kinds of funds — private, public, provincial and 
federal. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And, sir, where might I find indications of 
government funding for this institute at the U. of S.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well we are in the process of accessing all 
sorts of money, and we are negotiating and working with various 
kinds of alternatives with the university money, private sector 
money, federal money, and provincial money. And depending on 
how much private money we may have, and how much federal 
money we have, and the priorities of the university, then we will 
know, at that time, the allocation of money in 1988 towards this 
institute. 
 
So it’s a combination of things. Put it this way, if we don’t  

have to fund it all ourselves, there is some incentive, and I’m sure 
you would agree, to get the private sector and municipalities or the 
university and its sources of funds, because it fits what they’re 
doing in their biotech research, and the federal government, to get 
as much money from all these players as possible before we just 
jump up and down and say we have a 100 per cent funding for any 
particular project. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well sir, you jumped up and down last 
December talking about the creation of this institute. At that point, 
from what I understand now, you had no fiscal provision for it. 
I’m wondering how you can announce the establishment of a 
biotech institute at the U of S campus and have no fiscal provision 
in your own budget for it. 
 
How do you know, in fact, that the private sector or the federal 
sector is going to participate and to what extent they’re going to 
participate in this venture unless you, yourself, have made a 
commitment in terms of the budgetary allocations for the opening 
of this project in ’88? And I’d like to know where provision for 
those allocations are indicated in the budget that you’re 
responsible for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I know this is your first term in the 
legislature, but let me give another example. We announced that 
we were going to build an upgrader with the Co-op Refinery and 
the federal government. Co-op Refinery, federal government, 
provincial government agrees we’re going to build a new upgrader 
right here in Regina — the biggest project in the history of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it wasn’t in our budget, wasn’t in our budget. And it’s going 
to be class of the world, world-class in terms of some of the finest 
. . . and if the NDP missed it, it was right in front of their nose. It’s 
in Regina North West, and the member from Regina North West 
pooh-poohs it every day. He doesn’t like it. He didn’t built it . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — North East. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — North East, that’s right, I’m sorry. 
 
Now we announced that project, Mr. Chairman . . . Mr. Chairman, 
look it, when I talk about a project that they missed, because they 
are too busy buying rather than building, they have to chirp from 
their seat. 
 
Let me just say to the hon. member, let me say to the hon. 
member, that when we announced building the upgrader it wasn’t 
in the budget. We said we are going to build it — we’ve cut an 
agreement in principle with the federal government and Co-op 
refinery, and we’re going to build that. And we just finalized the 
financing. It was a month or two months ago, all the financing 
came together, and we signed and had all the bankers and all this 
done. 
 
Now we’re going to have a new research institute in Saskatoon, 
and there will be some provincial money and hopefully some 
private money and federal money and other sources of money. 
And you will see it happen. 
 
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3932 
 
 

Now when its done, I hope you stand in your place and say, thank 
you, Mr. Premier, for the new biotech institute, and thank you for 
the new agriculture college, and thank you for the new biotech . . . 
or geological sciences building, and thank you for New City 
Hospital, and thank you for the expansion, University Hospital and 
St. Paul’s Hospital, the new cancer facilities. Okay. You ask, we 
will tell you, and we will deliver them. And you can check them 
off — one, two, three, four, five. 
 
And then you look back at the NDP’s record and say, well it’s 
pretty flat — pretty flat in the ’70s and ’80s in Saskatoon. What 
did they build? You know, they nationalized the potash industry, 
and that’s about the size of it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Sir, on December 3 of last year in the Speech 
from the Throne, you announced the creation of a grains institute, 
a Saskatchewan grains institute. Where is that institute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, that institute is going 
through exactly the same process of federal and provincial and 
private in negotiation with people involved in the industry and 
putting it together. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How far are you along in plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — How far are we along in plans on the 
upgrader and the paper mill? I mean the same thing they go 
through this. They want to frighten people and say, Grant Devine 
would never build a paper mill or an upgrade. And we build them, 
Mr. Chairman, we build them just as sure as you can stand here. 
 
So let him rest assured that the grain institute will be in place, Mr. 
Chairman, and we’re going to get funds from the private . . . They 
don’t know how to get funds from the private sector because the 
private sector doesn’t support socialists, but we get funds from the 
private sector. We even get funds for a new agriculture college 
from the private sector, and we’re glad that can happen. And I 
suspect we’ll get private sector funds for the grains institute, and 
that’s why we’re taking that process and that mechanism, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Sir, on December 3 of last year in the Speech 
from the Throne, you announced the creation of a uranium 
institute. Where is that uranium institute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, yesterday the Minister of 
Tourism announced the formation of an advisory body with 
respect to tourism because we’ve set up this new private sector 
tourism organization. And that’s precisely . . . he talked to the 
community, he talked to individuals, and he said, yes, that’s the 
way to do it. 
 
We are consulting with the uranium industry and with the private 
sector on what they want the institute to look like, and we will set 
up the appropriate institutions after we consult with people. And 
that’s exactly what you would expect, because if we don’t consult, 
you’re asking me to go around the province and say, would you 
talk to the people that matter. When I don’t talk to them you say, 
oh, he’s just doing it because he’s running it by himself; and  

when I do talk to them, you say, well he’s taking too much time. 
Well you can’t have it both ways. We are setting them up in 
consultation and co-operation with the private sector. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ve listened this 
morning for an hour and a half at the Premier’s comments about 
respect and how members of this Assembly should have some 
respect with regards to democracy, and respect with regards to 
elected officials. And what the Premier seems to disregard is that 
people respect each other and people respect, in particular 
politicians, because of certain elements. they respect them because 
they have some integrity. They respect us because we have some 
honesty. They respect us and other politicians because there’s 
some consistency about them. And they respect us because there’s 
some element of truth to what we say and do. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, what the Premier has been doing over the last 
number of years has been attacking all of those elements and 
breaking them apart, and showing very clearly to the people of this 
province, as a result of his actions, that they have no respect for 
the Premier and this government. Because they have in every case 
failed to establish some integrity, failed to establish some honesty 
and some credibility, and they’ve never been consistent about 
anything — in particular, the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The Premier talked about promises made and 
promises broken. Well I can remind the people of this province, 
and I remind the members of this Assembly, that in 1971 the New 
Deal for People was issued from the New Democratic Party. It 
was a blueprint for what the government of the New Democratic 
Party would do in the first four years of government. In that New 
Deal for People there were 139 commitments to the people of this 
province, and in four years 134 of those commitments were 
carried out. That’s 96 . . . 96 per cent, 96 per cent completion of 
promises made. In four years, Mr. Chairman, 96 per cent of all the 
commitments made of this party were finalized and carried out by 
the government of the NDP from ’71 to ’75. 
 
From 1975, Mr. Chairman, to 1978, there was another, another 
blueprint for a government of this province. The NDP issued a 
New Deal for People . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Allow the member that has the 
floor to make his comments. Anyone can get into the debate in 
Committee of Finance, so allow the member for Regina North 
West to make his comment. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In 1975 the NDP, 
being a government of their word, issued another program, a 
blueprint for the next four years for this province. And the New 
Deal for People, Mk. 2, provided 83 promises, and in three and a 
half short years carried out almost every single one of them except 
for two or three, and there were some good reasons for that 
because the term was shorter. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, what we have here is perhaps a glaring 
comparison between what the NDP has made in  
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3933 
 
 

terms of commitments on a provincial scale, from the provincial 
party, to deliver in terms of a provincial program for the people of 
this province, and what the Conservatives have made 
commitments on. 
 
And I’ll go on and get to that point in a minute. But I want to just 
underline some of the comments I made with respect to integrity 
and honesty and consistency and truth and credibility. Newspaper 
article appeared last week in the Leader-Post, and it quoted the 
Premier as saying: 
 

We are going to shut this House down because the opposition is 
taking too much time speaking about all kinds of issues except 
the issues of the province. 

 
Well, Mr. Chairman, the fact of the matter is we have on every 
occasion in question period asked questions of this government, 
and on every occasion they have refused to answer. In estimates 
we have raised questions after questions about where their 
promises are and other matters relating to the people of this 
province, and in every instance they have not responded with 
anything, let alone the truth. 
 
And what they’re saying, what the Premier is saying, Mr. 
Chairman, is that the opposition is wasting time. Four months after 
the June 17 budget, after they launched the largest tax increase at a 
provincial level in the history of this province, four months after 
that budget, they tabled the gas tax Bill — four months. 
 
Last week we had over 40 Bills tabled in this legislature — 40 
Bills — after the 100th day of sitting. Who’s kidding who? Who 
lacks credibility in this province? Is it the opposition ? I don’t 
believe so. Is it the Premier and that government? Absolutely. 
Everybody in this province are laughing at that government. 
 
Another example of lack of credibility. On June 13, 1987, 
Leader-Post, the Premier says at a public meeting that the deficit 
for the coming year will likely be $1 billion. The Premier of this 
province, eight short days before the budget was introduced in this 
Assembly, said the deficit will be $1 billion. Eight days later, what 
is the deficit? — $577 million. Now that’s only 100 per cent off 
the mark. His Minister of Finance, the previous year, was over 200 
per cent off the mark. 
 
Now what kind of respect can people have for individuals and 
politicians like this, and particularly the Premier and the Tory 
government when they say one thing eight days prior to the 
budget, and they’re 100 per cent off the mark eight days later? Is 
that credibility? Does that demand respect from anybody, let alone 
the people of this province? 
 
Well I want to talk about some of the mismanagement and some 
of these promises and some of the misleading statements that the 
Premier has made. I have here, with the Premier’s picture on it, a 
photocopy of one of his campaign commitments, a photocopy of a 
leaflet that he distributed to every household in the constituency of 
Estevan. And he says here, “A PC government will eliminate the 5 
per cent sales tax.” That it will be all gone; that we will eliminate 
the 5 per cent sales tax. 
 

Well I’d like to ask the Premier, when is he going to do this? It’s 
now been five years. The E & H 5 per cent tax has not been 
decreased. It has not been eliminated. It’s been increased from 5 
per cent to 7 per cent — a 40 per cent tax increase. 
 
Cabinet colleague after cabinet colleague, the member from 
Kelsey-Tisdale says there will be a 10 per cent decrease in the 
personal income tax rate — a 10 per cent decrease in the personal 
income tax rate. We’ve seen the implementation not only of a 
decrease but an increase of a new tax, a flat tax. We now have two 
taxes in this province. But the total increase of taxes on personal 
and individual tax filers in this province . . . since 1982 there’s 
been a 47 per cent increase in personal income tax. Is that 
integrity? Is that honesty? Is that truth? Absolutely not; there’s no 
credibility. 
 
Minister after minister, the member from Kindersley, the former 
minister of Finance, promises that he will eliminate the 5 per cent 
sales tax, that he’ll eliminate the gasoline tax when they become 
government. In May of 1982 when the Premier stood outside this 
very building and announced the elimination of the gas tax, he 
said to the people of this province on province-wide television, as 
long as there’s a Conservative government we will never reimpose 
the gas tax — we will never reimpose the gas tax. This guy, this 
Premier, here, Mr. Chairman, has given a new meaning to the 
definition of “never.” Has he misled the public? Has he misled the 
people of this province? Absolutely! 
 
The member from Maple Creek makes the same tax 
commitments. The member from Melfort, all cabinet members, 
provides the same commitment — the 10 per cent reduction in 
personal income tax, elimination of the E & H tax, the doing away 
with the gas tax. We’ve seen a 42 per cent increase in hidden taxes 
since 1982. 
 
(1145) 
 
And I could go on with all of the members in the Conservative 
front benches and back benches who made these commitments, 
but it’s a matter of integrity and truth and honesty. 
 
We’ve seen commitments from this government, and the Premier 
in particular, that we’ve got to do away with red tape. With the 
reimposing of the gas tax and an increasing of the gas tax from 6 
cents a litre to 7 cents a litre, which is from 28 cents a gallon to 32 
cents a gallon, we see the Premier again being a little off the mark 
when it comes to the truth. He says one thing when he’s in 
opposition, and he does the opposite. With the gas tax we’ve seen 
the most horrendous red tape nightmare in the history of 
government, not in this province, not in this country, but in the 
history of government. He has now included 65 per cent more of 
the total population of this province into some red tape 
bureaucratic nightmare. 
 
This is a man who is demanding respect for this institution and for 
politicians when he is the architect, when this Premier is the 
architect of misleading, double-crossing statements and untruths 
that cannot be compared in any other legislature in this country. 
 
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3934 
 
 

He talks about respect. I have here in the newspaper the Grainews, 
October 5 edition. The Grainews is a cattleman’s corner 
newspaper, not an NDP newspaper. And they say here in this 
article, it says, “Boob of the month.” And I’d like to quote form 
this article, and I quote, Mr. Chairman: 
 

Lately our Saskatchewan Premier, Grant Devine, has been 
acting like a farmer who’s going broke and gradually sliding 
downhill towards the poor house. 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. Members have been 
cautioned before about using member’s names. Order. Order. The 
Speaker has ruled on this, from the Speaker’s Chair. Order. The 
member for Regina North West. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your 
advice. In this article, I quote: 
 

Lately our Saskatchewan Premier has been acting like a farmer 
who is going broke and gradually sliding downhill towards the 
poor house. He began by selling off assets he felt were no 
longer needed, such as timber rights in northern Saskatchewan 
and highway equipment. 
 
They didn’t bring much but it was better than nothing. It sounds 
like he is still trying to get rid of more property. We hear about 
the possible sale of pieces from SaskTel and Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance. Rental rates on remaining assets have 
been pushed as high as possible. People have to pay more to use 
provincial parks and fire departments if they live outside a town 
or village. 

 
And it goes on and on. I’ll skip over some of the more nastier 
comments they are making about the “Boob of the month,” the 
Premier of this province. And I go on. It says: 
 

On assets not yet sold or up for sale the Premier has been trying 
to shove inventory costs on to the taxpayer. The new drug plan 
is a really good example. Now, we have to carry the costs of 
drugs for (one or) two or three months before being reimbursed. 
On fuel bought at the pumps the principle is the same. 
 
It all reminds me of a farmer in a panic, trying to do everything 
possible to save the farm and not having much luck. Had he 
been a little more careful when land and equipment prices were 
at a peak, there would be no need to act so desperately now. 
 
(And) we aren’t finished yet (the article says). What is he going 
to do next year for an encore? One morning, we will wake up to 
see highway workers picking bottles in the ditch to earn their 
own living (and in this case cans). 

 
And this was written before the so-called free trade deal, that will 
devastate our economy in this country, that the  

Premier supports. It was written before Bill 34 and a number of 
other Bills that we’ll be opposing in this Assembly. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, the Premier got up in this House and he called 
members of the opposition hypocrites. He called us hypocrites, 
which by the way I think is unparliamentary. but with his Minister 
of Finance — who the Premier should know couldn’t answer any 
questions about the gas tax when he was asked for an hour and 
one-half the other day — couldn’t explain how it was going to run, 
or how it was going to be . . . who was going to administer it, and 
whether the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan records are 
going to be made public information to private companies. The 
minister couldn’t answer any questions. 
 
But with Mr. Premier here, and his Minister of Finance, and the 
member from Kindersley — the three of them — the member 
from Kindersley, the Premier, and the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, they run a government like Huey, Dewey 
and Louie. Huey, Dewey and Louie could do better. At least they 
wouldn’t be misleading people with all these comments. 
 
So I ask the Premier, in view of all of these commitments that 
you’ve made, in view of these promises that you’ve made that I’ve 
quoted just in regards to the taxes — I could go on for another 
hour with the other promises you’ve failed to keep — but in 
regards to those promises and the commitments to reduce taxes in 
this province, how do you justify all of the tax increases we’ve 
seen to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. members have tried 
this before. I didn’t promise $2 wheat, and I didn’t promise $10 
oil, and I didn’t promise a drought, and I didn’t promise an 
anti-dumping case by Americans on potash. And, Mr. Chairman, 
obviously we have to respond to adverse conditions as we see 
them. Now how could you remove all the taxes when you have 
your revenue, tax revenue cut by 47 per cent? It’s impossible. I 
mean, you can’t do that unless you cut expenditures by 47 per 
cent. It’s not easy and I understand that. 
 
But let me point out to the hon. member where it’s important, 
where we have said we protect people against high interest rates, 
we have hung right in there. Where we said we’d expend much 
more on health, we’ve done that. Where we said that we would 
take the tax off clothes, we’ve done that. Where we said we’d take 
the tax off gasoline, and Saskatchewan residents with their driver’s 
licence won’t pay tax on gasoline, we’ve done that despite the 
economic conditions. 
 
So increased spending in health care, new hospitals in health, new 
CAT scans, new additions to hospitals, new educational facilities, 
new agriculture college, interest rate protection, and many, many 
services, and it’s not been easy, Mr. Chairman. In spite of 
economic conditions we’ve done that. 
 
Now I know you’ve spoken that your record is impeccable but, 
you know, you were not successful in ’64 and you weren’t 
successful in ’68 and you weren’t successful in ’82 or in ’86 at the 
polls. The people didn’t  
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3935 
 
 

believe you — they didn’t believe you. They’d heard your rhetoric 
many, many, many times, and you said, oh well, we have this 
perfect record. Well the people didn’t believe you. And every 
time, when somebody else won and you went up in the polls, you 
said, oh the people were wrong. And you said that. The NDP say 
that often, that the people are wrong. The people are never wrong. 
 
The people are right, they elected the right government in ’64 and 
the right government in ’68 and the right government in ’82 and 
the right government in ’86. The people are always right, and in 
democracy only a socialist would say the people are wrong. 
Right? The people are always right. And they choose in a free 
democratic system the government that they want to protect their 
interest rates, to take the tax off clothes, take the tax off gasoline, 
to provide the kind of services that they’d like to have. 
 
Lower income people — if I could, Mr. Chairman, let me just 
remind the hon. member. For a taxpayer with a total annual 
income of $20,000, Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan has the lowest 
overall tax bill for anybody in Canada with less than $20,000 
income. And the hon. member mentions income tax, I mean, we 
look at, in terms of tax credits and rebates, health care premiums, 
retail sales tax, gasoline tax, total taxes, car insurance, telephone, 
home heating and electricity, and Saskatchewan is the lowest 
taxed province of any in Canada for people with $20,000 annual 
income. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not true. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well it’s right here. All right, for taxpayers 
under . . . with 35,000 — with 35,000, Saskatchewan has the 
lowest overall tax bill for middle-income families, Mr. Chairman. 
And if I could go down through it, with all the taxes, taxes and 
rebates, health care premiums, retail sales tax, gasoline taxes, car 
insurance, telephone, home heating, electrical charges, 
Saskatchewan has the lowest income tax and total tax base, taxes 
paid, of any place in Canada if you’re making $35,000 or less, and 
the lowest was $20,000. 
 
Well we can go back, Mr. Chairman, and point out that we have 
provided for the lowest income tax, or the lowest tax take in 
Canada, under very difficult times. Our tax revenues are down 47 
per cent and we still have the lowest tax take any place in Canada, 
and the record speaks for itself. And if you want to look at 
premiums and sales tax on clothes and various kinds of other 
payroll tax that you have in Manitoba, and twice as much flat tax 
as they might have in Manitoba, and all kinds of other things 
under NDP administrations, higher taxation, the low income . . . 
Senior citizens in this province are better off than any other 
province in Canada. They get $500 for individual senior citizens. 
They don’t pay tax on clothes. They don’t have to have extra 
billing. They don’t pay health care premiums. 
 
Mr. Chairman, all those things are there, and the hon. member 
stands up and says, you didn’t cut income tax. We cut income tax 
for low-income people far greater than 20 per cent. Go look at the 
record. And we taxed those on high income. Those that have high 
income tax, we charged a little bit more, and those that were low 
income, we reduced the taxes. 
 

And you look at the poor that had to pay sales tax on things. We 
cut that out altogether. And if you look at those on low income, 
Mr. Chairman, obviously they are the lowest taxed in Canada, 
under $20,000 and under $35,000. 
 
So I would let the tax record stand, regardless of the hon. 
member’s observations with respect to, did you cut income tax? 
Yes, we did, particularly for those on low income. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the Premier stands up in 
this House and he reads from some kind of a briefing note that he 
has and he says, believe me, I have credibility, believe me. This is 
something I’m reading from a piece of paper; it should be right. 
 
Well I’ll read something from a piece of paper that I have here. He 
says they’re gong to eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax. The 
Premier, in the riding of Estevan, his ministers, the member from 
Kelsey-Tisdale says you’d make a 10 per cent decrease in personal 
income tax across the board. And on and on. You can mention all 
the ministers. The Leader of the Conservative Party signs a 
personal guarantee to do away and abolish the unfair deterrent fees 
on prescription drugs. And his signature is here — the Leader of 
the Conservative Party. 
 
What have we seen? We’ve seen an increase not only from the $3 
implementation fee, the fee for filing a prescription, but we’ve 
seen a clear example of dishonesty where the prescription drug 
plan is costing individuals a heck of a lot more than the modest 
little fees that they used to purchase drugs in the first place. 
 
So how can we accept his argument that what he’s saying is true? 
This provincial budget, Mr. Chairman, was the largest tax grab in 
the history of this province. For a family of four it was $1,000 in 
net provincial taxes increased. A thousand dollars! 
 
Since 1982 you’ve increased provincial taxes on a family of four 
to almost $2,200. That’s a decrease? I can’t seem to figure it out 
on my calculator. Maybe your calculator, whatever you hit it, only 
has a negative. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just a deduct. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Just a deduct, as the House Leader from 
Riversdale says. 
 
But I think, Mr. Chairman, people in this province would not be as 
upset about these tax increases if the money was used to create 
jobs, if the money was injected into the economy, and providing 
for a decent opportunity for young people and others in this 
province to work. 
 
But this money has been watered away. They spend money like 
water. They have no management controls. They mismanage like 
crazy. And I think the people of this province are very upset with 
what they’ve seen. 
 
The Premier was right. I must concede, on one item. He said, 
when the voters make their decision that they are always right. 
And in 1982 I can say, and I believe this  
  



 
November 4, 1987 

3936 
 
 

personally, that they were right, that they voted Conservative 
because they believe all of these promises that were being made in 
writing — eliminate the 5 per cent tax, do away with the gas tax, 
cut personal income tax by 10 per cent, free phones, you name it, 
all the things . . . But the people of this province, Mr. Chairman, 
have been misled. They have been misled by a Premier who begs 
for some kind of respect, who stands up in this House and 
demands respect from the people of this province. But he’s the 
man that has been the architect of breaking down respect people 
have for politicians. 
 
And I have more questions to ask the Premier, and I’ll get back to 
that later, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 


