


















































June 23, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 23, 1987 
 

637 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
this afternoon to introduce two groups that are here from my 
constituency. I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members of this Assembly, four students from the Regina 
Catholic School Program for Gifted Learners in the Speaker’s 
gallery, and they are students from St. Patrick’s, St. Josaphat 
and St. Joan of Arc. Actually St. Josaphat is in the constituency 
of Rosemont and St. Patrick’s is not in my constituency either, 
but St. Joan of Arc is. With them is their teacher Carol Lundine 
and chaperon Diana Lundine. 
 
I met with these students and some of their colleagues a month 
or so ago and spent a good hour with them answering a host of 
very intelligent questions, and I would ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming them to this Assembly this afternoon. 
 
As well, I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to 
members of this Assembly 11 grade 7 and 8 students from St. 
Bernadette School in Regina North West. They are in the east 
gallery, the opposition gallery. The teacher is Don Zaharia and 
they have two chaperons accompanying them, Anne Hoffman 
and Brent Zapshala. 
 
I hope that all of you enjoy the procedures in the question 
period and the answers that are provided and certainly the 
questions, and I will look forward to meeting with students 
from St. Bernadette after the question period. Please join with 
me in welcoming them this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure 
that I like to introduce to you and the members of this 
Assembly, 30 grade 8 students from Allan — Allan High 
School. They are sitting in the west gallery, and I’m going to be 
meeting them, Mr. Speaker, at 2:30 for drinks and questions. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher, Ernie Melnyk, 
chaperons Paul Houle, Marie Grumetz, Sandy Klotz, and 
Corrine Welder. Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank them for coming 
to the legislature today, and I’m hoping that they’ll enjoy 
themselves. And I ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming them and wishing them a good day, a safe journey 
home, and a good summer holiday. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the Deputy Premier, the member for Souris-Cannington, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all the 
members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of 27 students 
from Redvers, Saskatchewan, from the Redvers School. They 
are grade 6  

students who are accompanied by three chaperones as well as 
their teacher, Diane Dube. 
 
They are seated in the Speaker’s gallery, and the Deputy 
Premier has asked me to pass on my warm words of welcome to 
you students. The member for Souris-Cannington is out of the 
province today, but I would ask all members of the Legislative 
Assembly to join with me in welcoming the students here today 
to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I understand that one of our members will meet with you a little 
bit later for pictures and drinks. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I am acting for my 
colleague, the member for Regina North East, Mr. 
Tchorzewski, who is not able to be with us at this moment. 
We’re expecting him back from Swift Current shortly. And it’s 
my pleasant duty to introduce to you and to the members of the 
Assembly some 48 students from the Dr. George Ferguson 
School in Regina North East, and they’re seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
They have with them their teachers, Ms. Wolfe and Ms. Burns. 
And they’ve had a tour of the buildings, will be with us for this 
question period, and then will, I trust, be meeting with Mr. 
Tchorzewski at 2:30 for some pictures and for some 
refreshments. 
 
I know they will have enjoyed their tour of the building. I trust 
they will enjoy the proceedings of the question period, and I 
know all hon. members will join with me in welcoming them 
and expressing the hope that they enjoy the remainder of their 
stay here with us. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have some 
students with us today in the Legislative Assembly. I believe 
they’re from the Saskatoon French School, seated in the east 
gallery. There are 29 students, grades 6 to 8. They’re 
accompanied by teachers Richard Blanchet and John Cathcart. 
 
This is going to be very tough for a Ukrainian boy like me to 
do, Mr. Speaker, but with your permission and the indulgence 
of the House, I would say to the students: Bienvenue à Régina. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Treatment of Manitoba Cancer Patients 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the 
Premier. The question that I have for the Premier follows 
basically on the questions and answers from yesterday’s 
question period, where at page 582 of Hansard the Premier said 
the following: 
 

. . . as the hon. member knows, with our budget we’re 
going to have to spend a good part of it  

  



 
June 23, 1987 

638 
 

treating people from Manitoba because they are going to 
be coming here. 

 
Now a very simple but important questions, speaking to the 
credibility of the Premier’s answer: what authority did the 
Premier have to make that statement and that claim? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I am advised that two 
months ago, Dr. Malaker, the director of radiation for the 
Manitoba Cancer Foundation, contacted the medical director of 
the Regina cancer clinic, Dr. Whiston. He indicated a concern 
about waiting times in Manitoba for some patients needing 
radiation treatment and asked whether Regina would be able to 
help them out in the case of necessity. Dr. Whiston advised him 
that the Regina clinic would take individual cases if the matter 
was urgent. 
 
That was reported yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and I advised the 
House that if we are going to provide top-notch and first-class 
health benefits to the people of Saskatchewan, then other 
jurisdictions may be taking advantage of it. And as a result, we 
have seen people in Manitoba, the doctor there, requesting that 
the city of Regina, and hospitals in Regina, if they would take 
cancer patients as the need arises in Manitoba. The doctor in 
Manitoba was concerned about the line-ups in Manitoba and the 
lack of equipment and funding. And I’m advised that the 
doctors here said that we would be glad to help out in the case 
that Manitoba people ran into that kind of difficulty. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. The question 
that I ask goes to the Premier’s credibility because in his 
statement yesterday — I’m not going to repeat it other than to 
say he clearly said the following: with our budget we’re going 
to have to spend a good part of it (referring to the budget) 
treating people from Manitoba. And later on, at page 582 of 
Hansard he said that Manitoba is: 
 

. . . asking the hospitals in Regina and (for) Saskatchewan 
taxpayers to pay for health care in Manitoba . . . 

 
Those are the words. Now my question to the Premier is again a 
simple and straightforward one. What authority does the 
Premier base his statements that the people and the taxpayers of 
Regina and Saskatchewan are going to be paying for the 
treatments that the Premier alludes to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the people in Manitoba 
request help from the people of Regina and the people of 
Saskatchewan because we have the facilities here. We have 
built the facilities, we have funded the facilities, we have 
bought the equipment, and we have provided the medical staff 
and the back-up staff to treat people Now in the province of 
Manitoba, if they’ve had difficulties, they’ve told us that they 
would like to come to Regina and into the province of 
Saskatchewan because we have these facilities, obviously 
financed by people here. 

Now as they run into trouble in Manitoba because it’s not well 
financed, we’ve said we would help them, and our doctors . . . 
and I’m advised this morning that our doctors will accept 
patients from Manitoba because we have the facilities financed 
here and the equipment. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would just put it another way. They couldn’t 
come here to use the facilities if we hadn’t built them and 
financed them and developed them and had the new technology. 
And they recognize that it is goo, Mr. Speaker, and we’re happy 
to help them out in their time of need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Supplementary question. Is it correct to say 
that the Premier is basing the statements on a Winnipeg Free 
Press story of yesterday referring to the Dr. Malaker, that you 
have already alluded to, dated June 22 is the date of the story; 
and if it is so, why is it that the Premier did not tell the House 
yesterday in portraying — no, I would say in misrepresenting to 
this House — that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are going to 
be paying for it. Why is it that the Premier did not tell the 
House that Dr. Malaker himself has said that none yet has come 
to the province of Saskatchewan? Why did you misrepresent 
that position to the House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what I said and what I’ve 
confirmed and had confirmed today, that Dr. Malaker, the 
director of the radiation Manitoba cancer clinic, has requested 
help from hospitals in Regina. He just didn’t send patients over 
here. He said, we have long line-ups in Manitoba; it’s running 
five or six weeks. I’m concerned about the health of the patients 
in Manitoba. You have good equipment and good hospitals in 
Regina. Could we send our patients to Saskatchewan? 
 
Now Saskatchewan doctors have replied, if you’re in trouble in 
Manitoba because it is underfunded, we would be glad to help 
you out here in Saskatchewan, because we do have the 
equipment, and we do have the staff, and we do have the 
hospitals. 
 
Now I think it’s only polite, Mr. Speaker, that the doctors in 
Manitoba have requested and asked whether Saskatchewan 
people would accept this, and we’ve said we’d be glad to help 
out because we’ve got some of the best facilities in Canada, and 
I’m confirming that this morning — or this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I asked a supplementary question which I 
really do think warrants a very straightforward and simple 
answer, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I don’t think that there is any need to give 
us a political speech at question period. 
 
I refer you again to the article that you said was the authority 
for the statement that Saskatchewan taxpayers are going to be 
paying for the Manitoba people who come to this province, and 
I’ve referred you to Dr. Malaker’s  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

639 
 

statement that none have already come. Is that your position 
today, that Saskatchewan people will be looking after the 
payment of Manitoba people who might be referred, even 
pursuant to this article? Is that your position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it is very clear that if we 
have spent our money on health care and we’ve increased the 
expenditures in health care and we have fine equipment and 
good hospitals and good doctors and good staff . . . And it’s 
well recognized in our neighbouring provinces. And it’s well 
recognized, Mr. Speaker, that the fact that they are calling us, 
can we use your facilities, your fine facilities, which obviously 
we’ve had to finance . . . 
 
Let me put it another way, Mr. Speaker. If we didn’t finance 
them, they wouldn’t be there, and people wouldn’t be calling us 
to use them — quite clearly. People in Manitoba want to use the 
facilities because the technology’s here, and the doctors are 
here, and it’s first class. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re only glad to 
help our neighbours in time of need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the 
Premier that nobody has been referred from Manitoba. The 
article says 55 patients, at most, are on the list. But the 
scandalous statement of the Premier yesterday was that the 
taxpayers of this province are going to be looking after any such 
patients who do get transferred over to Saskatchewan from 
Manitoba. 
 
I say to the Premier, and I ask him this: are you not aware — 
surely of all of the front-benchers in that government, you must 
be aware — are you not aware that under your own very 
legislation, the Saskatchewan hospital services plan, and the 
federal-provincial agreements, none of the costs for any of those 
patients — the maximum of which might be 55 — is the 
responsibility of the taxpayers of this province? They’re the 
responsibility of the taxpayers of Manitoba, and you deceived 
this House in saying otherwise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will . . . Obviously the 
opposition is fairly touchy about this. I will just make the point . 
. . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, order, 
order. Order, please. Order, order. Let’s all do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll make the point again. 
I’ll make the point again that if our health care facilities are so 
well recognized, because they have been financed, and they are 
put together with the finest staff and the finest support staff and 
the finest equipment you’ll find in Canada, that costs the 
taxpayers. And the people of Saskatchewan have paid for that. 
The taxpayer has. 
 
Second point. You say that Manitoba’s going to pay for all the 
costs if they have people in here. They never pay for  

all the costs, and you know that. As a former minister you know 
very well that it won’t pay for all overhead and it won’t pay for 
all the fixed costs. It’ll pay for the operating costs, the variable 
costs, and you know that. 
 
Saskatchewan people will have to pay because we believe in a 
top-notch health care system. We have, Mr. Speaker . . . and it’s 
the best and others will recognize it. We’re quite willing to help 
out the people in Manitoba when in fact their government 
doesn’t fund health care well enough. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary for the hon., 
the Premier. Here we have a situation where the Premier 
misrepresented the costs to the legislature yesterday, deceived 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan, and repeats the 
deception. 
 
I want to refer the hon. Premier — I’ve asked the page to 
deliver it to you, sir — a copy of your own department’s report 
of 1985-86, Department of Health, and I direct your attention to 
table 5 of this report. Table 5 on this report shows, by your own 
figures, that in this year the number of Saskatchewan people 
who left the province to get hospitalization care totalled 6,184, 
as compared to the total number of patients coming into 
Saskatchewan being only 3,314. 
 
I want to say to the Premier . . . I want to ask the Premier this: 
are you aware of your own table, and if you’re aware of your 
own table, in light of what you’ve just said, how is it that you 
can justify and explain the fact that almost twice the number of 
Saskatchewan people leave our province because of no beds to 
get care elsewhere? How do you explain that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will take the hon. 
member’s information because I want . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: —. Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order! 
He is making an answer. We don’t need to have the minister 
being hollered down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t necessarily accept 
the information the hon. member will give me, but if he will 
send it over, I will look at it and review it. 
 
Let me make the point, Mr. Speaker, that when you’re dealing 
with some severe health care issues, like cancer, Mr. Speaker — 
some of the very, very important health care issues of the day, 
like cancer — people are looking at Saskatchewan because we 
have the best cancer facilities any place in Canada, or certainly 
among the very best. Neighbouring provinces say, under these 
cases where people are severely sick, severely sick with cancer, 
they want to come to Saskatchewan because to top-notch health 
care facilities. 
 
Secondly, with respect to the number of people going out of the 
province and the number of people coming in, if those wanting 
to come in are being treated for cancer and some of the 
diseases, Mr. Speaker, that are a very major concern to the 
people in this country, I believe that’s a signal that the majority 
of Canadians know that we fund  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

640 
 

health care very well. If people are going out for elective 
surgeries, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It has been adequately answered. Is this a 
supplementary or a new question? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier said just a few 
moments ago that he doesn’t necessarily accept these figures 
that I’ve given to him. He hasn’t even given me the courtesy of 
looking at table 5. I gave him a copy of the annual report. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is the annual report of the Department 
of Health put out by your very own Minister of health. Are you 
telling this House that these figures which I give you — you 
can take a look at them yourself — are inaccurate? Are you 
trying to tell us that these figures are not to be believed? And if 
that’s the case, then you ought to be asking your Minister of 
Health to resign for putting our false documentation. You ought 
to be saying to your minister he should step down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, people in Manitoba are 
coming — are requesting Saskatchewan hospitals to help them 
with cancer because they’re not being funded in Manitoba. If 
people in Saskatchewan are going some other places for 
elective surgery, from some transplant, for abortions, for 
something else, Mr. Speaker, that’s quite different, quite 
different than cancer patients who we all know is one of the 
worst killers, having to come, having to request to come, having 
to ask Saskatchewan people because they’ve funded their 
hospitals and their doctors — can we come to Saskatchewan for 
help? 
 
Significant difference. The members opposite know that, Mr. 
Speaker. We will make sure that hospitals here and cancer 
facilities here are among the best in Canada, and we will 
continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary 
question to the Premier and . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — A final supplementary. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — . . . if I may say so, ask the Premier to come 
clean on this. Just once, please come clean. 
 
Yesterday and today you have made statements which are 
patently false. First, as to who pays for the care of out of 
province. Secondly, as to the numbers of patients that are 
coming to Saskatchewan as compared to Manitoba — 55 from 
Manitoba; over 6,000 from Saskatchewan. They’re flooding out 
of this province because the hospital waiting bed lists are so 
long. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier, this: in the light of what is obviously a 
blatant falsehood, in light of the fact that if anybody’s 
credibility is important, it’s yours, sir, I ask you to retract the 
statements of yesterday and today and to be honest with the 
people of Saskatchewan when life and death in hospitals exhibit 
that issue. How about doing that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker . . . Clearly, Mr.  

Speaker, the truth bothers the opposition when it comes to 
health care and cancer research and patients . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The truth is that people across Canada are 
looking to Saskatchewan, asking Regina hospitals and 
physicians if they can come to this province because the 
facilities are so good. The truth is, Mr. Speaker, that doctors in 
Regina . . . They don’t want to listen, Mr. Speaker, but I’m 
going to make them listen. The truth is the doctors in Regina are 
advising people in Manitoba, they can come to Regina . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we are proud that our 
cancer facilities are among the very best in Canada. The 
opposition has to recognize they’re the very best. The doctors in 
Regina, in this city, are saying, if you’re in Manitoba and you 
have some difficulty getting cancer treatment, you can come 
into Saskatchewan because the Saskatchewan government has 
funded health care better than any other jurisdiction in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firing of Medical Specialists 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Premier, along the same lines as those of my colleague. Mr. 
Premier, are you aware of the fact that the actions of your 
government have caused doctors at the Plains hospital to be 
fired? Are you aware of the fact that one of those was an 
endocrinologist, the only one in southern Saskatchewan, Doctor 
Boctor, and are you aware of the fact that unlike the Winnipeg 
patient who might come to Regina, a constituent of mine and a 
neighbour of mine was forced to go to Winnipeg, just last 
month, in order to get treatment in Winnipeg which she has 
consistently got in Regina from this endocrinologist. She has a 
serious pancreas problem and you, when you say that we are 
funding our hospital care better and our medical care better than 
any other province in Canada, are acting falsely so far as Regina 
people are concerned and so far as specialists in southern 
Saskatchewan are concerned, many of whom have been fired 
because of the actions of your government Are you aware that 
patients are going from Regina to Winnipeg to get specialist 
treatment in this way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is not 
accurate, is not accurate. People here . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please! I don’t think we 
can have a question put and then the person trying to answer the 
question, have them hollered down. Give the man an 
opportunity to try to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, people in Regina hospitals, 
the doctors, the staff, have been asked if they can come to 
Regina for treatment because they have line-ups of cancer 
patients in Manitoba — in Winnipeg. They’ve been asked that. 
Now I don’t know how often  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

641 
 

they’ve been asked, how many years they’ve been asked, but 
I’ll tell you now, they’re being asked. Okay? 
 
And you raise a case, and your colleague does, where patients 
from time to time will go to outside the city of Regina or 
outside Saskatchewan for treatment. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
understand if there are line-ups in Manitoba for cancer 
treatment and people can’t get beds or they can’t get equipment, 
why doctors here would respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I ask you again: are you 
aware, Mr. Premier, that many citizens of Regina are now 
seeking medical care outside Regina, some of them in 
Winnipeg, because of specialists who are no longer here, fired 
because of the actions of your government in denuding the 
Plains Hospital of a string of specialists who were the only ones 
in southern Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, that’s not the facts. And he 
knows that we did not denude the Plains hospital. He knows 
that the University of Regina’s decision . . . University of 
Saskatchewan decisions, and he knows that, so why is he 
misleading the House, and the people, by saying it was us? 
University of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The hon. member knows. The hon. 
member knows that isn’t very often, not very often in this 
country when other provinces ask for help from a province like 
Saskatchewan or a province like Manitoba or a province like 
Alberta to open their doors to the hospitals because they’re 
underfunded. That’s what we’re dealing with today, and that’s 
why you’re so upset. 
 
The Manitoba government hasn’t funded the cancer research, so 
they’re requesting Saskatchewan people to help them. And we 
said we would help. This is not a unique situation, Mr. Speaker, 
but we’re glad to help. 
 
Mr. Speaker: —. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, one more time of the 
Premier. One more time of the Premier. Are you maintaining 
the position that the firing of specialists at the Plains hospital 
was not connected with the funding level that you are offering 
to the University of Saskatchewan, was not connected with 
decisions of your government, but was solely extraneous to any 
financial decisions of your government? 
 
You know that isn’t true. Now why do you not admit that the 
doctors are not there, and they are gone, and the patients are 
therefore going to Winnipeg because of financial decisions of 
your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — That isn’t what you said. That isn’t what 
you said. Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows what he said, 
and we’ll go back and look at what he said. Want to talk about 
somebody’s credibility. You didn’t say  

that at all. 
 
I said it’s the University of Saskatchewan decision, and you 
said it’s because we have made the decision to fire some 
doctors, and that isn’t the case. And you know that. The 
University of Saskatchewan makes the decisions. And the hon. 
member is aware of that. 
 
What he can’t seem to understand is that the Government of 
Manitoba and the people of Manitoba obviously have made a 
formal request — a formal request, Mr. Speaker — a formal 
request to the people of Saskatchewan to pay for . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — That’s what you have to understand. The 
doctors in Manitoba have asked doctors here to look after 
Manitoba people. That's what . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary. Just so we understand 
the Premier’s line of argument. If you say that you cut all of the 
money to the University of Regina, than the fact that the 
professors are fired is the decision of the university and has 
nothing to do with the government. That’s what you’re saying. 
 
Now you’re saying that because you cut the money for the 
University of Saskatchewan and doctors were fired, it has 
nothing to do with you. You try to tell that to the school boards 
who are cutting teachers and the hospitals who are cutting 
nurses. They know where the decision rests. 
 
Are you not prepared to admit that when you cut budgets as you 
have done, and the health budget is cut this year, the inevitable 
result is the firing of doctors? We’ve had it in Regina, and 
patients . . . My neighbour has gone to Winnipeg because she 
could not get care in Regina. Do you not admit that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, funding for the universities 
in Saskatchewan, funding is up 38 per cent since we got into 
power — 38 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now you’re telling me that with the 
fundings up 38 per cent you’re going to blame me because the 
university makes a decision of what department’s going to be 
there, what staff’s going to be here. And I have to take 
responsibility for that when we’ve raised funding 38 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me add, let me add to the hon. member. The 
truth is, the truth is funding up in health . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order, please! We can’t have constant interruptions, 
whether you like the answer to the question or not. But we can’t 
have constant interruptions, and I’m asking the House once 
more to just allow the question to  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

642 
 

be completed briefly, quickly ask the question to be completed 
— or the answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Just to respond to the argument the hon. 
member made. When funding is increased to universities by 38 
per cent over the last four years — increased — and the 
universities make decisions on what they’re going to specialize 
in and where they’re going to allocate their funds, that is not my 
responsibility. I shouldn’t be telling the universities where to 
spend their money, particularly when I’m giving them more 
money. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they have made the decision that they are 
going to build colleges of agriculture, and they’re going to build 
a geological sciences building, and they’re going to staff several 
things. 
 
When, Mr. Speaker, we increase health care funding here to the 
tune of 60-some-per cent since 1981-82, that’s why provinces 
and doctors phone us for service, because no other jurisdiction, 
particularly Manitoba, can match it. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to make 
a ruling on a point of order that was brought up yesterday in this 
House. It was raised by the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, 
and it regarded question period where the Premier gave a partial 
answer, then passed the question to the minister responsible for 
the detailed answer. 
 
To the extent that this practice results in two answers to one 
question, I find that it is not in order, and the point is well taken. 
 
The minister may choose . . . order, order. I don’t need any 
cheers from either side for the ruling. Especially when the 
Speaker is on his feet, I would like silence please. 
 
A minister may choose to defer to another minister, but should 
do so immediately without giving an initial reply. I trust this 
will clarify this matter for all members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — We don’t need any handclaps for rulings. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to day to support this government’s newly  

announced budget, a budget, Mr. Speaker, that clearly reflects 
responsibility, vision for our province and our citizens. 
 
This country and indeed the world around us is advancing at 
record speed, and it is important that we as a government ensure 
our province is not left behind. 
 
This government has shown its commitment to delivering 
services to the people of Saskatchewan in an efficient and 
effective manner. And this, Mr. Speaker, is the responsible 
direction we will continue to take. Examination of every single 
aspect of government will allow us to find the best and the most 
reasonable areas in which to obtain savings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that we, as a government, could have 
taken the irresponsible and narrow-minded approach that our 
neighbouring NDP government of Manitoba chose. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our vision is to protect our families and our 
future generations from an economic crisis that could result in a 
$10 billion deficit as seen by residents of Manitoba. And that 
speaks as an example of mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, and it is 
clearly out of control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fiscal responsibility and financial accountability 
are a priority of this government. Without this, Mr. Speaker, 
that vision we have for our children would only be a fantasy. 
We are taking a realistic approach to the services we as 
government provide for our citizens, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our health care system is among the best in North America. It is 
of great value to the people of Saskatchewan. The people have 
told us it should remain a priority, and we have treated it as 
such and will continue to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care spending is at its highest level in 
Saskatchewan history — $1 billion plus — one third, Mr. 
Speaker, one third of our provincial budget, one third of our 
revenue. That shows that we do care. 
 
Since 1982, Mr. Speaker, we have increased our real health care 
spending by 15.7 per cent — that is 15.7 per cent of our real 
spending in this province. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
increased the health spending more than any other of the four 
provinces in western Canada. I am proud to say that since 1982, 
Mr. Speaker, real growth in the West has averaged 9.4 per cent 
compared to Saskatchewan’s 15.7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of special home care this government 
has reached new heights to assist our Saskatchewan residents in 
need. Over the past five years we have taken the opposition of 
1981 $13.6 million expenditure on home care and increased it 
to more than $23 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am pleased to say, in health care alone in my constituency, the 
town of Mankota will share in this example of increased health 
spending. This government, Mr. Speaker, is here to build and is 
building, not to close. 
  



 
June 23, 1987 

643 
 

In the town of Mankota we have finished a 12-bed nursing 
home onto an existing 12-bed hospital integrated system. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, shows that we do care about rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And this will ensure that we have an extra example . . . Maybe I 
should say is that we’re trying to keep doctors in rural 
Saskatchewan. It has been tough because they’ve all been going 
into the bigger main centres of Saskatoon, Regina, Swift 
Current, Moose Jaw, and we are trying to attract them back into 
our areas. And I think it’s only right that we should be able to 
utilize these beds out in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m looking forward to the grand opening on this August 
14, and I invite each and every one of you — including the 
opposite members across — to join us in Mankota for the 
important event in my constituency, just to show them that we 
do care, and we are providing services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Education, Mr. Speaker, is another course of priority for the 
people of Saskatchewan and this government. The 
amalgamation of the departments of Advanced Education and 
Education and the combining of our four technical institutes and 
the regional colleges under one umbrella, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, is a 
key change to the province’s education system. Mr. Speaker, 
our government is anxious to bring our education system up to 
date to meet the needs of a rapidly changing society that is 
currently undergoing a technological revolution. The 
establishment of $150 million education development fund 
provides for financial resources to carry out this strategy. 
 
These changes to our education system were long overdue, Mr. 
Speaker. Our children and our young people were not being 
provided with the skills needed to adapt to a society which 
engulfed in the most rapid social technological changes in the 
world has ever known. Education funding since 1982, Mr. 
Speaker, has outpaced inflation by an average of 1 per cent per 
year. This record shows commitment to education that 
surpasses that of the previous administration in the last five 
years of office, during which spending on education, Mr. 
Speaker, barely kept pace with inflation. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to cite an example of this 
government’s funding as it relates to the education in my 
constituency of Shaunavon: the completion of a brand new 
public school; approved spending for a new high school; and 
approved spending for renovations and to make sure that we are 
looking after our younger and our upcoming children in keeping 
up with the pace in this province. And that proves, Mr. Speaker, 
that we do care about education. 
 
Another spending priority this government has to ensure the 
survival and protection of our way of life for Saskatchewan 
deals with the agricultural sector, Mr. Speaker. We have put 
millions into protection for farmers because agriculture is the 
backbone of Saskatchewan’s economy. Premier Devine was 
instrumental in the billion dollar deficiency payment announced 
by the federal  

government last fall, Mr. Speaker, a deficiency payment that 
farmers in my riding and indeed across western Canada were in 
most need of. And that, Mr. Speaker, proves this government is 
committed to press for additional federal deficiency payments 
of 1.6 billion up to $3 billion this year. The people of this 
province in the agricultural sector appreciate that along with 
everybody else. 
 
I’d just like to mention a few other in the agricultural. Some of 
the programs that we’ve brought into place, the $25 per acre, 6 
per cent dollars to cash advance on livestock. That shows that 
this government is concerned along with a lot of other programs 
that we put into effect. We have built a feeding industry in this 
province that we’ve never had in history. We used to raise our 
cattle; we used to ship them out; they either went east or west. 
We went from 12 per cent three years ago, in the feeding 
industry, to 55 per cent. And Mr. Speaker, I would say that is 
history that we’ve never had before. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will continue to press to build our 
agriculture industry along with the Premier and support him in 
all the angles and avenues in the way to build our feeding 
industry so that we keep our cattle here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, not ship them out. And that proves that we do 
have a good agricultural policy, Mr. Speaker, not a policy like 
the opposite members announced on the weekend, saying that 
they don’t have one yet. And that, Mr. Speaker, improves the 
competition position of Saskatchewan farmers. We are taking 
steps to reconstruct agricultural budget by moving away from 
interest protection programs and moving towards increased 
development initiatives, irrigation enhancements, and more 
effective gathering and distribution of market information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the protection of Saskatchewan people have been 
consistent priority of the Devine government. If we are here to 
protect people in the future, we must have financial resources in 
place. The time for action is now. We will conduct our affairs 
with fairness and firmness, Mr. Speaker; Saskatchewan people 
expect no less. Saskatchewan people like to be positive; they 
don’t want to be negative. And I guess that last October 20 
proved that they wanted this government to run this province, 
and we will continue to run this province. We all know that 
Saskatchewan pioneers had the courage and vision to build this 
great province, Mr. Speaker, and these same pioneers built this 
on a positive note, not on a negative note. 
 
I support this budget, Mr. Speaker, put forth by my colleague, 
the Minister of Finance. It exercises the responsibility and the 
optimism essential to building a better Saskatchewan. I support 
this fully. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make a few 
preliminary remarks and I direct these basically to some 
members on the government side, and I don’t say these harshly. 
I just want to say that with respect to all of the  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

644 
 

figures you hear quoted from time to time on the increase on 
health spending, you should not be taken in by those figures. 
There have been increase in health spending, but what is being 
done is a comparison of the budget of the Department of Health 
four or five years ago with that budget of the Department of 
Health today. And that is declared to be an increase in health 
spending. And I think we all know better than that. 
 
What has been done is some significant parts of the 
government, on government activity, which used to be 
administered by other departments, are now administered by the 
Department of health. I’ll give you three quick examples. There 
is the . . . in the current year’s Department of Health estimate, 
there is some $6 million for ambulances. There has been no 
significant increase in ambulance services, the money has 
simply been moved from another department. 
 
There have been $22 million, $23 million for home care. 
There’s been no significant increase in home care services. The 
money has been moved from the Department of Social Services 
to Health. There’s $175 million, $190 million indeed, for the 
operation of special care homes. That used to be in the 
Department of Social Services, now is in the Department of 
Health. There’s more than $200 million, another $10 million in 
rent, which I will leave that aside, but close to 20 per cent of the 
Health budget today is financing services which were 
previously provided by other departments of government. 
 
Now I don’t quarrel with the fact that they may be operated by 
the Department of Health rather than the Department of Social 
Services; can take either view of home care. What you can’t 
claim, can’t claim and be intellectually honest, is that there’s an 
increase in health spending, because it simply will not do. You 
can claim that it’s better administered by the Department of 
Health than the Department of Social Services, and that’s a 
legitimate argument. I don’t agree with it, but it’s clearly a 
question of judgment. 
 
What you can’t reasonably claim, as I’ve heard members 
opposite claim time after time after time, including the Premier, 
is that there’s been this vast expansion in health spending. 
There has not been. And there have been increases, let there be 
no mistake about hat, but they have not reached the sums that 
had been achieved by counting money transferred, let us say for 
home care, from the Department of Social Services to the 
Department of Health, as an increase in health spending. 
 
I want to make a brief comment on some remarks made by the 
member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. He suggested that the 
NDP were the only ones who felt that they had, to use his 
words, “earned the right to be self-righteous.” And then he 
continued to go ahead and show that, earned or not, he could 
indeed be self-righteous. He suggested that the Liberals were 
the only ones who could combine compassion with fiscal 
responsibility. 
 
Unfortunately for the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the 
Liberal leader, there are some people who remember the last 
Liberal government in this province and their tender concern for 
medicare in  

that black budget of theirs of 1968, their increased medicare 
premiums, and their closing of small hospitals, and their 
imposing of deterrent fees. I heard Senator Davey Steuart the 
other day on the radio, and he was saying that the Liberals 
never recovered from that attack on medicare. And somehow as 
I heard Davey Steuart saying that, it didn’t sound like that their 
problem was an overdose of compassion. 
 
The member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg accused the NDP of 
gathering in all the oil royalties under Bill 42 and wasting the 
money. Some will recall that Bill 42 was the Bill which 
provided for royalty surcharges on the oil companies. And I 
felt, that’s a little much coming from a party who said that those 
royalties should be left with the oil companies and who 
campaigned in the 1975 election with their major plank as being 
the repeal of Bill 42 and leaving all of that money with the oil 
companies. Even the Collver Tories of the day were not that 
profligate with public funds. So much for the Liberal claim for 
fiscal responsibility. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the budget. My colleague, 
the member for Regina North East, the opposition financial 
critic, did an outstanding job in commenting on the budget. He 
called it a budget of betrayal — and that’s the best way in 
which it can be described. It’s a betrayal of the promises made 
to the people of Saskatchewan in 1982 and 1986. And I know 
that I will mention a few, and other members on this side will 
mention instances where this government has promised, made 
clear promises to the people and have not delivered, indeed 
reneged. But the most obvious way in which this government 
has betrayed the people of Saskatchewan concerns the way they 
have managed our finances. 
 
The core of this budget is restraint, that the provincial 
government finances are in bad shape, and that sharp, indeed, 
savage cuts are necessary to public services, to social services, 
in order that we can put our financial house in order. In order 
that, to quote them, we can “defend medicare”. Just how we’re 
defending medicare by slashing it I will let them explain. But 
their argument is that the financial affairs of this province are in 
a mess, and strong action has to be taken. And they say that this 
is all because of the budget deficit. And certainly to the extent 
that we have problems, it is, because we have a budget deficit. 
 
And I want to talk a little bit about that deficit. First, this 
government has pursued a policy of calculated deceit about 
deficits since it was first elected in 1982 — calculated deceit or 
a level of incompetence that I don’t think even the government 
opposite could attain. 
 
When they were elected in 1982, there had been — for all 
practical purposes, aside from tiny budget deficits almost of an 
accounting nature — there had been surpluses for 40 years. And 
certainly the New Democratic Party government, since 1971, 
had had 11 straight surpluses, including the year ending March 
31, 1982 — short days before the government opposite took 
office. 
 
The new PC government came to office and decided that they 
would cut taxes. They would spend money, cut  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

645 
 

taxes. It’s so much fun to cut taxes. You can put a flower in 
your buttonhole and you can get before a microphone and say to 
everybody, go out, fill your gas tank, it’s going to cost you 30 
cents a gallon less. And they claimed it was just temporary. 
 
In the summer of 1982, the minister of Finance, as he then was, 
the member for Kindersley, said that he was going to balance 
the budget over a four year term. And that was not true. In 
November, 1982, when that same minister of Finance brought 
in a budget, he said that he had a deficit which was minimized 
and manageable. That was not true. In March of 1982, he spoke 
about manageable increase in the combined deficit. That was 
not true. 
 
In March 1984 he raised the level of rhetoric and, if possible, 
lowered the level of truth. Let me quote. This is the Minister of 
Finance for the government opposite: 
 

We believe that all governments must work in concert to 
reduce budget deficits. It is inevitable (this is 1984 now) . . 
. It is inevitable that mounting deficits will result in 
unwanted reductions in government services and tax 
increases. 

 
How prophetic! Then he went on to say: 
 

I am pleased to announce a 20 per cent reduction in the 
deficit. The deficit has been turned around with out any 
social disruption. It has been turned around without cuts in 
basic services, and without major personal tax increases. 

 
That’s in his budget speech of 1984. That was not true. The 
deficit was not cut by 20 per cent or any per cent. It was sharply 
increased. 
 
In 1985 he forecast a deficit cut of $100 million. That was not 
true. There was a pattern of saying, right from ’82 to ’85, that 
they would cut the deficit, and each year it got bigger. 
 
My member, the member for Moose Jaw North, has, I think, 
kindly attributed this to simple incompetence, that they came in 
and they said: whoops! We blew it! Well, I think that’s a 
charitable view. I think that’s a charitable view. I think they 
knew what they were doing. I think they knew they were 
saying, we will cut the deficit, and they knew they weren’t 
going to cut the deficit. 
 
And then we come to 1986, the election year, and the current 
Minister of Finance forecast a deficit of $389 million. In his 
words, and these are published in his speech: “. . . a decrease of 
over $200 million from the revised estimates of 1985!” 
 
And in the printed speech he put an exclamation mark after that. 
And well he might have, because a more inaccurate and 
hypocritically inaccurate statement has rarely been published in 
any Saskatchewan budget. That statement in the budget was 
false. It was blatantly false. It was wrong by over $800 million. 
We who said that the statement was false, even we were 
surprised by the $800 million figure. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that could not be a mistake. That was  

deception. And the government opposite continued its 
deception. Last October the Premier said publicly, and I heard 
him, and I suspect many of you heard him, that the deficit 
would come in at around 500 million. That was not true. 
 
Five months later the same government announced that the 
figure was not 500 million, but closer to 1,300 million. Now 
that type of conduct is a callous deception on the public. 
Around 500 million they’re saying in October. Thirteen 
hundred million they’re saying in March. 
 
I want to remind the House that there’s not one major fact 
affecting the financial affairs of this province, which is true 
now, which was not true last October, or fully anticipated last 
October. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — There is nothing different so far as 
finances are concerned. Grain prices are down, but everybody 
knew they were down, and they’re no farther down than people 
thought they would be. Oil prices, if anything are higher than 
anticipated. In 1986, at their lowest, they were around $14 a 
barrel, and now they’re up to around $25 a barrel. Potash prices 
are increasing. Prices for other products, oil, seeds, cattle, hogs, 
uranium, are certainly no worse than anticipated. Population 
exodus is continuing, but that was true last October. The budget 
deficit cannot be any higher than insiders knew it would be last 
October. 
 
No. All the facts are that the government opposite knew what 
the truth was, the only difference is that the election is over. 
And the government opposite no longer needs the line of 
deception which says that the deficit is no problem. That’s what 
they were saying before last October. They no longer need that 
line of deception, so they’re no longer using it. They’ve 
dropped it. But they haven’t dropped it in favour of the truth. 
None of the budgets of this government since 1982 have been 
accurate or believable. None of them have given any reason for 
the public of Saskatchewan to believe them, and the budget 
we’re now debating is no exception. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — This budget is replete with statements 
and figures which ought not to be believed. But this time there’s 
a different agenda. This time the agenda is not to say that 
everything is rosy but to say that everything is very, very tough 
and we’ve got to savagely cut social programs, and to pretend, 
as members opposite are — and we’ve heard them stand up and 
say, there are tough times, we’ve got to act. They are saying 
there are no options, and they’re wrong . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member for Weyburn is suggesting that I 
should say something about the taxation of oil companies, and 
therefore I will, because it is one of the choices they have. 
 
(1500) 
 
A fair estimate of the value of oil which will be produced in this 
year, 1987, in Saskatchewan, is $165 billion. It’s a fair estimate. 
The member for Swift Current may wish to  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

646 
 

dispute that, but not far off. And in 1983, Mr. Speaker, the 
value of oil produced was $1.65 billion. And in 1983, Mr. 
Speaker, and that was a PC year, let’s understand that — I’m 
not talking about oppressive New Democratic party royalties as 
they’re wont to say, I am talking about PC royalties — in 1983, 
on that much oil they collected royalties of 42 per cent, or $685 
million. This year, when I predict the production will be very 
similar, they budget returns of $309 million, well under half of 
what they themselves collected short years ago in 1983 on the 
same value of oil. 
 
Well I want to talk about oil royalties because it’s pretty clear 
that when you’re saying to the oil companies, between ’83 and 
’87, you can have a $300 million tax cut — which is what 
they’re saying — somebody’s going to have a $300 million tax 
increase. And guess who? It’s the ordinary people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know that extra money that could be had if they would 
apply royalties at the same rate that they themselves applied in 
1983, that would be an extra 2 to $300 million more than the 
total of the so-called savings for the drug plan, or children’s 
dentistry, and chiropractic care — all of them together— 
universities, community colleges, technical institutes, John 
Howard Society, transition houses, native organizations, grants 
to the cities. They all don’t add up to 2 to $300 million. 
 
So there are choices — so there are choices. You could choose 
to tax the oil companies at the same proportionate rate you did 
in 1983 — and there were people working in the oil patch in 
1983 — or you could choose to cut health and education and 
social services. And you have chosen to cut health and 
education and social services. You could tax ordinary people or 
the oil companies, and you have chosen to tax ordinary people. 
 
We’ll hear members opposite say that we have to cut taxes to 
create jobs. And I think I heard one member opposite just about 
say that now. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard all this before. 
Between 1982 and 1986 this government said that it needed to 
cut oil royalties to show that they were open for business, to 
show that they would create jobs — long-term, stable jobs — 
and to diversify the economy. Diversification has been a buzz-
word of this government for a long time, and many of us have 
regretted that they haven’t turned their mind to doing something 
about it but only talking about it. 
 
And the tax breaks were given, Mr. Speaker, huge tax breaks, 
totalling $1.5 billion between 1982 and 1986. And ’86 came 
along and the $1.5 billion was gone, and so were the long-term, 
stable jobs. They were gone too. 
 
Now there’s no doubt that in the oil patch there will be some 
jobs. But they have provided to be temporary jobs — temporary 
jobs because many of them which came in 1982 and 1983 were 
gone by 1986, and that’s not a long-term, stable job. And those 
jobs cost us $1.5 billion. And the government opposite could 
have taken that $1.5 billion and used it to diversify the 
economy, to create industries or activity all across this province, 
and indeed there then would be thousands of long-term, stable 
jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — They chose not do that. They chose to 
give the money to the oil industry and to take their word for it 
that the jobs they would create would be long-term and stable. 
And they have not been. The oil industry came in and said, 
we’ve had $1.5 billion, yes, but times are tough and we need 
more tax cuts. So in December 1986 there was another round of 
royalty cuts to get the oil companies to create some more long-
term, stable jobs to replace the ones that were gone. 
 
Once again, the ordinary taxpayers are asked to pick up the 
slack. Yes, there are choices. You could choose to side with the 
oil companies or ordinary taxpayers, and you’ve lined up with 
the oil companies. You’ve made your choice. You have made 
your choice, and it’s no use you saying that you have to cut 
these services; it is no use you saying that there are no 
alternatives. There are alternatives. There are choices. You’ve 
made your choices, and the people of Saskatchewan will judge 
you on the choices you have made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The government opposite is fond of 
saying that every dollar counts. These are tough times and every 
dollar counts. But I wish they would act that way. I ask the 
Minister of Finance and the Premier: if every dollar counts, why 
did you refuse to even raise a finger of protest when the 
Mulroney government cut transfer payments to the provinces by 
many millions of dollars? Or when it decided to increase 
prescription drug prices for all Saskatchewan people and also 
for the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two federal government actions are going to 
cost the people of Saskatchewan at least $75 million a year. 
That’s more than a full percentage point on the sales tax. Every 
dollar counts, the government says. Then why don’t these $75 
million count. Why don’t they count enough to generate a little 
activity on the part of the government opposite to press the 
Mulroney government to treat this province fairly. 
 
The federal tax system is so riddled with loopholes and special 
preferences and gimmicks which business and the very rich use, 
that we as Canadians, and we as Saskatchewan taxpayers, are 
losing tens of millions of dollars a year. The people are no 
longer denying that. People are admitting that the tax system is 
full of gimmicks and loopholes which are benefiting major 
companies and wealth tax payers. 
 
And yet, the government at Ottawa has not acted to plug those 
loopholes, and the government at Regina has not urged it to do 
so. If every dollars counts, why aren’t the government and the 
cabinet in Regina pressing the government and the cabinet in 
Ottawa to plug those loopholes and make our tax system fair so 
that corporations would pay their fair share; that wealthy people 
would pay their fair share; and that ordinary people were not 
asked to bear an unfair burden. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well let me put a few figures in  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

647 
 

context here. If all of the loopholes were plugged for major 
corporations and for the wealthy, there would be upwards of 15 
or 20 or perhaps more billions of dollars coming into the federal 
treasury; and of that amount, the Saskatchewan government 
would receive perhaps as much as 5 or $600 million, certainly 2 
to $300 million. Now that’s a lot of money. 
 
If every dollar counts, why aren’t the members opposite 
pressing the Mulroney government to get on with the job, plug 
those loopholes, and see that everybody in this country pays its 
fair share, all of the corporations pay their fair share, the 
wealthy pay their fair share? And then the ordinary people of 
this country and of this province would be prepared to pay their 
fair share. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now if every dollar counts, Mr. 
Speaker, I wonder why the government opposite doesn’t turn its 
mind to some of the wasteful expenditures which it’s pursuing. 
 
I wonder why they don’t cut the political staffs of the Premier 
and the cabinet ministers, which now I think stand at 183, 
which is about double what they were five years ago. Why 
don’t they count the dollars that are going out to those people? 
 
Now if Saskatchewan is in such desperate financial straits, then 
why are we proceeding to spend $120 million on the political 
boondoggles known as the Rafferty and Alameda dams in the 
constituencies of the Premier and the Deputy Premier? 
 
We all know that the Shand power project can go ahead without 
Alameda and Rafferty. That is only peripheral to building a 
power station. Alameda and Rafferty are dam boondoggles, and 
it’s time they stop. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Why are Saskatchewan people asked to 
bear this double standard, where we can have tens of millions of 
dollars spent on projects for which no economic justification 
has been given to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
You know, members opposite say, oh, these are great projects, 
and they’re financially sound. If they believed that, they would 
have made the figures available to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Request after request has been made for the analysis which 
shows that is’ sensible to spend $120 million on Alameda and 
Rafferty, and no figures have been given to the public. And I 
know why no figures have been given to the public — because 
no convincing figures can be given to the public. It’s a political 
boondoggle and not an economic investment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
the children’s dentistry plan or to the money for the Voice of 
the Handicapped, we’re told that every dollar counts. But when 
it comes to the hundreds of millions of dollars in tax breaks to 
the oil companies, or the hundreds  

of millions of dollars that we, in Saskatchewan, are losing 
because of the federal tax loopholes, or because of the cut in 
transfer payments or the tens of millions we’re losing because 
of the drug patent laws, suddenly, suddenly . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Suddenly every dollar doesn’t count; suddenly 
every dollar doesn’t count. 
 
My point is this, Mr. Speaker: the government has choices. It 
doesn’t have to savage public services like the health care and 
education systems; it doesn’t have to hit ordinary people with 
huge tax increases. There are other sources of revenue. 
Members opposite really can’t deny that, but what they’re 
saying is that it’s not their job to see that the major corporations 
in this country pay fair taxes. It’s not their job to see that the oil 
companies pay royalties at the same rates that they did two or 
three years ago; that all these things are somebody else’s 
problem; their job is simply to tax ordinary people and to cut 
services to ordinary people. And believe you me, they’ve 
pursued that. 
 
But I want to narrow my focus a bit and say that even within the 
cuts they have choices, and they’ve made the wrong ones. Let’s 
take gasoline tax. Suppose I have a friend who’s a Regina 
lawyer. And his office staff comes to work on the bus, on the 
city transit, and before they finish the day on a lovely afternoon 
like this, the Regina lawyer jumps into his car and goes out and 
plays a round of golf. Members opposite have decided that the 
gasoline, the fuel in the vehicle which takes the staff to work 
should be taxed and that the transit rates should reflect the fact 
that the fuel is taxed. But when the lawyer jumps in his car and 
drives to the golf course, well of course that should be tax-free. 
And that is true; that is what they have decided, and it makes no 
sense. It encourages people to use the cars in the city. You 
should be in . . . In Regina they should be encouraging transit 
use. It makes no sense to encourage people to drive their cars in 
the major cities. It taxes people who ride buses in the cities. 
 
And the member for Weyburn is saying they don’t have a 
transit system in Weyburn. Very well, but they have an STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) bus. They used to say 
of STC buses, it’s cheaper by far than driving your car. Now 
they’re trying to make clear that it isn’t that much cheaper 
because for people of lower incomes who ride the bus they say, 
oh, that’s got to be taxed fuel, and the bus ticket has got to 
reflect that taxed fuel. But if they can jump in their own car and 
drive, like the member for Weyburn doubtless does, then of 
course that’s tax free. And that is exactly what they’re saying, 
and even in their own choices, even within the cuts, their 
choices don’t make sense. It makes no sense on the ground of 
business or on fairness. 
 
(1515) 
 
Let’s take their housing grants. Until a few weeks ago, they had 
two housing grants, one for senior citizens — the senior 
citizens’ home repair grant — where they paid money to senior 
citizens with a limited income up to $16,000 so that they could 
remain in their own homes. And they had another housing grant 
which gave grants to lawyers and business men with income of 
$50,000 or $100,000 or $250,000 to help them install a hot tub 
so they could have a trendy party. 
  



 
June 23, 1987 

648 
 

And they decided in the name of restraint to cut one. Well by 
now we know which one they’ve cut. And you’re right — they 
cut the senior citizens’ home repair grant, where the income is a 
limit of $16,000, and they left the grant for the trendy lawyer 
who wants to put in a hot tub and has a minimum income of 
$200,000 a year. 
 
Or take the matter of salaries. We’ve heard ministers of the 
Crown stand up and say nurses should have their salaries 
frozen, other health workers should have their salaries frozen, 
and so should teacher sand educational workers and those who 
work with the handicapped — no salary increases. We’re in a 
time of restraint. And yet we have a new president of the 
Saskatchewan Power corporation who is getting, at an absolute 
minimum, 50 per cent more than the previous incumbent, and 
no one denies that. No one will deny that. 
 
The previous incumbent who had 30 years service and was a 
professional engineer and knows something about power; the 
current incumbent who has a Q.C. and well . . . I don’t know 
who this new paragon of power, this pearl beyond price is, but 
when we look we find that he is the past president of the 
Progressive Conservative Party from Estevan — from Estevan 
— George Hill. No suggestion that that salary should be frozen 
or even increased by 5 per cent — at least 50 per cent. So this is 
unfair, and outrageously unfair, and the people know it’s unfair 
and they wont’ forget. 
 
And there’ve been other patently political patronage 
appointments — Paul Schoenhals, who was the minister in 
charge of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in the years 
when it lost the most money, and on the basis of that 
qualification he has been created the full-time chairman. A 
corporation which is down-sizing, and which never before had a 
permanent chairman, now has a permanent chairman costing us 
80 or $90,000 a year. 
 
And I won’t recount the similar success stories of Messrs. Dirks 
and Embury and Birkbeck and Parker and Rousseau and 
Young, to name a few. All of them, all of them, Mr. Speaker, 
are engaged in down-sizing the taxpayers’ pocket-books. This 
government is pursuing a blatant double standard. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people will pull together in 
time of diversity. They are prepared to sacrifice, but they insist 
that the sacrifice be fairly distributed. This budget does not do 
that; it is not even trying to do that. And that’s why there’s 
massive opposition to this budget in all corners of this province, 
and this government is going to hear about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, this budget not only hits 
ordinary people with higher taxes directly, but it’s going to cost 
them a lot of money indirectly. I want to refer to my own 
constituency of Regina and to my own city, but I know that the 
city of Regina, because of this budget, is going to lose about $6 
million — a little more than that really, it’s closer to $8 million. 
Six million dollars in capital grants; a half a million dollars in 
street urban assistance; a million dollars less in revenue sharing; 
more  

than half a million dollars extra because of extra costs from the 
sales tax and the gasoline tax. Eight million dollars for 200,000 
people — fewer than that — $45 per person, $180 for a family 
of four, is another tax increase on top of the ones which show 
up in front of the budget. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is yet another tax shift, a tax increase which 
was shifted from the provincial government to the municipal 
government, but must just as surely be paid for by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If I looked at this budget and inquired about where there had 
been big cuts, you might be surprised, particularly from a 
government opposite, the biggest cut has been in agriculture. 
And these are absolute cuts. If you take last year’s estimates, 
add the supplementary estimates, then take this year’s estimates 
and take out this phoney business of charging the government 
departments rent for the buildings the government owns, we 
find that the Department of Agriculture is going to get $170 
million less this year than last. We find that the Department of 
Education is going to get $23 million less than last — $23 
million less. 
 
And the Department of Health — and we are assured daily that 
they’re spending more and more money on health — a simple 
look at the figures will show that they are budgeting a cut in 
health, a small cut, $4 million, but a cut in the actual number of 
dollars. And when you apply what we know are inflationary 
increases in prices, particularly from goods which come from 
outside of Canada, that is a sharp cut in health services. 
 
Urban Affairs is going to experience a cut of $15 million — 
$15 million — and that means lower services or higher taxes for 
people who live in cities, towns, villages, and rural 
municipalities. You may well ask, well, who’s getting all the 
extra money? Well the biggest single increase, of course, is $94 
million interest on the public debt that goes to the bankers and 
the bond dealers. They’re the big winners — big winners. 
 
The other one, at least if you just compare the estimates, is the 
home program, although if you compare the supplementary 
estimates there is not an increase. 
 
And what agencies are getting staff cuts? Well I just gave a . . . 
I prepared a brief list because it gives some idea of the priorities 
of this government, where they are cutting staff: Indian and 
Native Affairs, Women’s Services, Youth Services, Human 
Rights commission, the Law Reform Commission, Health 
Education, Community Health Services, the Saskatchewan 
dental plan, the Mental Health Services — cut by over 100 — 
Northern Health Services. Increases? Well, Corrections 
Administration has a big increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that tells you something about he priorities of this 
government. We have ideas about their choices when it comes 
to raising money. We have ideas about their choices when it 
comes to spending money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer very briefly now to the approach of 
this government to Crown corporations. And I note that at their 
convention last fall, or last spring, their treasurer, Mr. Milton, 
said that in his opinion everything  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

649 
 

but SPC and SaskTel and the auto fund ought to be privatized. 
And I think that represents a view of members opposite. That 
means things like the general insurance part of SGI, and the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company, and Agdevco 
(agricultural development corporation), and Saskatchewan 
Minerals, and many others should be, to use the felicitous 
phrase of the former member for Wilkie, transferred to the 
private sector. 
 
But I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is all part of a plan 
by the right, as represented by the Progressive Conservative 
Party, to convince people that somehow government is bad, and 
that we here on the prairies should not use government at all in 
order to gain some control over our own destiny. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is not popular to say that more 
government is good government, but I want to tell members 
opposite that they are going to find out that less government is 
not going to be acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan when 
they cut the hospital plan — they’ll find out that people like 
government hospitals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I know there have been cuts in this city 
around the Plains hospital, and I’m not finding anybody coming 
and cheering and saying: what a splendid thing it is to get the 
government off my back! They’re not telling me that. They’re 
saying: what happened to my specialist? And I am having this 
said to me by medical doctors in this city who I am sure nobody 
every accused of voting NDP. No, indeed, they did not. They 
say it is simply bad, bad medicine to have all of the specialists 
fired at the Plains. And they’re not therefore saying that they 
want less government — far from it. 
 
We know that if we are to have protection from the great banks 
and the international oil companies, we have to use all the tools 
open to us. And that’s why, in the early days, the people on 
these prairies, the farmers, banded together to form their own 
co-ops. And the people who press . . . people who first farmed 
on these prairies pressed for, of all things, a compulsory 
government marketing agency, the Canadian Wheat Board. And 
I don’t find a whole lot of farmers saying: get that government 
off my back. Most of them are still saying: I like the idea of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And in the . . . Aha! Members opposite think that farmers scorn 
the Canadian Wheat Board. But I think they will find that, when 
push comes to shove, farmers will support the Canadian Wheat 
Board and will not adopt the doctrines of members opposite 
who say that everything offered by government is bad. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember 25 years ago when this battle was 
fought and when people with the same mentality of members 
opposite were saying, “state medicine” as they called it,” iron 
curtain medicine” as they called it, was bad, and they wanted no 
part of medicare. And that’s what the Liberals said, and that’s 
what the Tories said, and if you want a list of high profile 
Tories who said it, I’d be happy to supply it — because I 
watched them. I watched it. 

Senator Barootes was at the front of the parade. He has been the 
chief fund raiser for the Conservative Party in this province for 
a number of years, and he was right at the head of the parade of 
saying he wanted no part of medicare, no part of iron curtain 
medicine, as Tories then said it was. Because they believed that 
all government things was bad, and fundamentally they still 
believe that medicare is bad. Fundamentally in their hearts they 
believe that, because they think government is bad. 
 
Well I think they will find that the people of Saskatchewan 
know that government should be used, co-operatives should be 
used, private ownership should be used, joint ventures should 
be used, and that we ought not to bar anything on the grounds 
of ideology. We ought not to bar anything on the grounds of 
ideology. 
 
We ought to use all the tools open to us, otherwise we are going 
to be economic colonists. We are going to be beholden to the 
lords of capital unless we use local private ownership. And 
that’s why we believe in the family farm and have fought for it. 
We believe in local co-operatives. We believe in . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, indeed. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the record over the years 
indicates that our vision of building Saskatchewan is that we 
should be using all the tools open to us in order that we might 
control our own destiny. That’s our vision of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well I want just to add one point and 
then I will move to my closing remarks. Members opposite may 
feel that everything in government is bad. Members opposite 
feel that they . . . they may feel that they have, as a matter of 
ideology, to get rid of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
office, SGI, as we’re seeing it announced in the paper, or at 
least reported in the paper, but it’s part of our common heritage. 
And I want to say this: if members opposite decide to get rid of 
parts of our common heritage because of narrow ideological 
reasons, I think a future government of Saskatchewan will feel 
free to act to counteract this narrow ideology. 
 
And I think a future — and I am merely predicting — but I 
think a future Government of Saskatchewan would feel free to 
enter the insurance field to compete to win back policies, to 
compete to win back business, perhaps every single bit of 
business, who would know, to give the Saskatchewan people a 
choice of insurance carriers that they now have — private, co-
operative, and government. We think it’s good for people to 
have a choice, and we don’t think it should be barred because of 
the narrow ideology of members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I return to the theme of 
deception, of what the PC party promised last October and what 
it is now delivering. And I want to just say, Mr. Speaker, that 
this pattern of spend in the first term,  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

650 
 

deceive the electorate and, after winning a second time, 
bringing in the hatchet men of the right, this has become a PC 
trade mark. 
 
Ask about it in B.C. They know about that. Ask them in 
Manitoba — they used to talk about acute protracted restraint 
there — and now in Saskatchewan. And Canadians should 
know, and Saskatchewan people should know, that a vote for 
the PCs federally will be a vote for the same savage cuts by a 
wrecking crew with the same right-wing agenda as 
Saskatchewan people are now seeing. Mr. Speaker, when it 
comes to their approach to social services and fair taxation, a 
Tory is a Tory is a Tory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I hope that Saskatchewan people 
are fully aware of this when it comes time to vote in the next 
election. I hope they know the perils of re-electing a PC 
government. 
 
And now the Devine PCs are fully supporting the free trade 
initiative. It becomes clearer every day. Well, I want to talk 
about free trade because it impacts on all of us federally and 
provincially. It becomes clearer every day that if we link 
ourselves tightly to the U.S. we will be cut off from the markets 
of the Pacific Rim and the developing world. Let’s not deny 
that. And we will inexorably be drawn in, not only to the U.S. 
economic system, but its social and political system as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — According to the apostles of free trade, 
our producers, our manufacturers, can compete, but we’ll need a 
level playing field. And we all know what that means. Our 
exporters will have to have low, low wages, right-to-work laws, 
like their competitors in Alabama, and Georgia and Arkansas. 
And if we have any services left, they’ll have to be paid for, not 
by taxes on incomes, personal and corporate, based upon ability 
to pay, because that would raise our tax levels above those in 
the U.S. They’ll have to be paid for by sales tax on the 
consumer, which hits poorest, poorer people hardest. And, Mr. 
Speaker, understand that that’s what Michael Wilson was 
saying last Thursday. He is going to cut corporate taxes, he’s 
going to cut the top rate for personal income taxes, and he’s 
going to raise the money by sales taxes, which we all know bear 
hardest on ordinary and poor people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Certainly we can compete with the 
Americans, but only by making ourselves, for all intents and 
purposes, Americans in our social and economic system. And 
Canadians don’t want that. They want to be and to remain 
proud Canadians. And that’s why New Democrats oppose free 
trade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — There’s another reason why we oppose 
free trade. New Democrats believe that Canada should be 
playing a more vigorous role on the international stage. The 
world is crying for voices for  

peace, and for international reconciliation, for greater help for 
the Third World. 
 
To paraphrase what Father Bob Ogle said in his book 
North/South Calling, the poor south countries like Brazil and 
Nigeria and Pakistan and Nicaragua and Bangladesh and the 
Sudan, and you name them, they’re calling to all of us in the 
wealthy North to listen. We all know that Canada cannot act 
completely independently of the United States. We’re not naïve, 
but we believe that Canada can do more, and we believe that a 
New Democratic Party federal government will do more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — But only, Mr. Speaker, if we’re not 
hopelessly tied to the U.S. by still stronger economic strings, 
strings all controlled by the U.S. Our ability to play a more 
important and more effective role for world peace is also at 
stake in the free trade talks, and that’s another reason why we 
oppose free trade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I am observing the 
clock. I will have other opportunities to express my views in 
this legislature. But it will be clear from my remarks that I will 
be heartily supporting the amendment and will be opposing the 
main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The standing 
ovation given to the Leader of the Opposition by his caucus was 
probably because this is probably the last time the hon. member 
will be replying to a budget speech in this House. And I must 
say, given the antics of the members opposite over the last 
week, I’m sure the hon. member is looking forward to his 
retirement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to 
take part in this budget debate. It is a pleasure because this 
budget sends an important signal to the people of 
Saskatchewan. It says that the Devine government has the 
courage to face up to the challenge before us today and that we, 
as a government, are taking decisive actions. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, this budget puts Saskatchewan very much on track for 
the future. Once again, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is going into 
the lead in responding to the opportunities of these changing 
times, and this budget shows not only strong leadership for our 
province, but it provides a lead to other provinces too, who will 
undoubtedly begin to follow as they have followed 
Saskatchewan’s lead in the past five years. The people of the 
province, I’m sure, will be for ever grateful for the foresight and 
the leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, consider the bases of the budget. The finances of 
this province must be well-managed and this budget does that in 
a fair but effective way. No one questions the need to diversify 
this province’s economy, perhaps except for the NDP, and this 
budget continues our thrust of the past four years towards 
diversification of our economy. Like every province in Canada, 
we face the need to make adjustments to the health care system. 
And  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

651 
 

again, we are acting to see that it continues to be the best such 
program in Canada, and it provides the people of our province 
with the protection they want and must continue to have. In 
today’s fast changing world, we must adapt the education 
system to meet the increasing needs of our people, and that is 
exactly what we are doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget does a masterful job of dealing with 
these issues. This budget is a blueprint for our future. It is a 
blueprint for the government strategy that will enable our 
people to respond to the challenges ahead and to enjoy lives of 
achievement and success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am really disappointed at what the opposition 
members are saying and have been saying about this budget. 
They are deliberately misrepresenting what the budget says and 
what this governing is doing. They are simply ignoring the 
challenge facing the people of this province. They continue to 
live in the past, in their little make-believe worlds. They are 
calling, in one breath, for unlimited government spending, 
while at the same time suggesting that the deficit must be 
controlled. The members of the opposition are pretending that 
the prices of our resources, on world markets, have not 
declined. It is hypocrisy at its worst. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me assure you, that the people of 
Saskatchewan will not be so easily fooled as this opposition 
believes. The members across the floor may have little respect 
for the intelligence of the people of this province, but I can tell 
you that the members on this side of the House do not take our 
responsibilities so lightly. 
 
I am disappointed, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 
have still not learned their lesson, that they continue to try to 
fool and scare the public. But I can assure them that their failure 
to address the real challenges facing this province will lead 
them directly back to their opposition seats four years from 
now, just as it has done twice in the past five years, in 1982 and 
again in 1986. The members opposite, Mr. Speaker, can choose 
to ignore it, but it is no wonder that Saskatchewan has a 
financial problem Wheat prices are at their lowest in 40 years. 
Oil prices fell from $42 a barrel in 1985 to $14 a barrel in 1986. 
Potash nearly . . . was at $155 a tonne in 1981, has fallen to 
under $80 a tonne in 1986. Uranium has fallen from $50 a 
pound in 1978 to $24 a pound in 1986. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, a good deal of our problem comes from the 
disastrous miscalculations of the former NDP government led 
by the then premier, Allan Blakeney. In the boom days of the 
1979s, prices of Saskatchewan’s products outpaced inflation 
and the NDP government was, even then, living in a dream 
world. They assumed that even higher prices were on the way, 
and it structured, Mr. Speaker, it structured its spending plans 
accordingly. 
 
The Minister of Finance explained that very clearly in his 
budget address last week. He recalled that in 1981 the then 
minister of Finance, the present member from Regina North 
East, told the international investment community that oil 
revenues would increase by almost 180 per cent by 1986. That’s 
what that member said. He said that oil revenues in the province 
would increase between 1981 and 1986 by 180 per cent, but 
instead they  

have declined by 60 per cent. 
 
This financial NDP wizard also said that potash revenues would 
increase by almost 220 per cent, but instead they have declined 
by 80 per cent. But he went even further, Mr. Speaker. The 
member from Regina North East, as Minister of Finance under 
the NDP government, also said that uranium revenues would 
increase by over 350 per cent, but instead they have declined by 
40 per cent to revenues of $18 million this year. I would say 
that that’s quite an exercise in economic predictions made by 
the member opposite. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan government resource 
revenues have fallen by 50 per cent since 1985, declining from 
one third of government revenues in 1981 to only 13 per cent 
today. 
 
No wonder it’s necessary to streamline the operation of 
government to fit the economic and fiscal realities. Had we 
failed to act, Mr. Speaker, the annual interest payments on our 
debt would have reached nearly $1 billion by 1981, and we find 
that totally unacceptable. Of course, our Minister of Finance 
had to act to reduce this province’s deficit. Yes, he said, it 
would have been easy to follow Manitoba’s recent lead of 
simply raising taxes to meet heavy government expenditures — 
taxes on gas, taxes on clothing, taxes on food, a real estate 
transfer tax. That’s what they have in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. 
But this government is taking a more thoughtful and responsible 
approach. 
 
(1545) 
 
We reviewed all government spending and reduced the less-
needed programs. And no wonder the opposition is trying 
deliberately to hide the real fact from the public. Let us look at 
the opposition’s scare tactics and scare cries regarding taxes. 
Yes, the Minister of Finance did increase some taxes, like the E 
& H tax, and he has imposed a gasoline tax while sparing 
Saskatchewan individuals. But essential goods such as clothing, 
footwear, heating, and electricity are exempted from the E & H 
tax; and farmers are exempt from the tax on imports such as 
machinery, fertilizers, and pesticides. My colleague is also 
seeing that trust and loan firms pay more share in taxes. 
 
But let’s not overlook the tax reductions. A $200 sales tax 
reduction will protect lower-income families. And there is a 
$300 tax reduction for home-makers, and a $200 per child tax 
reduction. Single parents will get a $500 tax reduction for their 
first child. Senior citizens will get a supplementary $200 tax 
reduction. This means that a married senior couple with a net 
income of $17,000 will receive $350 in tax relief. A single 
mother with two children and a net income of $15,000 will get a 
$650 reduction in tax relief. And a family of our, Mr. Speaker, 
with a net income of $20,000 will get a $400 tax relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is that Saskatchewan residents still pay the 
lowest amount of taxes of those in any other province except 
Alberta. If the Quebec tax rates were imposed on Saskatchewan 
residents today, taxes would rise by over $8009 million. And if 
the Manitoba tax rate were imposed in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, our taxes would increase by well over $500 million. In 
fact, thanks  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

652 
 

to the tax reduction, many lower-income families will pay less 
tax next year. 
 
And let’s not forget that Saskatchewan families continue to pay 
the lowest costs for automobile insurance, electricity, home 
heating, and telephone service. So much for the high tax 
bogeyman that this raging opposition continues to scream and 
yell about. 
 
But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
will not be surprised that the government will continue to 
defend and develop our agriculture. Although the opposition 
will continue to try to mislead the public about this, my 
colleague, the Minister of Finance, said that the two central 
issues facing agriculture are simply low commodity prices and 
high debt. He said a second federal deficiency payment of 1.6 
billion to $3 billion will be needed for our farmers this year. He 
said that government will propose new ways in the upcoming 
weeks and months to finance farm equity in time for the public 
discussion this summer. 
 
He went further and said that with interest payments now lower, 
the government is deferring some of the interest rate protection 
programs for farmers that we brought in in our first term, Mr. 
Speaker, and we are moving towards new development 
initiatives. 
 
Some of the initiatives we are looking at are irrigation 
enhancement, and more effective ways to gather and distribute 
market information to producers. The livestock cash advance 
program will be modified to provide cash advances to livestock 
producers similar to grain producers. But let me underline a 
whole range of new and imaginative programs that will be 
developed over the coming months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A new thrust towards agriculture research, trade, and 
diversification is coming. Government will bring agriculture 
extension services into the technological era. We will be 
expanding local supplies of farm chemicals, fertilizers, and 
fuels. The production of generic agriculture chemicals will take 
place in the province. Initiatives in inland grain cleaning, 
feedlot and livestock development, special crop trading, and 
meat packing and processing are up and coming. 
 
The agricultural development fund has been boosted to $30 
million. Commitment to irrigation development has been 
increased by $7 million to $16 million. The establishment of an 
agricultural development secretariat to promote the interest of 
agriculture communities and to focus on the diversification of 
our agriculture is coming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just ask: when was the last time farmers 
of this province had such a clear and positive program laid out 
to meet the challenges of the future? And I’m sure with the help 
of government, Mr. Speaker, I know that our agriculture 
producers will rise up to the occasion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition has been particularly noisy and 
misleading about our changes in medicare, but they carefully 
ignore the fact that every province — every province in Canada 
— faces medicare challenges today. The opposition fails to note 
that Ontario is slashing the number of medical residencies in 
teaching hospitals by  

15 per cent. 
 
They fail also to note that in Manitoba they are reviewing the 
process for setting the physician’s fee schedule, that it has also 
cancelled ophthalmology training, that Manitoba has increased 
its drug plan fees, and has closed hospital beds, Mr. Speaker. 
And probably the most important thing they choose to ignore is 
the fact that Manitoba is now asking Saskatchewan hospitals to 
treat some of their cancer patients over the course of the next 
months or years. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is trying to mislead the public. 
It is afraid that the public will see that this government, led by 
Premier Grant Devine, is responding positively to maybe the 
biggest challenge facing every province today. Again, this is a 
case of Saskatchewan taking the lead in Canada and showing 
the way in how to deal with a major problem. 
 
My colleague, the Minister of Finance, pointed out that the 
health care sector is beset by structural and systematic problems 
which prevent delivering the best health care systems possible. 
That system was built up through a simplistic “add on” 
mentality of the NDP. It lacks adequate accountability and 
performance standards; it encourages excessive use and high 
administration costs at the expense of patient care, Mr. Speaker. 
Many health care professionals believe the system does not 
fully utilize their skills. The truth is that about 500 separate 
boards now manage various parts of the health care system, and 
they are eating up funds that should go to patient care. 
 
Opposition members never weary about crying out that there is 
a shortage of hospital beds. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatchewan has 6.7 acute care hospital beds for every 1,000 
residents — 31 per cent above the national average, and the 
highest in the country. 
 
For the edification of the members opposite, I shall repeat that. 
The fact is that Saskatchewan has 6.7 acute care hospital beds 
for every 1,000 residents in the province. That is 31 per cent of 
the national average, and the highest in the country. 
 
The fact, Mr. Speaker, we do have waiting lists for elective 
surgery in Saskatoon, and those waiting lists have doubled over 
the past five years. And we as a government are very concerned 
about this because even though health care spending the 
province has increased by 63 per cent in the last five years, the 
waiting lists continue to grow. The opposition would like to 
spend an ever growing river of money on that problem. It 
wouldn’t bother looking to see that the beds in smaller hospitals 
remain under-utilized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister explained it very well. He 
said, we don’t have a hospital bed shortage; rather we have a 
serious utilization and distribution problem. Physicians are 
unevenly distributed between rural and urban areas, and this 
compounds the problem. The present system can also cause 
excessive use if used by physician services and medical 
procedures. That is why the government and the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association will be doing a joint study to examine the 
utilization of physician services. Our government is not  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

653 
 

going frantic dealing with the symptoms of the problem; we are 
getting at the cause of the problem. 
 
The system must become more responsible for the dollars it 
spends. Unlike the opposition which hides behind a profusion 
of words and emotion, the minister has clearly outlined his plan 
in a very simple and clear way for the people of the province. 
 
The government will move towards a regionalized integrated 
health care system which is more efficient and more 
streamlined and more responsive and more accountable. The 
government will redefine the mandate of rural hospitals to 
accommodate the needs of the communities they serve. It will 
revitalize regional facilities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Where 
needed, it will reduce duplication of services in cities. It will 
compare the ratio of spending on health care administration to 
the spending on front line patient care. It will decentralize 
decision making so all participants have a stake in how the 
system performs. The Health minister will soon being 
consultations to discuss how we should restructure this new 
regionalized system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Supplementary health care programs like the drug plan or the 
dental plan will be restructured. The drug plan remains in effect 
despite the allegations of the members opposite. The dental plan 
remains in effect despite the allegations and the teeth-gnashing 
of the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, that is what the people 
of Saskatchewan want. They want action that deals with the 
problem, not the outburst of misleading rhetoric that has been 
coming from across the floor. 
 
The Finance minister went on to say a new priority of this 
government is substance abuse. The parents of Saskatchewan’s 
young people have told us that this is their very real concern. 
And my colleague announced $13.2 million this year will go the 
Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission, a boost of 
69 per cent. Why do members opposite not applaud this 
initiative by this government, Mr. Speaker? Why do they insist 
on being out of step with the public? 
 
As I said, education is a priority of our government. The 
Minister of Finance noted that planning is under way for a new 
educational television network to begin delivering adult 
education programming next year. The government will also 
establish a new $3.2 million educational outreach fund for 
teaching university and institute courses in smaller centres. That 
initiative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is being well received by people 
in rural areas. 
 
Of course a new and carefully managed strategy to greatly 
strengthen our adult education programs was announced earlier, 
and I believe that has to do with the integration of the 
community colleges system and the technical institutes to 
become regional colleges. This is the kind of action the people 
of Saskatchewan deserve and the kind of action that they 
appreciate. 
 
Let me refer briefly to diversification. The word 
“diversification” means building new assets. Very simply, 
diversification is building new assets. That’s why the 
government developed the Saskatchewan Builds program. It 
focuses on food processing, tourism, fertilizer  

and agricultural chemical production, special crop production, 
ethanol production, health services, biotechnology, 
communication, electronics, information management, and 
trade. Various programs to assist in this are being consolidated 
into an economic diversification and investment fund, funded 
with $22 million. That, Mr. Speaker, is a blueprint for progress. 
It will benefit every person in this province. 
 
You will all remember our oil royalties were restructured in 
January. The June 9 land sale returned $23.4 millions, almost 
twice as much in one sale as was generated in all of 1986-87, 
which we all admit was not a very good year for our oil 
industry. With the $30 million enhanced oil recovery project to 
go ahead in the Swift Current area, and the new deep well 
discoveries being made recently in south-east Saskatchewan, 
it’s clear our energy policies are working well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on detailing more of the things in the 
budget that are setting this province onto a new course for 
greater growth and greater development and greater leadership 
to this country, but I know that many of these issues will be 
covered by my associates. So I would like to just say, Mr. 
Speaker, and conclude this way, that this is a proud day for me 
to be able to stand and speak on a budget that is setting our 
province on a course towards a future which will bring 
satisfaction to all of us. 
 
We live in a wonderful province, a province of opportunity, that 
we’re going through some hard times right now. The majority 
of the people in the province think we live in the best place in 
the world and that the opportunities for the future for not only 
themselves, but their children, are here. And under the 
leadership of Premier Grant Devine, the diversification of our 
economy, which will encourage people to stay and help the 
province grow, will continue. 
 
As a people, we have come a long way since the pioneers first 
arrived, but there can be no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that this budget 
is setting the stage so that progress in the days ahead will dwarf 
anything we have seen in the past. I have no doubt that the 
people of this province understand this completely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment, but I am 
proud to say that I will be supporting the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise on 
behalf of the people I represent to respond to the budget. 
 
After months and months of government by decree, we’re 
finally in the legislature. The government has tried to avoid 
accountability, but public opinion has forced them to call this 
legislative session. 
 
For most of us the budget contains no surprises. We’ve had it 
announced bit by bit, piece by piece, day by day, and week by 
week. And finally the Minister of Finance has delivered us the 
real agenda of the Conservative  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

654 
 

Party, the real ideology of the Conservative Party. 
 
During the last five years, you’ve pretended to be populist. 
You’ve talked about tax cuts, you’ve talked about service 
improvements, but the talk is over and the truth is out. 
 
You’re the party of tax increases, and you’re the party of human 
service cuts, and you’ve hurt a lot of people, a lot of people. 
 
Last December, in my reply to the throne speech, I spoke of the 
people I represent, people who work, people who have worked 
hard and are now retired, and people who want to work. A large 
number of people in Saskatoon Nutana feel uncertain about 
their future, and they feel very betrayed by your government. 
And I want to talk about those people, and I want to talk about 
how your policies are hurting them. 
 
I want to talk about Mr. And Mrs. Johnson. They’re a senior 
citizen couple living in our constituency. They’re living on a 
fixed income, the old age pension and the supplement, and you 
people have frightened them, and you’ve frightened them 
dearly. They both have heart conditions, they both have high 
blood pressure, they both have arthritis, and they have other 
additional health problems. 
 
The Premier assured us the other day that he was going to talk 
to their doctor, when I raised the question in question period. 
 
Mr. Speaker: —. Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with your leave 
and leave of the House, and if the member has no objection, I 
would like to introduce some students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
thank the hon. member and assure her that naturally you’ll be 
able to continue immediately when I finish. 
 
Inadvertently, earlier today, some students were introduced who 
weren’t here, by a colleague of mine. So on behalf of the 
Deputy Premier, who unfortunately had to be in Ottawa today, I 
have been given the pleasure of introducing a group of students 
from Redvers School. 
 
We have 30 students in grade 6, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
accompanied by their teacher, Diane Dube. I will have the 
pleasure of meeting with this group in about 20 minutes time 
for pictures and refreshments and answer any question they may 
have. I’m sorry your own member isn’t here today; it was 
unfortunate, but inevitable, that he had to leave this afternoon. 
 
But on behalf of the members of the Assembly, we do welcome 
you warmly here today. We hope you have an enjoyable stay, a 
very safe summer holiday. I know you’re very anxious. I’ve got 
a kid just about your age, and he’s pretty anxious to get out and 
enjoy the summer, too. 

Welcome to Regina; welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying earlier, the 
Premier’s assurance the other day to the senior citizen couple 
that he was going to talk to their doctor about their drug costs 
hasn’t alleviated their fears. They have to take those drugs 
because if they don’t, their health will be seriously harmed; if 
they don’t, they could die. And they’re outraged that your 
government doesn’t care. Quite literally, Mr. Speaker, they 
don’t know what they’re going to do. They don’t know where 
they’re going to get the $322 each month to pay for the drug 
bills up front. And as their member of the legislature, I’m not 
sure either. 
 
I’d like to be able to tell them that the Premier recognizes that 
he’s made a mistake. I’d like to be able to tell them that the 
government opposite will reinstate the old drug plan and go 
back to the $3.95 dispensing fee — a plan that gave people on 
lower and middle incomes a sense of security; a plan that said 
to them that no matter how tough times got or not matter how 
sick they got, there’d be no worries and no stress about having 
the money to pay for drugs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! ‘ 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — But the Premier of this province and the 
members over there don’t care, and they certainly don’t listen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about another policy that the 
members opposite have introduced, and they’ve hurt elderly 
people and disabled people, and that’s the Conservative 
government’s 66 per cent increase in home care fees. Home 
care fees in this province have gone from $3 an hour to $5 an 
hour. This is a 66 per cent increase — a 66 per cent increase in 
one fell swoop. And I think that’s wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Senior citizens in my constituency say that 
they can no longer afford to pay for home care, and they 
certainly can’t pay for home care with the increase in 
prescription drugs and changes to the prescription drug plan. 
 
The Premier says that he’s an economist, and I guess I have to 
believe him. I understand he does have some credentials. But 
this economist seems willing . . . he wants to push people into 
nursing homes and out of their homes. And it makes no sense 
economically, no sense  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

655 
 

whatsoever, because it costs $2,400 a month to keep people in 
nursing homes, and it costs a lot less to assist people and assist 
families in keeping their elderly people and disabled people in 
their own homes. And it makes no sense. 
 
I don’t know what the government thinks it’s up to, but I can 
assure you that there are a lot of people who’ve been hurt by 
this policy, and I think it’s time the government changed its 
mind. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, I represent working people, working 
people who feel uncertain about their future. The people in my 
riding work hard to make a living. Many have worked for the 
same employer for a good number of years, and many are 
seeing their job security and their future threatened by the 
members opposite. They, Mr. Speaker, feel betrayed by the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the PC party in 1982 promised to lower income 
tax. They promised to cut income taxes in this province by 10 
per cent. And what have they done? They’ve introduced the 
largest tax hike in our province’s history — unfair flat tax. The 
working people in my constituency are low- and middle-income 
people. The flat tax is particularly devastating because, unlike 
the big business friends of the members opposite, my 
constituents can’t write off apartment purchases, they can’t 
write off shares in the film industry, and they can’t write off 
shares in the oil business. 
 
For wage earners, the income tax deductions are the standard 
ones — for a spouse, a child, for contributions to a church or 
charity, and of course, for expenses associated with health care. 
For the most part the flat tax I applied to the gross income of 
the people I represent. And that’s unfair, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s a betrayal of the Conservative government’s promise to 
cut income taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the Conservative government 
also promised to eliminate the provincial sales tax, and that 
promise, too, has been broken. Instead of eliminating the 5 per 
cent sales tax, they’ve just increased it to 7 per cent. Another 
broken promise, and another betrayal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also made another election promise. They 
promised that never again would we see the gas tax in this 
province. And people believed them. Two days ago the price of 
gasoline went up in this province by 32 cents a gallon. Another 
betrayal, another broken promise. In fact, I’d call it a falsehood. 
For the family that lives on my block, on my street, your 
government’s tax increases have cost them $1.765 extra per 
year, and that doesn’t include the loss to the dental plan and that 
doesn’t include the cost of prescription drugs. Where’s the 
fairness in that, members opposite? How is this tax reform? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about young people. When I 
was leaving high school in 1970, people thought that they had 
the world by the tail. We had a lot of hope. We knew we had no 
problem of getting into university; there was no problem in 
getting into technical institutes.  

And we also had just elected a New Democrat government 
under the leadership of Allan Blakeney. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we had hope; we had a future. 
We knew that when we left university or we left the technical 
institutes, that we’d have jobs. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
in 1982 promised the young people of this province that they’d 
never again have to leave Saskatchewan for job opportunities. 
And, in fact, his battle cry over and over again was: let’s bring 
the kids home. Well I want to talk about how those kids have 
come home. 
 
In the first four months of this year, 4,771 young people have 
left Saskatchewan. Young people are leaving this province in 
droves. Your government is providing young people with no 
jobs, no opportunities, and no hope. When you took office in 
May of 1982 there were 112,000 young people employed in this 
province. And in May of 1987, how many young people were 
employed? Ninety-eight thousand — a loss of 14,000 jobs for 
young people. Mr. Speaker, it means fewer jobs, fewer 
educational opportunities, and no wonder they feel betrayed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the young people of this province were 
particularly concerned to learn that your government has chose 
to eliminate 1,100 students spaces in our technical institutes and 
fire 142 instructors. But these are merely numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
I want to talk about some of those programs. In particular, 
young people were disturbed to learn that 55 seats in the 
certified nursing assistants program were eliminated, 
particularly when there were 165 people waiting to get into 
those seats in the last school term. With the stroke of a pen, the 
Conservatives have wiped out the certified nursing assistants 
program at Kelsey Institute in Saskatoon, and young people are 
wondering why. 
 
They’re also alarmed, Mr. Speaker, that the Conservative 
government chose to eliminate 80 students positions in the 
diploma nursing program at Kelsey. And they’re disturbed that 
the University of Saskatchewan is considering cutting the 
enrolment in the baccalaureate program in nursing by 
practically 50 per cent in order to pay for the PC deficit. 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, the young 
people of this province are asking why. Why would the 
Government of Saskatchewan want to limit even further access 
to careers in the nursing profession at a time when all indicators 
point to a critical shortage of nurses in our province in the next 
five years? 
 
My constituents, Mr. Speaker, were particularly concerned 
about he latest betrayal and probably the most important 
betrayal — the biggest betrayal of all — and that’s the betrayal 
in medical care. For the residents of my constituency and for 
the people of Saskatchewan, there’s a tragic irony that the PC 
government has chosen the 25th anniversary of medicare to 
launch its attack on medicare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, medicare in this province was developed by  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

656 
 

the people of this province. It was their courage and their 
determination and their vision. Together with people like 
Woodrow Lloyd and Allan Blakeney, it was the people of this 
province that made Saskatchewan the birthplace of medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And today, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province will not allow the members opposite to create 
Saskatchewan or make Saskatchewan the graveyard of 
medicare. They won’t allow it, and they’re going to fight back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the health care budget 
presented last week was not only a betrayal but it was also 
deceitful. For it tries to hide the fact that the Devine PC 
government is actually planning to cut health care spending in 
this province by $19 million — $129 million less than what 
they spent last year. When you take into account the 
supplementary estimates for last year, and when you take into 
account the more than $10 million being funnelled to the 
property management corporation, and when you take into 
account the funding of capital projects, on a straight and fair 
comparison basis there is less money in this year’s budget than 
there was in last year’s budget. Higher taxes on Saskatchewan 
people for reduced services. 
 
Now let’s just look at some of those health cuts. Let’s just look 
at some of those programs that the members opposite have 
chosen to reduce. Let’s look under the heading: health capital 
funding. Funds for hospital rejuvenation and renovation and 
construction have been cut by $9 million. Mental health 
services in this province, services that are desperately needed in 
all communities across this province; we’ve seen 100 people cut 
from those programs. 
 
(1615) 
 
And then there’s threats to the chiropractic services — one of 
the most senseless cuts of all, Mr. Speaker — the threat by this 
PC government to place an arbitrary limit on the number of 
visits that one can take or have when you go to visit a 
chiropractor, services desperately needed by men and women 
who are in pain, and who are in need. I’d like to read a letter 
from a constituent of mine: 
 

I’m a self-employed floor covering installer. I have lower 
back problems that chiropractic care alleviates when 
needed. I require three or four treatments in a row. One a 
month will not do me. I cannot afford to pay extra money 
for these treatments. 

 
And the letter goes on, Mr. Speaker, and I want to read it: 
 

I can only hope that your party will restore the programs 
that are being cut so ruthlessly. I have never paid attention 
to politics until the last six months. 

 
And that’s what people of this province are saying about  

the health cuts by the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And I know, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
opposite have received many of the same letters that I have, 
because I have been receiving copies of constituents’ letters to 
the Minister of Health and to members of the legislature located 
in Saskatoon. 
 
And it seems to me that it’s time they started reading those 
letters, and it’s time that they started listening to those letters 
because the men and women across this province are deeply 
concerned about the future of medicare, and they’re deeply 
frightened by the government’s actions, and they’re frightened 
that you’re going to destroy medicare. And I think it’s got to 
stop. 
 
I want to talk about some other health cuts — the elimination of 
the highly successful children’s dental plan. This was an 
innovative health care service, a preventive service, a 
community-based service, and a cost-effective service. This 
program was eliminated by the stroke of a pen by the PC 
government. And as a 12-year-old neighbour told me: is the 
government really . . . is it really mean, or are they just plain 
stupid? 
 
I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that if this PC government thinks 
that they’ve made a popular political choice in eliminating the 
dental plan, they’re wrong — dead wrong. Just go to the tends 
of thousands of children who were served so well in the more 
than 500 clinics across this province. Just ask the tens of 
thousands of parents throughout rural Saskatchewan if they’re 
glad that their dental program is gone. 
 
But in many ways, Mr. Speaker, in many ways the cruellest cut 
of all has been the cut to the prescription drug plan. Those cruel 
and wrong-headed cuts won’t hurt the healthy, and they won’t 
hurt the wealthy, but they will indeed hurt the poor, and they 
will indeed hurt people who are older, and people who are sick. 
 
But will these drug cuts, these drug changes, reduce the cost of 
pharmaceuticals? I say the answer is no. But they will shift 
those costs to other people, shift them onto the backs of those in 
society who are most in need, most vulnerable, and least able to 
afford them. We have the solemn and formal election promise 
of the PC Government of Saskatchewan. The PCs guaranteed 
that they would abolish deterrent fees for prescription drugs. It 
was signed by the then member, Gary Lane — signed by Gary 
Lane, broken today by Grant Devine and Gary Lane. 
 
I want to talk about hospital waiting lists in Saskatoon. As the 
members no doubt know, we have more than 10,000 people on 
the waiting list in Saskatoon waiting to get into the three major 
hospitals. People are contacting me daily about waiting lists that 
extend for eight or nine or 10 months. They can’t get into 
hospital I’ve had several examples of people who’ve required 
hip replacement operations, or cataract operations and they 
haven’t been able to get into hospital. 
 
And it’s interesting that the Premier today talked about people 
of our province going to Manitoba, because I can  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

657 
 

assure you, Mr. Speaker, that there are hundreds of people 
leaving this province and going to Calgary because they can’t 
get into Saskatchewan hospitals and they can’t get into hospitals 
in Saskatoon. 
 
And it seems to me that it’s time that the government, instead of 
closing 308 beds at the three major hospitals in Saskatoon, did 
the right thing. I think it’s time that they funded hospitals 
properly in Saskatoon, that they funded those hospitals so that 
we don’t have to close hospital beds, we don’t have to close 
operating rooms. What we really should be doing, Mr. Speaker, 
is extending the hours of surgery so that we could clear up that 
backlog. I know that there are a number of people who are 
suffering, and they’re in a great deal of pain, and they’re 
missing work because they can’t get into hospital and I wish the 
members opposite, instead of cutting the health budget of more 
than $19 million, had’ve thought about putting a little extra 
money into the three major hospitals in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the government 
has further health care changes being planned, further 
reductions in service, further cuts, and further attacks on 
medicare. And many of my constituents, Mr. Speaker, fear that 
the government is planning to introduce deterrent fees on a 
wide range of health services. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to challenge the Minister of 
Health or the Premier to enter into this budget debate, to stand 
in this Assembly and to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
this Devine PC government will not impose deterrent fees, will 
not impose health premiums. Will you give the people of the 
province assurances that you’re not going to impose premiums 
or deterrent fees? Will those people do it? I wish they would 
because the people are worried. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d now like to turn for a 
moment to the myths of the PC budget. There are three lies 
about the health care that the PC government opposite is trying 
to put forward. 
 
First, they argue that their fiscal mismanagement has meant that 
they must cut health services to reduce costs — cut medicare to 
save medicare. Not true, Mr. Speaker. Just not true, for their 
attacks will not reduce costs. The costs of prescription drugs 
will not be less. The costs of healthy teeth of our young people 
will not be less. But now those costs will be shifted — not 
reduced, just shifted — and shifted onto those who can least 
afford them. 
 
Second, they argue that they must destroy medicare to save 
medicare. Wrong again, Mr. Speaker. Dead wrong. 
Saskatchewan people know that we must review and assess our 
health care system, that we must strive to make it a cost-
effective system. But we must not do that in the senseless and 
wrong way of the PC government by destroying medicare. We 
must protect and preserve medicare and then go beyond 
medicare to a better health care system for all Saskatchewan 
people. 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, they claim that they have no choice. We 
have no choice, they say. We simply have to cut medicare. They 
say that their fiscal mismanagement and their $3.3 billion 
Devine deficit means that they have no choice. But that’s the 
biggest lie of all. And they have made choices, and they have 
made the wrong choices. 
 
The PC government chose to give away more than $1 billion to 
the big oil companies. The PC government chose to bail out 
Pioneer Trust. They’ve chosen to give our resources to out-of-
province corporations like Manalta Coal and Weyerhaeuser. 
The PC government chose to provide patronage jobs at high 
salaries to defeated PC candidates, and PC cabinet ministers 
like Mr. Schoenhals, and Mr. Dirks, and Mr. Embury. The 
Premier’s choice to fly off with his entourage to Japan at a cost 
of tens of thousands of dollars was another choice. PC choices, 
Mr. Speaker, and I say wrong choices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for more than four years the PC government 
pretended to be a populist government, promising goodies for 
everyone, promising tax cuts, promising improved services for 
health and education. They promised the sun, they promised the 
moon, and they promised the stars. But with this budget, the 
populist mask has been stripped away. Now the people of 
Saskatchewan see this government for what it really is. Now 
they see its deliberate, determined, reactionary nature; now they 
see its reactionary ideology unleashed. We’ve seen a tax on 
working people, we’ve seen a tax on young people, on senior 
citizens, and families. You’ve seen a tax on the very social 
fabric of Saskatchewan. What they’ve done is they’ve replaced 
co-operation and trust with fear and mistrust; tax increases for 
ordinary people, tax cuts for big corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past months I suspect that the PC 
members opposite have lost track of all of the cuts that their 
government’s made. Doe anyone on that side of the bench 
really remember the first cut announced by the Devine 
government after the last election? Do you remember the first 
one? Well I do, Mr. Speaker. The very first cut announced back 
in December was the cut in royalties paid by the oil companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes time to vote on this budget later 
this week, some PC members opposite will vote for it. They’ll 
be voting for cuts and royalties to oil companies and cuts to the 
prescription drugs and cuts to the dental plan and cuts to the 
Human Rights Commission and cuts and cuts and cuts. And I 
think that their constituents will judge them accordingly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the reasons that I’ve outlined in my response 
to the budget, I cannot support this budget and, therefore, I’ll be 
voting for the amendment and against the budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to rise in this Assembly and respond to the 
budget introduced by the Hon. Minister of Finance for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
  



 
June 23, 1987 

658 
 

Mr. Speaker, the budget clearly outlines this government’s 
commitment to fiscal responsibility and of the building of our 
economic base to secure this province’s future, not only for our 
children but for their children too. Protecting and building 
Saskatchewan has and always will be a strong commitment of 
this government. 
 
There are many opportunities, if we work together, to provide 
services, to provide a quality road network, to provide jobs, to 
provide processing and manufacturing for raw materials, not 
exporting both the jobs and materials to central Canada. Both of 
these are ours to have if we look after them. 
 
The Department of Rural Development has worked carefully 
and looked carefully, and reviewed all department expenditures 
to see how we could become more efficient, more streamlined, 
but at the same time be part of a building of rural 
Saskatchewan. Through this process, we consulted with 
members of rural municipalities from one end of this province 
to the other. The rural municipalities understood the need to 
control both their expenditures and ours at a time when 
revenues are very low. 
 
And you heard the Minister of Consumer Affairs speak about 
how revenues are down. Wheat prices, we all know, are down 
by more than 50 per cent; oil prices, down from $42 a barrel to 
$14 a barrel and low; potash prices down by almost 50 per cent; 
uranium prices down by almost 50 per cent. And we do have 
knowledge of these revenues and the prices, and we know that 
they are down. 
 
So what we set out to do was to bring our financial situation 
under control. Through our consultations with rural 
municipalities we examined ways to reduce our expenditures, 
yet build and maintain essential services to the people of 
Saskatchewan. This was a very extensive undertaking, but I’m 
very pleased to say that with the co-operation of SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), the rural 
administrators’ association, we were able to hold the line on our 
expenditures. Working with those elected by rural 
municipalities, we’ve been able to both be beneficial to the 
province and to the rural municipalities. 
 
We’ve been able to bring in many, many different . . . many 
benefits, at the same time holding our expenditures. We had a 1 
per cent reduction in revenue-sharing grants, unconditional 
revenue-sharing grants. But we had a 10 per cent increase in re-
gravel grants. We retained, and we’ll have the opportunity to 
improve and build on the high-volume, high-traffic road 
program that we put into place in 1985. We’ll be focusing on 
rural development corporation with the idea about 
diversification and services to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We will be introducing a new rural development Act, which we 
worked with both the SARM and every municipality in this 
province has had the opportunity to look at it, review it, and be 
part of it. We took the recommendations of the rural law review 
committee. We’re going to make changes such as The Line 
Fence Act — changes in the way they vote. Right now if you 
have a  

tie vote in a rural municipality, what you do, you pull a name 
out of a hat to see who wins. That doesn’t seem very democratic 
to me, so what we’ll be doing is putting our house in order, 
same as the urban folks have it. We’ll be looking at the taxation 
base, variable mill rates, regional parks, resort villages, and 
many others in the new Act. 
 
(1630) 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about rural 
development corporations and what they can do for rural 
Saskatchewan, in fact for all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s a diversification of our rural economy. Mr. 
Speaker, it has become very clear that this government has, and 
will continue, to develop the programs and policies needed to 
ensure both diversification and development of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Many of you here would be familiar with the rural development 
corporation programs — maybe some wouldn’t, but most of us 
would— which, along with our neighbouring rural and urban 
municipalities, they’ve worked together, which meets a certain 
criteria, to provide economic development and services for their 
area that they would not be able to provide on an individual 
basis. So it’s people in a region working together to provide a 
service for their area. 
 
I recently had the opportunity to attend three, and establish 
three separate rural development corporations in this province. 
And the member — he’s not here — the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was there at the one, the first one we 
incorporated that was down at Wood Mountain, which is called 
the Poplar Hills Rural Development Corporation. And I believe 
it’s a very, very positive response from the people down there. 
In fact, I had an opportunity to meet with one of the folks from 
there today. We talked about it, and he says its come along 
really well, and in fact they’re looking at three or four different 
types of services and developments for the area. 
 
The other area that we’ve set up a rural development 
corporation in is the Sagehill area. You’re all familiar with the 
Dana radar base. They will be developing that into both some 
job opportunities. They’re looking at about five or six, in fact 
about 15 different things they could do with the base to develop 
both industry in there and jobs, and also they’re looking at a 
couple very innovative things I’m sure you’ll hear about in the 
future. 
 
Another area that I had the opportunity to visit and to bring into 
focus was an area at Albertville. It’s called the NORDCO (New 
Opportunities Rural Development Corporation) rural 
development corporation; it’s at Meath Park, Albertville area, 
north-east of Prince Albert. I had the member for the area, 
member for Torch River-Shellbrook, with me and I believe the 
response there was almost overwhelming. They felt great about 
it. They had too thought of a lot of different ways they could 
develop service in the area, create job opportunities and, in fact, 
when we were there they listed three or four things that they 
planned to do. 
 
Another area that we will be looking at over the summer — and 
we would be working with SARM (Saskatchewan  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

659 
 

Association of Rural Municipalities) and the administrators’ 
association and each and every municipality in this province, 
we’ve been talking about it at every district meeting for the last 
week or so — is road rationalization. Road rationalization 
simply means reviewing the current designated road network, 
and assistance rate structure to ensure that the programs are still 
serving the needs of rural municipalities. 
 
Various road classifications were established as early as 1956 
when the grid road program was initiated. Other programs were 
added over the years, such as the main farm access program in 
1967, and most recently the heavy-haul, high-volume road 
program in 1985. 
 
The present designated road network totals 54,800 kilometres 
and consists of eight basic road classifications, plus about four 
other combined classifications. 
 
When the task force on rural development went around the 
province, they recommended that the road classifications be 
simplified to fewer categories and that the assistance rate should 
also be simplified. 
 
Traffic patterns are changing in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Elevator consolidations, branch line 
abandonment will further increase the need to review the 
designated road network to ensure that the main network of 
rural municipal roads will meet the future traffic demands of the 
folks in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The objectives of the road rationalization include the following: 
a greater emphasis on high-volume roads carrying inter-
municipal traffic; grater emphasis on reconstruction of the grid 
network; and less emphasis on reconstruction of lower-volume 
roads, such as the main farm access roads; and mostly and 
mainly, simplification of road classification and assistance 
rates. The designated road network was reviewed and roads 
were classified into five road classifications. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve been going around 
the province at each SARM district meeting explaining, on a 
sort of a first-time basis, what we’re looking at, asking for the 
municipalities for their input. We’ll be going back out and 
talking to those municipalities, again asking them how they 
would see it in their each municipality, and then do it on an area 
basis, and then on a provincial basis. 
 
The proposed assistance rates will then be structured to place 
emphasis on high-volume roads and less emphasis on roads 
mainly where we have local traffic. 
 
And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s, as I explained to the 
SARM district meeting in Moose Jaw this morning, this is 
proposals. They can . . . Anyway, we’re prepared to listen to 
any and all proposals they may have, any changes they would 
like to make, and within a year or so we hope to have it in 
place, but through full consultation with each and every rural 
municipality, and certainly with SARM and the rural 
administrators’ association. 
 
Another area that I will be dealing with in this sitting of the 
legislature is SARM’s private members’ Bill to allow their 
public liability insurance for the 299 R.M.s in  

Saskatchewan. This Bill will allow the R.M.s to have a $2 
million liability on all aspects of insurance needed, and this 
regards including environmental damage or protection. 
 
And again, it is communication and working together to protect 
our farmers in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
you all know why we bring it in, the high court awards around 
the country — very, very high. And most R.M.s are finding it 
difficult to get public liability insurance, and I’m sure some 
insurance companies will oppose this Bill. But I believe that the 
record of the people who will be using this Bill to, in fact, put in 
place public liability insurance for the 299 R.M.s, it speaks for 
itself. We all know that they brought in the municipal hail 
insurance program, and we all know that’s been very successful 
and very well run. And I would suppose and hope that we’d 
have the support of the members of this legislature when this 
Bill is brought forward as a private member’s Bill, and we get it 
through as quickly as possible, because I understand they’d like 
to put in place this public liability insurance in fact this year, if 
it’s possible. 
 
I’d like to talk just briefly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about 
agriculture. I had the opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to go to 
Ottawa and appear before the House of Commons Standing 
Committee on Agriculture. In fact, Saskatchewan was the only 
province that made a presentation to this House of Commons 
Standing Committee on Agriculture in regards to farm input 
costs. 
 
I also had the pleasure in January of 1985 to . . . or 86 rather, to 
go around the province on a farm input cost survey. We held 
about 14 meetings around the province. We had over 2,000 
people come out and give us their ideas and their presentations 
on how we could implement and bring in costs — farm input 
saving costs that would help the farmer out there. 
 
Some of . . . what we did, we took our recommendations that 
we had made to the Premier. We presented them to the House 
of Commons standing committee. We had a lot of back-up 
material which we also provided to the House of Commons 
committee, and I was left with the understanding, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they would be taking it into consideration when they 
made the report to the House of Commons. 
 
Some of the areas that I had the privilege to address was the 
farm interest costs in regards to the interest costs charged, 
especially on farm owned land. And we talked about farm 
financing, farm fuel taxes, fertilizer costs and how they could 
be contained, chemical costs — and certainly generic chemicals 
was a subject of discussion — feed grain switching, and 
research. 
 
The one I’d just like briefly to touch on was . . . that we talked 
about briefly was on farm chemicals and the recommendations 
that we had made to them in regards to generic chemicals that 
we . . . the patent time, the product’s specific registration 
procedures be removed or amended to facilitate the production 
of generic chemicals in Canada. 
 
Also we insisted that environmental protection be put in  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

660 
 

place, and we went through to explain to them how we felt it 
could be done. We also talked about the federal patent 
protection that’s in place in Canada of 17 years. The committee 
there asked the question: would 10 years be an acceptable 
length of time? And certainly what we said to them was that it’s 
much better than 17. 
 
One other area I’d like to touch on briefly, and I know that it’s 
very, very important to the people of Saskatchewan, and that’s 
tomorrow I’ll have the opportunity to join the Premier and the 
people of Melville to officially open the new head office for 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance in Melville. Tomorrow 
represents another major step towards bringing government 
closer to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of Melville have 
given us every welcome you could imagine. They’ve been 
helpful in many, many ways. In fact, I was looking through one 
of the articles of last week’s Melville paper — and it was 
interesting to hear the member for The Battlefords last night, 
where he talked about his problems with the chamber of 
commerce — and the headline said, “Crop insurance and 
chamber working together to make Melville better.” 
 
I think that’s very, very important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
organizations, that members of the legislature, and especially, 
as you know, our member of the legislature for Melville has 
worked very, very closely out there with the chamber of 
commerce and with the crop insurance people to make it a 
success, and to make it beneficial to the people of the area. 
 
Just to give you an idea what it would do to . . . what the crop 
insurance would do or the people of Melville in regards to spin-
off benefits, there is about 300 crop insurance adjusters around 
the province. They all come into Melville for training. They 
bring their families; they spend money there. That is almost on 
an ongoing basis, week-over-week basis. That’s a tremendous 
benefit to the area. 
 
Another area would be the banking, the banking in Melville. 
The deposit alone of the insurance brought $170 million last 
year into a banking system in Melville. What we’ve done, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we divided it up between the three banks — 
the two banks and the credit union in Melville. In fact, we asked 
the credit union how much they could handle, and that’s the one 
they actually got. So we actually focused on the credit union, 
feeling they were more Saskatchewan oriented than some of the 
. . . than the other two. 
 
Another thing to do with crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. This is 
the first time in this province’s history all crop insurances will 
be based in rural Saskatchewan. And the farmers across this 
province have told me many, many times, as I’ve travelled 
around, that they really appreciate it. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 
you know the city of Melville has asked members opposite and 
ourselves, now that we’re in government, to bring to Melville 
the Main Street of government. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s what we have done with crop insurance. We brought to 
Melville some of the Main Street of government. 

Tomorrow, again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ll see a very large 
gathering of people in Melville, as the people of this fine city 
welcome the provincial government’s head office to their city. 
And I know the members opposite may not be in favour, totally 
in favour of this gathering, because it’s a service for rural folks 
being provided by a corporation located in a rural community. 
In other words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is farmers helping 
farmers in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But I hope the members opposite might take notice of this event 
because it represents this government’s commitment to 
improving services to the people it serves. And I was also just 
looking at the same paper, and they were talking about the 
welcome of people to . . . the crop insurance to Melville. And I 
see here by the mayor, Don Abel, says, “Welcome to Melville, 
Crop Insurance.” And he says: 
 

One of the more gratifying things to have happened to our 
city during my time as Mayor has been the arrival of the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Offices (to our city). 
 
The official Grand Opening of the corporation on June 24 
is an important day for our city, but I am not just referring 
to the new and beautiful building, but more the 
opportunity the people now working there have in our 
community. 
 
I’d extent to them all the most hearty welcome, and I look 
forward to them blending into our community, and adding 
their expertise and fabric to our fine city. 

 
I think that says very much in itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how 
important a relocation of a corporation such as Sask Crop 
Insurance to Melville can really be to an area like that. 
 
The other thing I’d like to just briefly touch on is the crop 
insurance contracts. This year we have reached a high of 
48,000-plus contracts for the Crop Insurance Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. It is by far, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the most of any 
province in Canada. In fact in the first year there was only . . . 
when you go back to the first year when it was brought into 
place, there was only 194 contracts, and their liability coverage 
was 306,000. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 48,000 
contracts with liability in excess of $1 billion. That, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker . . . and we have also 23 million acres-plus insured 
under the crop insurance program. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been a pleasure to speak and bring my 
thoughts on where I see rural Saskatchewan going, on our 
budget that our Minister of Finance has brought to control . . . 
not only to get our financial affairs in order, but to bring 
financial stability to this province for years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not support the amendment but I certainly 
will be supporting the main motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
  



 
June 23, 1987 

661 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, I enter the debate with pleasure 
because I want to represent the people of Saskatoon Sutherland, 
and to give voice to their concerns and to their convictions 
regarding this budget. They’re feeling that the priorities in this 
budget are fundamentally misdirected and wrong. Indeed, so 
outraged are the people of Saskatoon and of Sutherland at this 
government and its warped sense of priorities, that I find it 
difficult to know where to begin in commenting on this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fundamental problem with this budget is that it 
simply does not reflect the priorities of the people of 
Saskatchewan — the good people of Saskatchewan. They don’t 
have a government as good as they are. 
 
The people of Saskatoon Sutherland tell me they want a 
government that has a concern for fairness and a concern for 
caring for people, that puts the public welfare before private 
interests. They want a government that takes care of people who 
are sick, people who are elderly, people who need an education, 
or are vulnerable, before, long before they take care of the 
“Porklingtons” and the Paul Schoenhals of this province. 
Indeed, it is this sort of favouritism — precisely this sort of 
patronage and preferential treatment — that Saskatchewan 
people not only cannot accept, but they will not forgive. It is 
symptomatic indeed of the Premier and of the whole cabinet, 
that their priorities are fundamentally misdirected and wrong. 
Indeed, I would say fundamentally immoral. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is immoral for the Premier and this 
government, who said nothing about dismantling the health care 
system during the October election, who said everything about 
building hospitals and improving the level of care for the sick 
and the elderly, now to deliver a budget that ravages health 
care, the sick, and the elderly. A budget that allocates nothing, 
that says nothing about their election commitment to a new city 
hospital in Saskatoon, when in Saskatoon we have a waiting list 
of 10,000 people waiting to get into hospital. And this isn’t just 
Saskatoon residents; this isn’t just a rural problem. These are 
people from across Saskatchewan that need to come into 
University Hospital. 
 
And what do we find this summer? We find 308 beds closing 
down — 308 beds for people who need hip surgery so that in 
the spring they can go out in to the fields and sow their crop, 
and in the fall they can go out and harvest it; 308 beds closed 
down for children who need ear surgery so they don’t run the 
risk of going deaf. 
 
And at the same time, this same government opens a new 
Premier’s office in Saskatoon to increase its public image and 
its public presence, at public expense. And then I have to say, 
and the people of Sutherland have to say, did we have a 
government that is fundamentally wrong and misdirected in its 
priorities; a government that is, in fact, downright immoral in 
the way it conducts public affairs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not simply hospital care that 
is under attack or that is seeing this kind of double standard in 
the government affairs. One of the largest  

special care homes in the province is found in my constituency 
of Sutherland, Sherbrooke nursing home. It has one of the finest 
reputations in the province. It’s one of the largest homes. It’s 
known for its innovation, for its cost efficiency, its high quality 
personal care, for the commitment of its director. 
 
Now during the election, the people of Sherbrooke nursing 
home and the residents of the home and the people in this 
Sutherland constituency were promised an expansion project. 
On October 8, 1986, during the election, the residents of 
Sherbrooke were visited by a former cabinet minister, now gone 
to PC patronage heaven in the potash corporation to the tune of 
$100,000 a year. That individual came to the Sherbrooke home 
and announced the government’s commitment to construct 120 
new beds — 120 new replacement beds — a wonderful plan to 
meet a real problem to convert what are now four-bed rooms 
into single-bed rooms. And the people of Sutherland, I know, as 
going to the door and talking to the residents of Sherbrooke 
home, welcomed that announcement — welcomed it with open 
arms. But that was during the election. 
 
And what do these same men and women of Sherbrooke now 
find? What do these pioneers of Saskatchewan now receive 
from their government? A freeze on the expansion of this 
project announced on October 8. That’s not what was 
announced on October 8, a freeze in the project; it was 
announcement that the project would go ahead. No, this PC 
government stood there at Sherbrooke with a duplicity and a 
broken faith, no commitment of any real significance to the 
people of Sherbrooke. 
 
And if we go and we look at the annual report for the 
Sherbrooke home, which just came out last week, it’s chock-full 
of information that describes the kinds of problems they are 
now facing. They recently completed in Sherbrooke home, an 
assessment on the residents who were considered level 4. And it 
turned out that a full 38 per cent of the residents in this home 
are assessed as needing level 4 care. 
 
But this home receives not one penny of funding for level 4 
care. Thirty-eight per cent of its residents need that level of 
care, are assessed at that level of care, and none of them receive 
funding for that level of care. In fact, this government chooses 
to impose fees on the residents of this home, $73 a month, 
because it can’t live up to its own responsibility to adequately 
fund the home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — This annual report here from Sherbrooke 
home goes on to talk about the shortage of staff in the home, 
which is equivalent to 11.6 full-time people on the Sherbrooke 
staff. Sherbrooke is considered one of the largest level 4 homes 
in the province, if it were funded for level 4 care. But it doesn’t 
get that level of funding from the government. 
 
What it gets, in addition to the freeze on the construction of its 
project, is a freeze in the operating budget for its next two 
years, which includes a reduction in staff enrichments which 
was announced in October. A new pool, a therapy pool, was 
built at the Sherbrooke nursing  
  



 
June 23, 1987 

662 
 

home, but the government won’t give it money to fund the 
operation of the pool. The home has to go out and scrounge up 
funds that were promised for the operation of the pool, from the 
public itself. Some commitment to health care from this 
government. It’s a betrayal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government can find money, can find buckets 
of money to promote tourism, complete with contests and prizes 
and trinkets and beads, contracts for political friends, and then 
go out to drop promotion of dental hygiene and health care for 
people, to cut children and young people from the dental 
program. And the people of Sutherland say, that is 
fundamentally wrong, that is a misallocation of public money, 
that in fact is immoral. 
 
The Finance minister says in his budget address, and I quote 
from page 14: 
 

. . . the Dental Plan will be delivered through dental 
offices. The adolescent component of the program is . . . 
eliminated. This provides for the most (efficient) targeting 
of funds by ensuring that correct dental hygiene practices 
are established at an early age. In addition to improving 
the quality of dental care . . . 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, no one in the Sutherland constituency 
believes the minister when he says this is an improvement to the 
dental care system in the province. And I want to tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that I had a dental therapist call me at my home one 
evening while I was eating supper. She was in the middle of her 
supper, and she was so upset by these cut-backs to the dental 
program that she came to me and said that she hoped to heaven 
that I would comment on the false economies and the wrong 
priorities that this government has in cutting that program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it being 5 o’clock — I call it 5 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	ORAL QUESTIONS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS

