













































September 24, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 24, 1987 

 

 

2829 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Trade 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. The question before the committee is 

the estimates for Economic Development and Trade. I will give 

the minister a few minutes until his officials come in for 

introductions. 

 

Would the minister introduce the officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The officials with us today is Bob Volk, 

acting deputy minister; Bryce Baron, director of industrial 

development services; Gerry Adamson, trade promotion; Dave 

Dotchin and Terry Tarowski and Art Wakabayashi and Paul 

Haddow on the trade negotiating side with bilateral trade, 

multilateral trade division. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Chairman, and Mr. Minister, if I might have the indulgence of 

the committee for a few moments, I’d like to begin the 

consideration of these estimates with a few observations that I 

hold and members on this side of the caucus hold about the 

government’s policy on economic development and trade and 

how we have measured its performance to date . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman, the Deputy Premier talks about all of the largess 

that the government has distributed to Peter Pocklington. I 

really hadn’t intended to get off into that so early in my 

remarks, but perhaps later on during the course of the evening 

we can discuss about Mr. Pocklington as well. 

 

But what I really want to discuss, Mr. Chairman, is in a large 

way from an overview point of view — the question of whether 

or not the administration, the current Government of 

Saskatchewan, has done a good job or a poor job in the question 

of economic development and trade. I’ll try to document in a 

few moments the reasons for the conclusion that I’ve arrived at, 

which is that the government’s record here in economic 

development and trade is a record largely of failure, broken 

promises, sloganeering, but very little factual evidence of 

success to the detriment largely of Saskatchewan small business 

and Saskatchewan business people. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I submit that what we’ve seen since 1972 is an 

economic policy which is a policy fostered by political 

sloganeering first and abandonment of that slogan when it suits 

the interests of the government to so do, and in the consequence 

as I’ve said, very little jobs or very little economic activity. We 

all are familiar with such slogans as “open for business”; we 

remember the slogan “partnership for progress”; we remember 

the slogan “Saskatchewan builds.” All of these are recycled 

slogans which crop up every 18 months or so, as the Premier 

and the Minister of Economic Development feel the need to try 

to rejuvenate their political fortunes. 

An announcement is made of a new policy in Economic 

Development only to be abandoned not long thereafter, and this 

by the way, Mr. Chairman, from a government which prides 

itself on running things in a business-like fashion — a 

government which in that business-like fashion has run the 

province virtually to the ground with a $3.2 billion cumulative 

deficit. 

 

So we have all these slogans trotted out and abandoned. Open 

for business is perhaps the best one; you don’t hear that phrase 

any more, Mr. Chairman. Partnership for progress, 

Saskatchewan builds — it talks slogans but in the meantime it 

does the reverse. It starts slashing back on those kinds of 

programs which can be used to attract or to aid business 

opportunities in our province: the industrial incentives program, 

eliminated; small business interest reduction program, aid to 

trade, the market development fund. 

 

I argue, Mr. Chairman, that this government is great on political 

slogans but very, very poor in terms of actual hard performance 

for small businesses and for jobs and for our economic 

development. 

 

Now only that, Mr. Chairman, but I go one step further. I say 

that it’s more than a government of sloganeering only — it is a 

government of sloganeering to be sure — but it’s also a 

government which has decided that if there is any corner-stone 

to its economic policies, it is one which in effect amounts to big 

money to a few big companies virtually from outside the 

province of Saskatchewan to the detriment of Saskatchewan 

business people, to the detriment of Saskatchewan 

entrepreneurs, to the detriment of Saskatchewan young men and 

women who are looking for jobs. The policy has been one of 

disaster for the local entrepreneur who wishes to try to 

experiment and take his or her hand in business. 

 

But a largess as we started off the estimates this evening, partly 

in jest, but in dead seriousness. Largess for the people like Peter 

Pocklington and the others which we have cited here in the 

Chamber, and I’m not going to belabour at length at this 

moment, in any event, in my opening remarks. 

 

I argue that the track record is clear, Mr. Chairman. The track 

record can be measured by a number of indicators and I want to 

discuss a few of them very briefly in my opening remarks. But 

let’s take one which I think is very damning indeed of this 

government. This is the question of the bankruptcy rate for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, bankruptcy in this province is sky-rocketing, I 

submit, sky-rocketing to unprecedented levels. For consecutive 

years, sir, in which business failures have topped the 300 level 

in terms of numbers. I draw to your attention, Mr. Chairman, 

and to that of the minister, that in 1986 Saskatchewan had the 

second highest bankruptcy rate, the second highest bankruptcy 

rate in all of Canada. And this depressing trend has carried 

forward into 1987. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in the first six months of 1987, January to the 

end of June inclusive, 488 firms have gone bankrupt  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2830 

 

in this province as compared with 439 a year ago. This is 11 per 

cent higher than last year’s first half, in 1987. And the list of 

business failures, Mr. Chairman, is known to Saskatchewan 

business men and the Saskatchewan business community, but 

the litany is depressing. I’m going to take the time of the 

committee to recite some of these failure and bankruptcies 

because, Mr. Chairman, they are staggering to me when I did 

some research in preparation for these estimates. 

 

Let’s begin with 1982 and just highlight some of them. GWG 

Ltd., Saskatoon, closed, 150 employees losing their jobs. 

September of 1982, Wilkinson Co. Ltd. in Regina, closed, steel 

and metal distribution, nine workers lose their jobs. Swertz 

Brothers in Weyburn, closed, construction company, 52 people 

lost their jobs. June of 1983, Sheldon Manufacturing Ltd. in 

Regina, closed. Mr. Chairman, this was the province’s first 

maker of industrial fasteners. 

 

At that time, the industry minister, the Hon. Paul Rousseau, 

only a few weeks after the first slogan, open for business, 

described Sheldon Manufacturing Ltd. as “one of the building 

blocks in the new foundation being laid for a healthy and 

vibrant private sector in Saskatchewan.” I wish that would have 

been true, Mr. Chairman. I wish that it could have been a 

building block, but it’s closed, 15 employees lost their jobs. 

 

August, 1983, Eftoda Pontiac, Buick Ltd. in Yorkton, closed, 25 

people lose their jobs. September 14, 1983, CIT Office 

Interiors, Saskatoon, office furniture operation, closed, 14 

people out of jobs. November of 1983, Intercontinental Packers 

in Regina, closed, 124 people lose their jobs. March of 1984 — 

I suppose this ought not to be on the list — the Moose Jaw mall, 

scrapped. May of 1984, Bell’s Dairy Limited, Melville, closed, 

25 people lose their jobs. December 31, 1984, Dad’s Cookies 

Ltd. at White City, closed, and this, Mr. Speaker, from a 

company with a 46-year tradition in Saskatchewan since 1938 

— bankruptcy, closed. In 1985 Vencap Equities Ltd., Regina’s 

first VCC (venture capital corporation). By the way, Mr. 

Chairman, parenthetically speaker, for some other debate, we’ll 

have to examine the VCCs. That’s now closed; founded in 

1958, in 1985 it’s closed. 

 

IN 1985, the Battlefords Venture Find Inc., floundered in 1985. 

January 1985, CSP Foods Ltd., Saskatoon, canola crushing 

plant, closed. January 1985, Prairie Industrial Chemicals Inc., 

closed, chlorine packaging in Davidson. January, February 

1985, the Drapery Shop, Cornwall Centre, Regina, closed, nine 

employees out of work. February of 1985, Mr. Chairman — this 

is one perhaps I ought not to mention to the hon. member — 

Pioneer Trust, closed. February of 1985, Premiere Furniture 

Ltd., producing contemporary pine and spruce bedroom suites, 

closed. April 1985, Pro-Star Mills in Saskatoon, 18 employees, 

closed. This by the way was starch, protein, and fibre produced 

from yellow field peas, and by the way, Sedco invested over $2 

million in that. 

 

May of 1985, CSP Foods — another one — Ltd., Nipawin, 

shutting down the packaging department of the plant and 

transferring it, Mr. Chairman, to a new facility in Edmonton, of 

all places, in a joint venture with Canada Packers. August of 

1985, Looks Manufacturing in  

Humboldt, closed, 56 employees. August of 1985, Patrick 

Pipeline Ltd., Saskatoon, closed, 60 workers. August 31, 1985, 

Dominion Bridge, Mr. Chairman, in Regina, 110 people out of 

work after 26 years of business in Regina, closed. August 1985, 

Native Metal Industries Ltd., Regina, scrap steel-cutting 

enterprise, closed, 50 employees. December of 1985, Microtel, 

on the oldest high-tech companies in Saskatoon, established in 

1973, closed. 

 

February of 1986, MacLeod’s Moose Jaw, closed — 14 people. 

March of 1986, Eaton’s, Moose Jaw, closed, 88 people. March 

of 1986, Molson Brewery plant in Prince Albert, closed — 73 

employees. May of 1986, Saskana Sausage (1979) Ltd., Regina, 

closed down four locations. May of 1986, Ward Johnston 

Electric Ltd., Regina, closed, distributors of Frigidaire and 

Quasar products. October 1, 1986, General Motors closed its 

Regina sales office, 40 people affected. October of 1986, Nardei 

Fabricators (Saskatchewan) Ltd. of Regina, pipe welding and 

fabrication plant, closed. And by the way, Mr. Chairman, this is 

another example of my opening remarks about a slogan and 

then abandoned. This was officially opened in the final week of 

the election campaign, sir, which you will remember, in 

October of 1986. And at that time the Premier, in announcing 

this particular company, Nardei Fabricators (Sask.) Ltd., said 

the following: 

 

What you see before you is a continuing story of what is 

happening in Saskatchewan in terms of processing and 

manufacturing and diversification. 

 

Actually, Mr. Chairman, what we’re seeing here is a continuing 

pattern in Saskatchewan of announcements followed up by 

nothing in terms of actual concrete jobs. What we’re seeing is a 

pattern of announcements and then bankruptcies and closures. 

 

(1915) 

 

Well let’s continue with the list: November 28 of 1986, 

Northern Telecom closed one of the four Saskatoon area plants 

— this affects my constituency, Mr. Chairman — 124 

employees out of jobs. December of 1986, Sherwood Co-op 

food mart in Regina, closed, 25 people out of jobs. December of 

1986, Federated Co-operatives Ltd. pulls out from a proposed 

government consortium for a fertilizer plant integrated with the 

Co-op Refinery. That too, I think, was an election promise — a 

$200 million project. I don’t know if we can say closed, but 

never off the ground. 

 

January of 1987, CWA Houseboat Charters Ltd., Saskatoon, 

closed. January of 1987, Supercart International Inc. of Regina, 

$1 million — another VCC — closed. January 23, 1987, 

Central Canadian Distilling company in Weyburn, closed — 23 

full-time employees. March 6, 1987, the Fresh Air Experience 

in Saskatoon, closed — specialty sporting goods store. March 

of 1987, McGavin bakery of Regina, to close in September, if it 

isn’t closed already — 51 employees, Mr. Chairman. April of 

1987, Bi-Rite warehousing operations, Regina, closed — 27 

employees. In June of 1987, Brazeau West in Esterhazy, 

trucking company, closed. June 27, 1987, Eaton’s in Swift 

Current — 25 employees, closed, Mr. Chairman, and the list 

goes on and on. 

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2831 

 

In fact, one of the old firms in the question of farm implement 

dealers from Saskatoon . . . inaudible) . . . Smith-Roles. I had to 

ask the member from Regina Centre because momentarily I 

forgot. Smith-Roles Ltd., that is closed. 

 

The member from . . . The minister asks whether I have to ask 

somebody from Regina for a Saskatoon company. The answer 

is yes, and I’ll tell you why I do, Mr. Minister. There are so 

many closures, no one person can keep full track of them. The 

point is there is really an unparalleled series of bankruptcies. 

 

Mr. Chairman, let’s take a look at it from another point of view. 

In 1972 to 1982 inclusive, I have the list of bankruptcies here. I 

can tell the House and you, Mr. Chairman, and any member 

who would want to dispute these figures, that no time during 

the entire period from ’71 to ’82 was the list of bankruptcies on 

a per year basis as high as it’s been each and every year that the 

Premier and the Minister of Trade and Economic Development 

have been in office since 1982. In 1982, 280 bankruptcies; in 

1983, 314; in 1984, 309; in 1985, 302; in 1986, 351. And I’ve 

already told you what the trend is — already in the first six 

months, it seems as though this is going to surpass itself this 

year. 

 

At no time in any period in modern history has the level of 

bankruptcies been as high. And these are, by and large — there 

are some notable exceptions, it’s true — but these are, by and 

large, Saskatchewan entrepreneurs. They didn’t get the $10 

million like Mr. Pocklington. They didn’t get the deals like 

Weyerhaeuser does. They’re the ones who have to struggle with 

high interest rates, government bureaucracy and paper work, a 

government indifferent and insensitive to the needs of small 

business. They are the ones who go belly up, unfortunately, 

under the policies of this administration. So you see, Mr. 

Chairman, that indeed is a very serious indicator and indictment 

of what’s taken place. 

 

I want to discuss another little point here which I think is 

shocking, Mr. Chairman. I want to underline this to the minister 

and to you, sir. This is the statistic — away from bankruptcies 

— the statistic dealing with investment in capital expenditures. 

Investment in capital expenditures, which I think is a pretty 

good indicator, has also shown no improvement. In fact, even 

more ominously, Mr. Chairman, there are projections in this 

area for 1987. 

 

Now the federal PC government and its Department of Regional 

Industrial Expansion forecasts that capital spending — I want 

you to note this particularly, Mr. Minister — that capital 

spending by large corporations in Saskatchewan will decline by 

21 per cent in 1987; by 21 per cent, from 1.03 billion in ’86 to 

just a little over 800 million this year. 

 

The shocking fact about this statistic, sir, is that Saskatchewan 

will have the largest drop in investment and capital 

expenditures of any province in Canada, and that includes small 

provinces like P.E.I. or the depressed regions of Atlantic 

Canada. So it’s a serious, serious record, one which means 

hardships, very serious hardships for our people, for our 

entrepreneurs, and for  

our working people in the province of Saskatchewan and the 

business communities associated with them. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to proceed again, just to buttress the point 

that I wish to make, by looking at some other aspects of 

economic growth in a general way, apart from bankruptcies. I 

want to examine the record from 1982 right up to the current 

year’s estimates under review in order to compare them. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan’s annual percentage increase in 

gross domestic product, according to the facts, has dropped 

dramatically since 1982, and I submit, Mr. Chairman, that it has 

been consistently lower than the Canadian annual average. In 

fact, with the exception of the odd year, Saskatchewan’s growth 

rate has been less than the rate of growth in a majority of the 

other provinces when we compare their economic development. 

 

From 1982 to 1985, the Atlantic provinces, Quebec, Ontario, 

and Manitoba out-performed the Saskatchewan economy in 

terms of gross domestic product growth. The forecast rate is 

only expecting an expansion in the economy of 0.1 per cent this 

year and only 1.9 per cent next year, one of the lowest growth 

rates in all of Canada — this coming from a department which 

is in charge of and prides itself in economic development and 

trade. 

 

Now these conditions have been hard everywhere, on every 

sector of our economic development, Mr. Chairman. But I think 

nowhere has it been as difficult as it has been in the 

manufacturing sector where the promises of the government 

under the Premier have been very high, but the performance and 

the delivery, as I’ve said in my opening remarks, have been 

very poor. 

 

At one time the predecessor, one of the predecessors, the 

minister of Economic Trade and Development, Paul Rousseau, 

talked about the manufacturing sector, and he said the 

following: 

 

We have 1,500 manufacturing companies in the province. 

Although manufacturing is ranked as the number one 

sector in Canada, it is only ranked eighth in Saskatchewan 

in terms of total output. In all the years of the previous 

administration, it never moved. 

 

That was his statement. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, those are pretty good political statements, 

but what are the facts? In 1986 the Saskatchewan 

Manufacturers’ Guide lists approximately 1,000 Saskatchewan 

manufacturers, a substantial decrease during the year since 

1982. As well as that, after five years of being open for 

business, building on the partnership, and all the other slogans, 

the manufacturing sector still ranks eighth in terms of 

Saskatchewan gross domestic product, never moving during the 

entire life of this government since 1982. 

 

And there are other indicators which reveal stagnant growth in 

the manufacturing sector. The value of manufacturing 

shipments over the last three years . . . Saskatchewan has 

experienced one of the lowest growth in sales in this category in 

Canada: in 1984, 8.9 per cent  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2832 

 

growth; in ’85, 0.8 per cent, less than 1 per cent; and in 1986, 

half of that, 0.4 per cent. 

 

And when it comes to employees in manufacturing, Mr. 

Chairman, again there’s been a dramatic decline in the number 

of persons employed. In 1981, in manufacturing, the figures 

were 21,479. That’s decreased steadily to the point where in 

1985, the total number of people employed in manufacturing is 

now at 18,571, and these figures are, Mr. Chairman, according 

to the government’s own records. That’s a loss of 2,900 jobs in 

the manufacturing sector from 1982 to 1985, or a 14 per cent 

decrease, notwithstanding all of the talk about being open for 

business. Mr. Chairman, that is a sorry, dismal record of failure 

by the Economic minister and the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Have there been new businesses created, 

Mr. Chairman? Can it be said that the old ones are simply dying 

off but that they’ve been replaced by new ones? Has there been 

a new record of progress that this government can boast? Well I 

think that the record here is just as bad, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The total failure of this government’s economic policy is 

evident in the level of growth in the corporate sector in our 

province. Now statistics from the department’s own Consumer 

and Commercial Affairs department, the corporations data file, 

indicate a strong growth rate in the corporate sector in the late 

1970s but a significant downturn in 1982. Between 1975 and 

’81, the number of businesses grew by 10 per cent; in 1982 the 

figure dropped dramatically to about 4 per cent, on a declined 

figure. 

 

And what about jobs, Mr. Chairman, which of course is what 

it’s all about at the end of the day. Here I think are the most 

damning of statistics and the most obvious evidence of the 

failure of this government. With respect to jobs, Mr. Chairman, 

we have one of the worst records probably in a long time if not 

going all the way back to the Dirty Thirties. Unemployment has 

simply doubled during this government’s time in office. Job 

creation has really not taken off — in fact, unemployment has 

soared. The unemployment rate has soared from 4.1 per cent, 

Mr. Chairman, in 1981, to 7.7 per cent in 1986. 

 

In the NDP years, unemployment was never over 5.1 per cent. 

In the Conservative years, unemployment has never been under 

6.1 per cent as the jobless people continue to mount and then 

ultimately flee the province because of the lack of economic 

development — I have a word to say about that. 

 

And what’s more tragic — or most tragic — is for the young 

people of our province; those who would want to stay here and 

to live and to work with their families. The youth 

unemployment figures are even more shocking. Between the 

ages of 15 to 24, youth unemployment rate for July, 1987 was 

14.5 per cent, Mr. Chairman. Over the past 12 months only two 

provinces in the country suffered a decline in that figure, and 

that is Saskatchewan and Alberta. 

On unemployment, Mr. Chairman, the figures are dismal as I’ve 

indicated, by almost every yardstick. It’s no wonder therefore, 

sir, that people have no hope and they have nothing else to do 

but to flee this administration and to flee the policies of this 

government. That’s what they’re doing. Numbers of people 

leaving the province are almost at a record level. In 1985 and 

1986 there was substantial net out-migration — in 1985 over 

6,000 people; in 1986 over 8,000 people. That’s after all the 

accounts for those coming in and the births and those leaving, 

we’re still in a net out-migration position. 

 

Mr. Chairman, only one other province has lost more residents 

and that is the province of Alberta. And this trend is continued 

in 1987, in 1987 to date, sir, with 5,094 people, mainly young 

people, leaving in the period from January to July of 1987. Mr. 

Chairman, I say that is the most tragic and the most serious 

indictment of this government’s and this department’s failure 

with respect to economic trade and development. 

 

We want our children in Saskatchewan, working with their 

families and building a future. We don’t want a government 

chasing them out — which has been the record of this 

administration and of this minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And so, Mr. Chairman, one could go on. I 

don’t want to take too much more of the time of the committee, 

I’ve taken a lot already. But you can see what the record shows 

by almost every yardstick which is accept. These are not my 

figures, concocted; these are figures that come from the federal 

departments or from the provincial departments. 

 

By every yardstick, this has been a bungling economic strategy. 

And the majority of their projects, those that have succeeded, 

have succeeded only because there has been a large amount of 

government involvement, Mr. Chairman. Take for example the 

heavy oil upgrader in Regina is virtually 100 per cent 

government money at risk. That’s the one that’s going. The 

Pocklington bacon plant involving subsidized loan guarantees 

and cash grants, potentially $10 million in direct investments. 

The Weyerhaeuser sweetheart deal that I’d discussed earlier. 

The facility to manufacture recreational facilities in North 

Battleford — that’s a package that could mean $4.5 million in 

grants. A total investment of $11 million there. The Rafferty 

and Alameda dams, the Shand project — these are again 

projects which the government boosted and government 

maintained. 

 

(1930) 

 

You see the point that I’m making. The individual entrepreneur 

who wishes to take a risk, the individual entrepreneur who 

wishes to have a government supporting him or her, a 

Saskatchewan person taking a chance to create jobs, doesn’t get 

any help, and the result is that they’re forced into bankruptcy 

and forced to leave the province or to flee the province. Those 

projects which are succeeding — and the irony of this, coming 

from a so-called free enterprise government, are those projects 

in which this government has sunk millions of dollars in order 

to buttress them to hell. A total paucity of program  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2833 

 

and policy, a total condemnation of exactly where it is that 

we’re going. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, let me close by saying that this is a 

government which is great on slogans and short on 

performance. This is a government which frankly has placed all 

of its eggs in one basket — get the big entrepreneurs from 

outside the province to come in, even if it means opening up tax 

dollars to get them here; forget about the Saskatchewan spirit, 

forget about those who want to take a chance. This is a 

government which has placed all its eggs in one basket on free 

trade. I won’t talk about that at this moment; but in effect, tied 

all of its political and economic raison d’être, its reason for 

being, to free trade. And again that seems to have floundered 

seriously, if not totally gone belly up, by the actions of the 

federal government and supported by the Premier of this 

province and the Minister of Economic Trade and 

Development. 

 

Today, Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan business people and 

Saskatchewan workers are worse off than ever. Today more 

than ever Saskatchewan business people realize that we’re 

sliding back to the dark 30s by this Neanderthal policy. More 

than ever, our young people have no hope; they despair of the 

lack of vision; they are outraged at the inadequate and unfair 

program of support for economic development and trade. 

 

And I say, Mr. Chairman, that this speaks very poorly for the 

minister’s record and, in my judgement, only can lead to the 

conclusion that this government has been a total and abject 

failure in the area of economic trade and development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member has 

raised a series of points over the last 35 minutes and pretty well 

dealt with everything. I quite frankly . . . Looking at a member 

that strives to be the premier, I would have quite frankly 

thought that he would have come up with something better than 

that. If you refer back to Hansard of last year . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . If you refer back to Hansard of last year, the 

speech is almost identical to the speech advanced by the 

member from Quill Lakes — almost identical with a little 

different flair to it. 

 

Now I can go through a series for the next 35 minutes of the 

number of companies that have been opened in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Now we can do that, but I wonder what is served 

by you standing up and saying, so-and-so went bankrupt, and I 

standing up and saying, five more businesses opened; 10 more 

businesses opened. If you go back to statistics . . . If you want 

to deal with statistics in a fair way, let’s look at the number of 

businesses, new businesses registered, and that’s, I would 

guess, a pretty fair judge as to what new companies have 

started. Let me go back to 1980 through 1986. In 1980 there 

were 30,619 new businesses opened; and in 1981, 32,058; 1982, 

33,047; 1983, 33,444; 1984, 36,495; ’85, 37,300; and last year, 

37,700. So what you’ve seen is over 7,000 more businesses 

open last year in this province than there were in 1980 when 

you were government. Seven thousand new businesses. Now 

those  

are Saskatchewan businesses, whether you want to admit to that 

or not. Those are Saskatchewan business — 7,000 more 

businesses. 

 

And if you’re looking at the business bankruptcies — you 

started out talking about bankruptcies — there are 7,000 more 

businesses opened in 1986 in Saskatchewan than there were in 

1980. Seven thousand more businesses. Now how many 

bankruptcies were there? Three hundred and fifty-one. Now 

there is going to be bankruptcies in troubled times; obviously 

there’s going to be bankruptcies. But 350 . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well the member from Regina North West, 

we’ll talk about bankruptcies if we want. So 300 bankruptcies 

in businesses. And businesses go bankrupt every year and have 

for the last 50 years, but there’s 7,000 new businesses. 

 

Now you talked about the science and tech field. In the field of 

science and technology from 1982 when you left government, 

there was 37 high-tech companies in Saskatchewan. Today 

there’s 170 high-tech companies in Saskatchewan, and they’re 

employing over 3,000 people, relative to 1,700 people when 

you were in government. 

 

Now we . . . As I say, we can go through this if you want, sector 

by sector, and you can say, so-and-so closed his doors, and I 

will say that I got a list here, if you want, of the new companies 

that have set up, those that have qualified for IIP (industrial 

incentive program), whatever. The industrial incentive program 

that we had in place, over 90 per cent of it went to companies 

that were Saskatchewan companies, head office in 

Saskatchewan, small Saskatchewan companies. Ninety per cent 

of it. 

 

Now the member also talks about investments. Investments 

have in fact been increasing in this province, not decreasing. 

They’ve been increasing in this province. Now the member, the 

hon. member takes the figures of total investment, which 

includes agriculture investment. Now clearly I am prepared to 

admit, standing here, that agriculture investment this year is less 

than it was in 1980. Now I don’t think the member opposite or 

any farmer across this province is going to say that was because 

the NDP were in government as opposed to us. And if we do, I 

think we’re going to be talking like children, if we somehow 

believe that it’s all our fault that agriculture’s in the problem it’s 

in today, and it was all because of you that it was good in 1980. 

And that’s not true, because we all know what commodity 

prices in that field have done. 

 

If we really get down to talking about, want to get right down to 

talking about the opening question, which I thought the hon. 

member would lead into, and that is, how do we look at 

diversifying the economy in a province like Saskatchewan, I 

think the Premier has said on many occasions, and the concept 

upon which we have attempted to expand and diversify our 

economy, is that we build upon our strengths. First premiss. So 

we ask ourselves: what are the strengths of the province of 

Saskatchewan and the economy of this province? 

 

I think anybody would know that the largest dimension of our 

economy is agriculture, so we can deal with agriculture, if you 

like, in the economic development  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2834 

 

field, or we can deal with agriculture, if we want to deal with 

agriculture policy, if you want. Or we can deal with agriculture 

bankruptcies, if you want to get into that field. 

 

So the second dimension that we deal with then, after 

agriculture, as to the strength of our economy, is in the resource 

sector. Now the resource sector in this province, for the most 

part, is made up of oil and natural gas — probably the largest 

dimension — followed by potash, and uranium, forest sector, 

other mining sector: coal, gold, that type of thing. So if you 

want to look at saying, did we develop and did we attempt to 

build on that resource sector . . . And you have a tendency to 

want to go back and compare what you did when you were 

government, compared to what we have done, as opposed as to 

maybe how we should diversify the economy and what 

proposals that you would suggest or have for views on that 

question. Let’s look at the resource sector, and if you want I’ll 

go into much more detail on the agriculture sector, but I’m sure 

you would want to deal with that in Agriculture estimates. 

 

But let’s look at the resource sector — oil and natural gas. Now 

I think even the member from Riversdale would not sit there 

and indicate somehow that the oil and natural sector has not 

gone forward over the last five years, that there are not more 

wells drilled, that there’s not more production, that there’s not 

more activity in the oil and gas field. I’m sure that he would not 

do that. And we can get into details on that. 

 

And we can get into the field of the potash business. And the 

potash business, obviously, is on hard times now, and it was in 

some pretty good times in a three or four year cycle in the 

1970s where prices went extremely high only to fall extremely 

low. And I can suppose say that we did not make great strides 

in the last five years with regard to expanding potash. 

 

And I think if you look back over the last 15 years in expansion 

in potash, what do you really see? If you add your years in 

government plus our first term in government, what do you 

really see? Do you see a new potash mine having been built in 

that 15-year period? Not really. There’s only been really one 

major expansion and that was the expansion undertook by you, 

to your credit I suppose at that time, of the Lanigan potash 

mine. That was started, half completed when the government 

changed. We again took the decision to continue on with that 

project, but that’s the only project where in the potash industry 

expanded. 

 

Now I can give you credit for building of the uranium industry 

or, at least, the building of Key Lake. I give you credit for that 

and I give credit to the member from Saskatoon Fairview, for 

his support of that particular project. But you did expand, and 

the only thing you built, the only major building that you did in 

11 years was a uranium mine at Key Lake. Quite frankly, I 

support that; I support the policy that you pursued at that time 

of expanding uranium industry. It creates jobs. It is onto some 

difficult times and I’m sure in these estimates we’ll be able to 

deal with the problem associated with trade and the uranium 

industry. 

 

But then we go to the lumber industry and that, I think,  

you’ve seen some progress in diversification in this province 

with the Weyerhaeuser project. And that diversification for the 

hon. member, in case he’s not aware, is that the new process 

being involved with Weyerhaeuser is to not simply produce 

pulp but also to produce paper. 

 

Now I was always of the view that you build upon your 

strengths and you try to add more value to that resources, that 

resource within our province. We have for, perhaps, 75 years 

been accused of being huers of wood and drawers of water in 

this province, and I suspect with some justification. And many 

governments have tried to address that problem of huers of 

wood and haulers of water. And I think the Weyerhaeuser 

project is a good example where it takes the softwood, blends it 

with the poplar, as we would know it, us non-forest people, to 

make paper. 

 

Now before, we simply took the softwood, made a pulp, 

shipped the pulp out into the rest of the world. The new process 

involves using that softwood, blending it with the hardwood or 

the poplar, and instead of simply making fence posts out of the 

poplar trees, we blend it and add it and make fine papers. And 

that fine papers has a quality market throughout the world. And 

that was a significant investment. 

 

And we can get into Weyerhaeuser if you want, into the details 

of Weyerhaeuser, as you want. I would simply caution the hon. 

member to wait until the year-end figures come out in March of 

1988 before you say and get into all the rhetoric on 

Weyerhaeuser. 

 

Then if you go to the next area of resource development, it’s 

gold mines. I think the hon. member could . . . It would not be 

fair to say that we have not proceeded forward with the opening 

of a new gold mine, with the prospects of several other new 

gold mines in the next three or four years. The gold mine 

opened at Star Lake just this year was the first gold mine 

opened in the province of Saskatchewan in 50 years — 50 

years. Now you might say that gold mining is not significant 

and not relevant; I happen to believe that gold mining is a good 

pursuit by which Saskatchewan can pursue and follow, and I 

think it’s an area that holds much promise — an operation again 

that we developed. 

 

(1945) 

 

In the field of science and technology, as I indicated before, the 

number of jobs in the high-tech field has increased from 1,700 

to over 3,000. Now that’s not maybe as fast as one would want, 

but clearly that is progress in an area that I think is important — 

important in the sense that you’re dealing with the knowledge 

industry and the growth of new technology. 

 

Let’s get into the area of manufacturing. I think it would not be 

fair to say that we have not made strides in manufacturing. The 

hon. member makes light of the Hunter’s project in North 

Battleford, as the member of North Battleford or from The 

Battlefords has on many occasions. I happen to believe that the 

project of Hunter’s in North Battleford by the Bondars is a 

quality operation. 

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2835 

 

I would invite the hon. member from Riversdale, if he is in The 

Battlefords region, to go into that plant and look at that plant. 

Here we have some people from North Battleford who I believe 

have established a national reputation as people able to sell the 

largest . . . the largest vendor of recreation vehicles in all of 

Canada right in North Battleford, Saskatchewan. They took a 

plant that was shutting down in Kelowna, producing less than 

four vehicles a day, to the point now where they are producing 

over seven vehicles a day and expect to be able to increase that 

production even faster. Well over 100 young people are 

working in that plant, and I’ll tell you it is something to see just 

to go watch how that is turning out. 

 

And across the road is Gainers with another 100-and-some 

young people processing pork bellies into bacon into the market 

of the word. Now you can look at . . . I can go on with those 

projects. 

 

Look at Hitachi-Marubeni which is a Japanese company, the 

first time ever a Japanese company has expanded outside of 

Japan into the manufacturing field; the first time 

Hitachi-Marubeni has expanded a manufacturing process 

outside of Japan, in Saskatoon. Now I’m sure that the hon. 

member has taken time to view that project. 

 

You then come to a project like heavy oil. If you are to look at 

developing our resources, what you have to come to and 

appreciate is that the resources, the oil resources of this 

province is made up of two basic types of oil: light or sweet 

crude and heavy oil. The light and sweet crude is finite in 

quantity, is running out, and is rapidly running out 

unfortunately. But we do have vast amounts of heavy oil. But if 

we’re to look at heavy oil, where do we export our heavy oil to? 

Ontario doesn’t buy it. It’s bought by the Americans. So we set 

about to build a process right in Regina that will allow that 

heavy oil to be developed here. 

 

So if you go through all of the stuff that we have done over the 

past five years, over the past five years, what we have done is, 

in fact, build. 

 

Now the member opposite, the member from Riversdale, says, 

you do not stand for business and you do not want to see 

business expand. Let’s go back and look at the record that he 

had for 11 years. And did they encourage, did you encourage 

the development of business? Not likely. During your period of 

time, what you did, what you did was say, the government 

should get into the business of business. And if you look over 

11 years, exactly that is what has happened. 

 

Your reign in the last administration was characterized in the 

world of commerce as follows: we bought the potash mines. 

Did you create any jobs? No. We bought out the 

Intercontinental Packers. Create any jobs doing that? We 

bought a million acres of farm land. Did you help any farmers 

doing that? What did you create by doing that? 

 

You went into . . . Everything you went into was that the 

government should buy it. And we can go back over the last 11 

years and listen to the speeches, eloquent speeches by the 

member from Riversdale, on why the government should own 

something. It should be the  

government that owns it. And that was your heritage. And that’s 

the heritage of the Leader of the Opposition, quite frankly, if 

you look at his 11 years in government. And what history will 

talk about is, is the Blakeney administration was the process of 

building Crown corporations, commercial Crown corporations. 

 

So you sit here and talk about a government that has clearly 

taken a different approach. We don’t believe that government 

should get in and run every business. We happen to believe, in 

fact, that it should go the other way. That we should take 

businesses and put them out into the private sector, and let the 

private sector own and run the business, the commercial 

business, as opposed to the government. 

 

There has, in fact, been over the past five years some significant 

growth in business. Have we faced challenges? Clearly, we’ve 

faced challenges. And those challenges, for the most part, have 

been driven by the fall in the commodity prices, the fall in 

commodity prices of wheat, of potash, of oil, or uranium, 

softwood lumber — commodities all going down at the same 

time. And that has been a struggle to deal with that. I would say 

if you look at the numbers and you look at the record, that the 

progress being made over the last five years has been very, 

very, very positive. 

 

I can tell the member opposite that we don’t stop there, that our 

mandate is to build more businesses to create more economic 

diversification, not to buy it, to build it — to build new, not to 

buy what is there. And I suspect, if anything separates the 

philosophy as it relates to economic development, nothing 

separates our philosophy more than you wanting to buy existing 

businesses and us wanting to build new ones. 

 

Now we can debate that philosophical argument. I was led to 

believe, reading the local newspapers, that somehow you — not 

the rest of your colleagues — but somehow you say maybe, 

maybe the Blakeney years was not the right way to go. Maybe 

the decisions we took in those times were not the right 

decisions, and we should review that as a party. I thought you 

were heading in that direction, but after listening to you for 35 

minutes, it’s clear, it’s clear that your theories and your 

philosophies of business are no different than they were in 1971 

to 1982, but you, that you as a Premier would go back to the old 

ways of taking over business, of re-buying back anything that 

was privatized or public participation, and that our mandate 

would still be the same as it was before — buy, don’t build. We 

disagree with that philosophy, and I believe the people of 

Saskatchewan, quite frankly, believe that our philosophy of 

development and building is better than yours of buying. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly do agree with the 

Minister of Economic Development and Trade that his 

government and his approach is not that of this side of the 

legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Because we had a mistaken notion, I 

suppose, by the Minister of Economic Trade and Development 

that it was a job of government to run a  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2836 

 

balanced budget, to run and to base economic development as if 

you were looking after your own purse. Little did we know that 

the new way in Saskatchewan was to have a deficit of $3.2 

billion, at least on the operating side, and about $10 billion on 

the Crown corporation side, that that was the new way to go by 

way of economic development and trade. So he’s dead right 

about that. We definitely don’t agree as to how you operate the 

businesses and the economic development. 

 

I would also argue that we, I think, had a mistaken notion that 

provinces and governments tried to get stimulation 

economically in order to provide jobs. I think the fact that we’re 

at 5 per cent in unemployment at the highest level during the 

years from 1971 to 1982 was wrong because the new way now 

is to have an unemployment rate of 7.5 per cent and going 

higher, Mr. Chairman. The new way is apparently to have the 

Saskatchewan young men and women looking for jobs; not 

looking for jobs, fleeing the province of Saskatchewan — 

fleeing it — because these people are captives of just a very few 

large corporations who are not even Saskatchewan 

corporations. 

 

The minister says that his is the new way. I’ve got a surprise out 

there for the Minister of Economic Trade and Development: if 

you people would ever leave this fortress, Legislative Building, 

that you’ve created for yourselves, and get out there and start 

talking to the small-business men of Saskatchewan, you would 

know that your approach of putting your economic policy held 

hostage to the Weyerhaeusers of this world and the 

Pocklingtons of this world almost got you beaten in October of 

1986 and for sure are going to get you beaten whenever you 

have the guts to call the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — So I guess it is true that we are in a different 

space. I can’t believe, Mr. Chairman, how these people have the 

Midas touch in reverse: everything that they touch goes broke. 

Everything that they touch. Oh well, it’s international matters. 

Potash — we had not very much to do about it; it was some 

circumstances beyond our control. Oh, we could talk about 

agriculture, but we have nothing to do about agriculture at all. 

Oil and natural gas is taking a dive; we can’t be blamed for that. 

 

Well who in the world can we blame for the fact that there is a 

record unemployment? Who in the world can we blame the fact 

that there simply are these record number of bankruptcies? The 

minister hasn’t refuted that statistic at all — not at all — and I 

invite him to refute that statistic in his argument. The statistic 

shows that there’s an 11 per cent increase in this first six 

months of 1987 in bankruptcies over the first six months last 

year, sir, and that last year was at an all-time, all-time rate level, 

high rate level for bankruptcies and it’s going higher this year. 

That’s a statistic I ask you to refute. That a statistic I ask you to 

refute. 

 

You tell me how the gross provincial product, you tell me how 

the gross domestic product sine 1982, sir, by your figures, has 

gone down from a high of 15.6 all the way down to . . . the 

highest being 4.8 in the last year. It’s never been that low, sir, in 

15 years. You’ve never refuted that. 

I guess there is a big difference all right, Mr. Chairman, there is 

a big difference. Going around and providing jobs and trying to 

balance a budget and working an economy which is based for 

Saskatchewan people first, rather than some large multinational 

corporations, is a big difference. I want to tell you that, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — What these people are doing opposite, Mr. 

Chairman, is driving us back to the Dirty Thirties. These people 

are doing something which they think is new. I’ve got a surprise 

in store for the Minister of Economic Trade and Development. 

This is nothing new. This is a 50-year-old policy. It was tried 

during the Dirty Thirties by the Anderson government, the last 

Conservative government that we had. This is nothing new. 

 

The open-for-business slogan was introduced by the late 

premier, Ross Thatcher. The late premier, Ross Thatcher, had 

that slogan, open for business. He was also in power for seven 

years. He talked a big game and he produced zero by way of big 

business operations in the province of Saskatchewan. He drove 

out more small business entrepreneurs and more working men 

and women, apart from this government. I guess no one 

expected that we’d find a worse government in the 1980s 

period, as we have in 1982 under this current administration. 

 

There’s nothing new about this. There’s a difference between 

men and women who believe that here in Saskatchewan we’ve 

got to work together to get economic development 

opportunities. We on this side believe that it’s a combination of 

private enterprise and private entrepreneurship; that we want to 

stimulate that, and the statistics show that. 

 

The hon. member from Cut Knife, if he was only half awake to 

the circumstances, would know — as every chamber of 

commerce person knows — that there has never been as much 

economic activity as in the years of the mid-’70s because we 

used that kind of combination of private enterprise and 

co-operative enterprise and public enterprise on a selected basis, 

on a non-ideological basis, to stimulate jobs and opportunities. 

And it worked. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Not these people opposite, Mr. Chairman. 

Not these people opposite; they don’t believe in any of that. 

They’re attacking the Crown corporations, they’re attacking the 

co-operative movement, they’re neglecting our small-business 

people. What they’re doing is they’re paying attention to the 

Weyerhaeusers and the Pocklingtons and the IMCs 

(International Minerals and Chemical Corporation) of this 

world. They’re giving them the money. They’re taxing us, 

they’re taxing us at every stage of the game, and their economic 

approach is then to turn that money over to their big large 

business friends. 

 

There’s nothing new about this, Mr. Chairman. This is as old as 

the hills. Every time as you get an old line, free enterprise 

so-called party — like you get in this government in power 

today — you get that kind of a  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2837 

 

record. You get hard times and tough times, and I want to tell 

you, Mr. Chairman, whoever coined that old phrase is dead 

right. Tory times are tough times. And we know that right now 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And I want to tell the hon. member 

opposite, the minister opposite, and the other member who’s 

doing a lot of yapping from his seat, I want to tell the members 

opposite: if you don’t believe that that’s the case, if you don’t 

believe what I tell you, that out there there is despair by the 

business community because of the lack of economic 

development, then I’d say to the Minister of Economic 

Development and Trade, you can solve that problem very 

quickly; we can have this matter resolved. Call a by-election in 

Saskatoon Eastview. Call a by-election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You tell us about all the high-tech 

developments and all of these things about the contrast. I’d say 

to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade: get your 

Premier into this legislature, call a by-election in Saskatoon 

Eastview, and let’s put the test to those theories and the proof of 

the pudding. Call it any time. It’s probably, as the Leader of the 

Opposition says, the highest income seat in Saskatchewan. Call 

a by-election to see whether your economic policies are 

working or not. 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, they won’t call an election 

because every one of them is scared silly about the results of 

that by-election. They know full well what’s waiting for them. 

Canadians have had a sample of that kind of economic 

development in three years now of Mr. Mulroney, and they’ve 

had it for five years under the Devine administration, Mr. 

Chairman. They know exactly that we’re going back to the 

future when we have this kind of open-for-business policy. 

There is no open-for-business policy; there is nothing new 

about it. It is bankrupt policy from a bankrupt government, and 

unfortunately our people have to put up with it. And I say, Mr. 

Chairman, that this minister’s bad explanations about how you 

make pulp and paper and what you do with the oil industry 

don’t masquerade the simple, bald facts. 

 

And the facts are: we have more bankruptcies than ever; we 

have more unemployed than ever; we have highest taxes than 

ever; we have the largest debt than ever; we have the most 

people leaving Saskatchewan than ever; we have the highest 

people on welfare than ever; we have the fewest people working 

than ever; and all the economic indicators show that this 

government has been a total and complete, utter failure and it 

ought to be condemned for the same. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I will . . . Rather than 

getting into the wild rhetoric that we see from the member from 

Riversdale, no different than we saw before, let’s  

deal with sector by sector. Let’s deal with the manufacturing 

sector, and let’s deal with StatsCanada — if that’s a qualified 

enough statistical base for the hon. member. Catalogue number 

61-205 and catalogue number 61-206, so the member can look 

it up and verify it. And what we’re talking about is investment, 

investment in the manufacturing sector in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Investment in the manufacturing sector of the 

province of Saskatchewan which we believe is the way we must 

diversify our economy. 

 

Let’s look at the numbers: 1981, during the time of their 

administration, $125 million invested in the manufacturing 

sector; 1982, $144 million invested; 1983, $160 million; 1985, 

$180 million; 1986, $283 million, compared to $125 million, 

almost over twice as much. But that’s not it, Mr. Speaker. What 

StatsCanada projects the intention of investments in the 

manufacturing sector in our province this year is not $125 

million, which was their number when they were in 

government, but 511 million invested in manufacturing in this 

province — a record. Never in history has been there more 

money invested in the manufacturing sector than there will be 

this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — And that’s StatsCanada. That’s 

StatsCanada, to the hon. member. Never, ever before, in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, there will be more dollars invested in the 

manufacturing sector in 1987 than there was in the last five 

years of an NDP administration. If that’s what you don’t like by 

way of performance of the private sector, so be it. You choose 

your way of buying the companies; we’ll choose this way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think they’ve got 

very much choice. They’ve already made their bed and they’re 

going to lie in it come the next election. I can guarantee you 

that, Mr. Chairman. There’s no doubt about that. 

 

These new economic policies are the old economic policies of 

the Dirty Thirties. We’ve never had as tough a time 

economically, under economic development, as we have right 

now in the province of Saskatchewan. Never. You know that, 

Mr. Chairman, to be true and the hon. minister know that to be 

true as well. That’s why he tries to give the excuse and the 

escape that it’s always due to some international factor. All of 

these figures, all of the selected figures that he gives, belie the 

truth. 

 

But look, I want to tell you this, Mr. Minister. In my judgement 

you can take the investment in manufacturing . . . I will give 

you the figures which I think tell the global story for the 

province of Saskatchewan. You explain these for me, please. 

This is the gross domestic product, the gross domestic product. 

Take a look from 1982, the percentage increase, 3.3; in the year 

before that it was 15.6; in 1983 it went down to 2.9; in 1984, 

8.3; in 1985, halved again to about 4.8 per cent. And I want to 

tell you, Mr. Chairman, if you compare that with any of the 

other periods . . . I don’t care what government was there. Just 

take a look at the statistics of it. By any non-ideological  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2838 

 

yardstick this gross domestic product, which is surely one of the 

most important figures going, shows the government has done a 

dismal job. 

 

They talk about investment in manufacturing. Take a look at the 

growth in the number of businesses. This is by their own 

figures. Take a look at 1981, the percentage growth in the 

number of businesses. In 1981, total corporations in 

Saskatchewan, a growth of 8.8 per cent. What happens in 1982 

— 2.8 per cent. What happens in 1983? Well they’ve increase 

to 3.9 per cent. What happens in 1984 — 3.6 per cent; and in 

1985 the figure shows the same kind of a track record which is 

applied — a very sharp drop. 

 

The reason for that, Mr. Chairman, is this: sure, they’ve had 

some difficult times internationally from an economic point of 

view; no one can deny that. It wouldn’t be fair to say otherwise. 

I acknowledge that. But the reason for the current dilemma is 

because these people are slaves to a 1930s economic policy. 

They believe in some sort of old-fashioned notion of tying their 

wagon to the United States, bringing in all these big United 

States entrepreneurs to create the bit investment in 

manufacturing opportunities. And they have fizzled, Mr. 

Chairman; they have fizzled and they have forgotten about the 

small Saskatchewan business man. 

 

That’s exactly the approach of the 1960s with the late premier, 

Ross Thatcher. That’s exactly the same approach, the last time 

we had a government of this stripe back in the 1930s, of the 

Conservative premier, the late Premier Anderson. They have 

forgotten the local Saskatchewan entrepreneur and they simply 

refuse to touch base with them. 

 

What they’ve developed here is a government which is out of 

touch. It’s a fortress Legislative Building government; that’s 

what it really is — some sort of old ideas of Adam Smith, as my 

desk mate the member from Quill Lakes talks about, with no 

knowledge of what it takes to stimulate an economic project in 

the province of Saskatchewan — and that is that combination of 

private enterprise, co-operative enterprise, and on occasion 

public sector enterprise, to be continually reviewed and done in 

the proper and appropriate fashion. 

 

They haven’t done that. You ask any small-business man, 

including the chamber of commerce people, and they will tell 

you this government has forgotten about them, Mr. Chairman. 

They have forgotten about them, and with that they have 

forgotten about the young men and women of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And I tell the Minister from Economic 

Development and Trade, if you don’t believe me, you prevail 

on the Premier of this province to call a by-election in 

Eastview, and let’s have a test of exactly whether or not they 

buy your approach or our approach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member from Riversdale 

wants to get into the question of GDP (gross domestic product) 

and the GDP numbers for this year and last year versus for 

other years. I ask the member from Riversdale, in a most 

serious way, in the determination of gross domestic production 

. . . Gross domestic production  

is total output minus the cost to give you a GDP. 

 

Now, if you look at one of the leading factors of the gross 

domestic product of this province, it’s got to be agriculture. 

Now the member from Riversdale should know that in 1980 the 

price of wheat was what, almost $8, down today to the point 

where it is what, almost $2 — less than $2 for much of the 

production that we have. Now that is a sizeable reduction in the 

value of the major commodity that we produce in this province. 

And that’s a world-wide problem. 

 

Now we can sit here and shout back and forth at ourselves like a 

mock parliament, if you like. The reality is the price of wheat 

has gone from $8 down to $2. Now I know the hon. member 

knows nothing about farming, and I would suggest cares 

nothing about farmers — cares nothing about farmers. He must 

admit that the leading factor in the gross domestic product is the 

price of grain — is very, very significant — and that, in fact, 

did reduce. Nobody denies that and nobody in the province is 

not aware of that that is at all informed of what’s happening in 

agriculture. And that’s a reality. The price of potash has gone 

down, and I can factor that down for you if you want as well. 

 

So the member opposite says, everybody’s fault but mine. If we 

want to get in, Mr. Chairman, to talking about really what are 

the challenges that this province faces, this province has relied 

upon resources and this province has relied upon the production 

of grains for export to the world markets. 

 

Now you go talk to any farmer and he’s going to tell you that 

there’s problems out there in the world market like he hasn’t 

seen for a long, long period of time. Now I think if we want to 

sit here as politicians in a legislature the people elected in this 

province saying, I’m smarter than you because I kept the price 

of wheat up higher than you did when I was in government, 

then I think every person in this province should chastise all of 

us for acting in that type of forum and debating at that particular 

level. 

 

The member from Riversdale would somehow suggest that 

when we’re dealing with, how should we diversity this 

economy, stands up and says, call a by-election. Well how 

relevant is that, Mr. Speaker, to the estimates that are before the 

House today? How that does contribute, I would ask, to the 

debate that many people are asking themselves about how we 

diversify our economy? How do we deal with tomorrow with 

the challenges that we face today? How does the farmer face the 

challenge of his market dissipating on him? And that’s a 

difficult problem. And many of them are losing their farms just 

because of that; many of my best friends are losing their farms 

because of that. And then that is very difficult, and that’s a 

challenge all farmers are facing. 

 

And how do we move away from reliance totally upon resource 

sector and agriculture sector? How do we adjust and find 

markets for that adjustment? How do we find the investment to 

do that? That’s really what we’re talking about in economic 

development, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we talk about manufacturing, it’s one of the key 

areas that we must use to diversify our economy. And  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2839 

 

if we have shown progress from 125 million during the 1980s 

of their administration to over $500 million this year, that’s 

progress. That’s not enough. We would hope by the end of our 

term that could be up towards $1 billion investment in 

manufacturing. That’s the type of approach that we must deal 

with if this economy of our province is to carry forward and 

diversify. 

 

Now we’re not going to diversify our economy by sitting here 

talking about statistics as to who’s the smartest, him or me. That 

will get us no place, Mr. Speaker, but that is what we’ve done 

now for an hour and a half. I suggest that what we have to deal 

with is, put forth ideas. If the hon. member from Riversdale has 

ideas as to how we might better approach the question of 

diversifying, then so be it, advance. Surely that’s what people 

are elected to this Assembly for. 

 

But to simply sit and argue about statistics and somehow think 

that this is what this game is about, I suspect that there’s a lot of 

people out there watching tonight, or those that are watching 

tonight basically saying, well, well, well, well, well, well, isn’t 

that wonderful. Isn’t that wonderful, they’re sitting there, two 

guys supposedly educated, yelling about who’s got the best 

statistics. Surely we can do better than that. Surely we were 

elected to do better than that, and that is to how can we best 

diversify the economy. And nobody in this room — nobody in 

this room — has got all the answers, Mr. Speaker, but surely 

that is what we should be talking about here, because I believe 

that’s what we’re elected for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I wish to respond to the 

Minister of Economic Development and Trade, particularly the 

last plea that we should be discussing how to diversify the 

economy. There’s be lots of time to do that, Mr. Minister, either 

during these estimates or in the course of the term of this 

administration. There is no doubt about that. But this has 

nothing to do with the question of a discussion, how to diversify 

the economy. 

 

These are, sir, as you know, a consideration of your estimates. 

This is the time when we, the opposition, and the public, those 

who may be watching on television, can make a judgement call 

as to whether or not you have been doing the job appropriately; 

whether you and the Premier and the Deputy Premier and the 

Minister of Finance — old $800-million-off-the-mark Minister 

of Finance — from Qu’Appelle, whether or not you’re doing 

the job. And I’m saying that if you look at the statistics that I 

recite — none of which you have rebutted — if you take a look 

at the major statistics by any independent yardstick, there can 

be no other conclusion except that of an abject failure. 

 

(2015) 

 

Now you get up and you say well what’s Saskatoon Eastview 

by-election got to do with this? Well I’ll tell you what it’s got to 

do with this. You won’t listen to us; you won’t listen to me; you 

won’t listen to other commentators. I don’t know whether 

you’re taking advice from your department officials. Well I’ll 

tell you  

what Saskatoon Eastview by-election’s got to do with it. 

Maybe, just maybe if you call it, you will listen to the people of 

Saskatoon Eastview and others who are saying that your 

economic development policies are so old, so out-dated, and 

such an abject failure, maybe if you get a sound thrashing there, 

that will waken you up and get you to redirect the way this 

thrust is going economically. Maybe that’s the relevance of 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Goodness knows nothing else will do it 

from our side of the legislature. 

 

So I say to the Minister of Economic Trade and Development, 

look, there’s no harm in admitting that you’ve done a bad job 

— or I’ll back off and say, not a bad job — that it hasn’t 

worked. I don’t mean this in the personal sense. A lot of things 

that we try in public life don’t work. Go ahead and admit that 

you need some new directions. I don’t think that if you did that 

anybody would condemn you for it. In fact, if you wanted to get 

on and get on a nice discussion of how diversification should 

take place, why don’t you admit that the last five years simply 

hasn’t worked. That would be at least a beginning to start to 

reconstruct some new policies that might work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well now we heard many of those 

arguments in the last election. The Premier said, I want to build; 

and you side said, we want to take me back to ’82. And that’s, if 

you really cut the last election, that’s what it was about. And I 

would suggest to you that the election which was — what, 11 

months ago? — the people spoke. There’s so many people on 

this side and so many fewer on that side and that election was 

based on who best could build the province. And the people of 

Saskatchewan said, I think the Progressive Conservatives can 

build better than the NDP, because — I’ll tell you why — 

because the NDP had not one new idea last election and you 

have not put forth one new idea since coming into this House 

— not one new idea. And you say, well call a by-election. 

 

Now no new ideas. And I ask the member, I challenge the 

member to put forth something. And what does he do? He skirts 

around the issue — I don’t want to talk about new ideas. And 

what do we take from that? Anybody that’s not prepared to put 

forth new ideas as the member must, we can only assume wants 

to go back and fundamentally believes what we did in the past. 

That is, buy more business; we will buy more business . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And he says, yes, it’s a better policy. 

I hear him saying from his seat that, we will buy the business as 

opposed to the policies that you’re pursuing. Well I happen not 

to believe that. I happen to fundamentally not believe. I happen 

to fundamentally not believe that government should go around 

buying businesses. I further believe that government should not 

go around buying out farmers’ land from them. I don’t believe 

in that. Now that is the general philosophical position of your 

party, and tonight it’s clear that that’s the general philosophical 

view of you who strives to be the new leader of that party. 

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2840 

 

Now we can argue that philosophy all night if you want. And 

we’ll argue it, I’m sure, up to the next election. And all I would 

say to the member of Riversdale: don’t count your chickens, 

like you did in 1982, until the election day; and like you did in 

1986 until the election day. You were disappointed in ’82, you 

were disappointed in ’86, and you’ll be disappointed again in 

1990. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I wonder if I might ask the minister a 

few questions. He talks about how we should diversify our 

economy, and I’m sure that he and I and half a dozen other 

people could give the standard speech on how we diversify our 

economy. And it has three or four elements and we all could do 

it. We process more of our agricultural products before they 

leave our province. Yes, we process more of our other resources 

before they leave our provinces. We attempt to manufacture 

here products which are now imported into this region, and we 

manufacture some products which we can successfully market 

in the prairie basin. And you might add others: some high-tech 

products which could be marketed beyond the prairie basin. But 

that is your strategy, that was the strategy of Mr. Thatcher and 

our government, and I take it, I suspect, every Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now all I want to do, Mr. Minister, is just proceed and check 

out a few of these. With respect to the processing of agriculture 

products, one of the things which we have done in the past is 

brewing. We have brewed beer in this province, and I ask the 

minister does he agree that there are: (a) fewer breweries in the 

province than there were five years ago, and (b) producing less 

product? 

 

Now do you agree with that, Mr. Minister? And do you agree 

that more beer in being imported into this province . . . was true 

five years ago? And we will deal with that aspect of processing 

agricultural products. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — If you’re to look at what we’ll talk about 

as the food processing sector — now, we’re talking about the 

food processing sector. There has been a 25.6 per cent, food 

processing, okay. That’s processing our agricultural product in 

Saskatchewan. There has been a 25.6 per cent increase since 

1982, 25 per cent. Now maybe that’s not as good as it should be 

but that’s still a . . . that’s a pretty fair increase over five years. 

 

If we’re going to get to breweries and we want to have a 

legitimate discussion on breweries. All right. What has 

happened in this country is, in my view, questionable 

economics as it relates to breweries. Every province has a 

system that protects its breweries by supplying its own 

customer. All right. So what we have developed across the 

country is breweries in every province. 

 

Now, there is a view supported by all provinces in this country 

that we should start looking, as Canadians, at whether or not 

that protection between Canada, between provinces of Canada, 

is a good thing or not a good thing. And everybody has 

indicated that that should probably change. How do you phase it 

out and how do you look after the employees that work in those 

breweries? 

 

Now how do you grapple with the problem of free trade within 

Canada, which I don’t think any political party in any province 

disagrees with. It’s just how you do it and  

what process you do it at. Now breweries is one that is through 

a cycle of change. Nobody is going to deny that, and I don’t 

think the hon. member would say that’s wrong, as long as it 

unfolds the right way. Is there fewer jobs in the brewery today? 

There is. Will there be fewer jobs in breweries in the future? 

Probably there will be, but isn’t that what economic 

development is? That some of those don’t stay for ever but new 

ones come in and take their place. I don’t think the hon. 

member disagrees with that either. 

 

The question is, how do you manage that process, and I think 

that’s a legitimate debate as to how you manage the process, 

whether or not we should maintain a system that only beer 

produced in Saskatchewan can be consumed in Saskatchewan 

and not Alberta and not Manitoba. I wonder if the hon. member 

says that that is a proper policy and the only policy this country 

should support and pursue, or whether we should have better 

and more open trade between the provinces within this country., 

Is that not what the country really is about, and should we not 

pursue that type of a policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I think that the minister, albeit he 

didn’t want to, has answered the question. He says: (a) there are 

fewer people employed in brewing; secondly, and he implicitly 

says that if we’re going to have competition, that will mean that 

Saskatchewan will lose out. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s what he said. That’s what he said, 

and he’s prepared to accept that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — That’s right, he . . . 

 

Well, let’s move on to distilling. We had a distillery which 

processed Saskatchewan product and sold it, by and large, in 

the United States. Do you now admit that we no longer have a 

distillery operating and, therefore, that agriculture product is no 

longer produced in this province? 

 

And the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster feels that it was a 

joke. I suspect the people who had the jobs down at Weyburn 

didn’t think it was so funny when it closed. 

 

My question to the minister is, in short: do we have an 

operating distillery industry in the province, and is that an area 

where we might have a product we can export to the United 

States, an agricultural product, and do we do it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — There was one distillery in the province 

of Saskatchewan; it stopped distilling product prior to our 

coming to government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, that’s 

true. And then following that, what they did was brought 

whisky in from another province, and they put it in bottles. All 

right, now there was . . . (inaudible) . . . There’s nothing wrong 

with bringing whisky in and putting it in bottles and the 

shipping it out to sell. That’s well, if we can do that. 

 

The problem is, is that there wasn’t enough people that wanted 

to buy and drink that whisky to make it worthwhile to continue. 

It was a product that people turned away from. Saskatchewan 

consumers did not buy it, nor did other people buy it, and that 

can happen. 

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2841 

 

There’s times when they buy products that you manufacture in 

the 1950s that they don’t want to buy, maybe in the 1970s or 

1980s. But there was nothing being distilled in this province 

when the government changed in 1982, nothing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Whether or not it was, I’m not harking 

back to the past. I’m just saying: is this something you can do 

and have you done it? And the answer is no. There’s less beer 

being brewed, no spirits being distilled. 

 

Now let’s proceed to rape-seed crushing which is an obvious 

area for processing. Is it your submission that rape-seed 

crushing is something which is going to grow in the next few 

years or not, and is the amount of rape-seed crushed in this 

province growing, or is it not growing, and if not, why not? 

Isn’t that an industry which could be a growth industry? 

 

And you can deal at the same time, if you like, with the 

manufacture of margarine, and tell me whether that one is 

expanding. 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can advise the hon. member of the 

following: that Saskatchewan produces about 40 per cent of the 

rape-seed of the prairie region, and we crush about 10 per cent 

of what we produce. But here’s the reason as to what happened, 

is that what we . . . What happened is the rape-seed crushing 

plants were built, for the most part, from the early ’70s to the 

late 1970s, and the two most modern plants built — that was 

during your administration — one was . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . You didn’t. One was built in Alberta and one 

was built in Manitoba, just over the borders on each side. That’s 

what happened; that is exactly what happened. CSP at 

Harrowby. That is when it was built, because during your 

administration you were not interested in pursuing the 

development of crushing plants for rape-seed. You were not 

interested in that. You had other agenda items. So who built 

them? 

 

There are seven or eight rape-seed crushing plants in Alberta by 

the end of the 1970s; seven to eight rape-seed crushing plants. 

And there’s — what? — two in Manitoba. And that’s what 

happened. 

 

You sat by, and if you want to be critical of anybody you 

should be critical of yourself, because during that period of time 

did you help, and did you look at saying, hey, there’s an 

industry that we could build in Saskatchewan. We produce . . . 

we produce the bulk of the rape-seed, that we should process it. 

No, you didn’t do that. You allowed it all to be built on both 

sides of us. All to be built on both sides of us. No different than 

fertilizer; the same thing. The same thing: let the Albertas and 

the Manitobas develop it. We won’t worry about that because 

we’ve got other agendas. All right. We were nationalizing this, 

that, and the next thing so fast you didn’t even see where you 

might be able to develop that. 

 

Now should we stand up and say we should encourage 

somebody to build more rape-seed crushing plants in 

Saskatchewan when they’re now struggling to stay alive in 

Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba? Is that what we  

should do, over-build here? And the industry doesn’t want to. 

The industry is trying to rationalize itself, and one would hope 

they’re able to rationalize themselves and come out of it as a 

stronger industry. 

 

Now, will we produce more rape-seed? Will we crush more 

rape-seed in Saskatchewan when we find more markets for 

rape-seed around the world? We would hope so. And of course 

Japan is a very important market — the two really key markets 

that we have to go after in that particular product. And we hope 

that we are able to or that the companies involved are able to. 

 

But I don’t think you should stand up, of all people, and say 

about rape-seed crushing or about any food processing as to 

what we’re doing in the future. If you were to look at your 

government in 11 years, that is one that you badly overlooked. 

And I think if you looked back, you, in all honesty, would admit 

that as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we 

see this interesting little ploy of the minister’s. When we ask 

about the future he wants to talk about the past; and when we 

talk about the past he wants to talk about the future. He just 

upbraided the member for Riversdale for talking about the past, 

that he wanted to know what was happening in the future. 

 

When I asked him what’s happening about rape-seed, he says, 

oh yes, we produce 40 per cent and we crush 10 per cent, but 

there’s nothing possible that we can do with that because of 

what happened 10 years ago. 

 

Now shall we go on to alfalfa deny? Tell me about the 

prosperity there. Tell me about the new alfalfa dehy plants, and 

tell me about whether or not you see a future for further 

diversification in alfalfa . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 

Chairman, I wonder whether the member for Morse can contain 

himself. He wants to talk about oil; he wants to talk about 

Outlook. I want to talk about alfalfa dehy. You may not grow 

much alfalfa in your country, but there are places that do. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, has there been an increase in the number of 

plants and the quantity of alfalfa dehydrated or cubed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Two observations. One, about today, 

CSP Foods in Nipawin — we are advised that this will be their 

best year ever, and that is because they have been able to 

arrange for some contracts with Proctor & Gamble and able to 

access the U.S. market far better than they ever have been able 

to in the past. And they see this as their best year, 1987, and are 

positive that that new change and those market arrangements 

maybe will assist them in seeing a better future. 

 

With regards to the alfalfa, the new wave, I suppose, or the new 

direction in alfalfa, is what is called the long fibre market. We 

have dealt in the past with the short fibres, and there is much 

expectation that the long fibre market, particularly into Japan, is 

really a positive and is something that has a goodly number of 

people fairly interested, fairly excited about that as being a good 

growth potential for agriculture and agricultural  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2842 

 

processing in the province, both in the existing areas and in the 

new proposed irrigation areas around Outlook on the west side. 

 

So there is some fair optimism in that area. Again it’s a market 

that has to be developed. It’s an international market that has to 

be developed. It has to be developed by the companies and by 

the producers, but it’s an area that we would think will find 

some good niche markets and hopefully have a fair run of 

success of finding and holding those markets in the future, and 

therefore giving the people back at the end of the stream — 

those that produced the product — a cash crop that maybe will 

allow them to diversify out of some of the stuff that they’re 

producing now and maintain the farming operation, where 

otherwise to simply grow wheat would not allow them to do 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The question was, in case you forgot it: 

are there as many plants or fewer plants? Tell me about 

Choiceland. A nice, simple, direct question: is it operating? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The answer is, the Choiceland plant is 

closed down. It does only, as I indicated, the short pellet and 

that is by most analyses a dying market compared to the long 

fibre, which is the new focus and new direction. This is a small 

plant, as you’re aware, where the economies of scale are really 

difficult on that one. It’s been struggling for some period of 

time and it has closed down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well I’m just wondering about the 

success of this processing of agricultural products, and I don’t 

notice it in an outstanding way in brewing or distilling or 

rape-seed crushing or alfalfa dehy or margarine. I think if it had 

been a margarine you would have mentioned it. 

 

I speak now of gasohol. You will recall that there were at least 

some proposals for a gasohol project some four of five years 

ago, and it doesn’t seem to have made much progress other than 

during the election there was yet another announcement. But 

leaving the election announcement aside, are you able to say 

whether or not there are any plans to proceed — not to study, 

but to proceed — with a gasohol plant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Perhaps if that question would be asked 

in the very near future I would be able to give the hon. member 

a positive answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — But I take it not tonight. 

 

An Hon. Member: — At least Gary Lane admits he won’t 

provide information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes. Well, perhaps. 

 

I will move to a very closely related subject and this deals with 

the question of substitute imports, and some of these could 

come under either category. We certainly don’t brew all we 

drink in this province so . . . and brewing less than a smaller 

percentage of what we consume. 

 

Tell me about fertilizer. We are targeting for the  

production of 50 per cent of farm chemicals. I’m sorry to talk 

about chemicals first. We are targeting for the production of 50 

per cent of farm chemicals used in Saskatchewan over the next 

five years. Now that was said just about exactly one year ago. 

So one year has gone by. Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what 

progress has been made with respect to the production of 50 per 

cent of the farm chemicals used in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised by officials that we are very 

comfortable and confident that by the end of this decade that 50 

per cent of all chemicals used by Saskatchewan farmers will be 

processed right in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As the hon. member might know, many of the large players in 

the field of agriculture chemicals are Europeans. We have had 

ongoing discussions, and I’m sure that we will have further and 

many more ongoing discussions with those Europeans. Do we 

have . . . Have we made to that commitment yet? No, we 

haven’t. But will we meet it? I would be very comfortable in 

saying that we will. 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well thank you for the confidence. But 

you are not able to report any substantive progress in the last 12 

months? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Ongoing discussions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Ongoing discussions as the . . . Fair 

enough. 

 

Obviously we need perhaps a little something more than 

confidence. I could read — and I won’t because some of my 

colleagues doubtless will — the confident statements dealing 

with Supercart. You will recall some of these flowing phrases in 

the press release of April 18, 1986. 

 

I simply want to leave this portion of the questioning with the 

obvious comment. We talk about diversifying. We talk about 

the theory of diversifying, with which everybody agrees. We 

talk about one way to diversify being upstream processing of 

our agricultural products, which with everybody agrees, but 

when we get down to brass tacks . . . We find that a mention has 

been made of a bacon plant. It will hardly substitute for the 

meat packing plant which you allowed to close down in Regina 

in the first couple of years. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nonsense. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — What do you mean, nonsense? Intercon 

was there and it isn’t there now. Intercon was there in 1982 . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, I don’t know whether 

the member for Souris-Cannington doesn’t know that there was 

a thriving meat-packing plant in Regina when he took office in 

1982. And I don’t know whether he doesn’t know that in two or 

three years it was no longer operating, but I’ll tell him that’s 

true. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2843 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — But moving on, I simply want to take 

the point. They freely admit that so far as brewing concerned 

there’s less employment and less product. So far as distilling is 

concerned, it hasn’t moved ahead a foot; and in fact, so far as 

employment is concerned, no progress because of what 

happened 10 years ago; so far as alfalfa dehy is concerned, no 

more jobs, just chatter about long fibre as opposed to short 

fibre; so far as gasohol is concerned, maybe we’ll have a 

announcement; so far as farm chemicals is concerned, we are 

confident, but no jobs. 

 

My point, Mr. Chairman, is this: if we’re going to diversify . . . 

And as I say, there are three or four pillars, to use a phrase 

much beloved by the members opposite. One of the pillars is to 

process agricultural products. And I say that precious little has 

happened in the last three or four or five years to expand jobs in 

agricultural processing. Oh yes, there’ll be one plant where 

there’ll be some more jobs. But there are other plants where 

there are fewer jobs or no jobs. 

 

When you add up what the potential is and what the failure to 

realize on that potential is, then I think we know that the 

industrial development and diversification programs of this 

government consist of speeches by the Premier; long, and if I 

may say so, dull speeches by the member for Kindersley; but 

when it comes to jobs for people who may want to work in a 

brewery or a distillery or an alfalfa dehy plant or a rape-seed 

crushing plant — no jobs. So far as jobs were for gasohol, no 

jobs. So far as jobs for working in these phantom chemical 

plants, no jobs. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Phantom? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Phantom, I said, because we have had 

a range of promises. If I were to take the number of 

announcements concerning the supercarts and the Nardeis, and 

the rest, and total the jobs that are there now, they would indeed 

be phantom jobs. 

 

But I am dealing with this narrow question of the upstream 

processing of agricultural products. And I say the minister 

hasn’t made a case that anything very significant has happened 

in the last five years or six years with respect to providing jobs 

by upstream processing of agricultural products. Certainly he 

can point to some areas where this might have happened. But I 

think that when it comes to pointing to areas which have been 

induced by the private sector as opposed to significant 

government funds, he will find even fewer. 

 

And I think that to join with my colleague, the member for 

Riversdale, I think it’s pretty clear that the record, shorn of its 

rhetoric and judged by jobs and potential; is a record of failure. 

And if it is attempted to be justified by the minister, we will 

hear a great deal of chatter but we will not hear many statistics 

about extra jobs in brewing, or extra jobs in distilling, or 

rape-seed crushing, or alfalfa dehy, or margarine 

manufacturing, or cheese manufacturing, or any others. 

 

And I say that until the minister can display to the people of 

Saskatchewan that there are more jobs and more  

economic activity, his rhetoric will fall on deaf ears and on 

very, very skeptical ears. Because we’ve heard a lot of rhetoric 

and we know that there are fewer jobs now than there were 

short years ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member talks about the red 

meat industry, and let’s start with that. He says there’s not any 

firm numbers. Let’s look at Intercontinental Packers. 

Intercontinental Packers had a plant in Saskatoon and a plant in 

Regina. They had a no-kill plant in Regina. They just brought 

the carcass down here and cut it up. That plant shut down in 

Regina, that plant shut . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’ve seen cattle slaughtered there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Now when you were in government. 

When you left government . . . Not when you left government. 

Since you left government, since the hon. member from 

Elphinstone turned over the reins of government to us, Intercon 

in Regina is closed down but Intercon in Saskatoon is expanded 

to the point now where there’s more than 200 people — more 

working now for Intercontinental Packers than worked for them 

in 1982; more than 200 people working in Intercontinental 

Packers. And Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon has 

expanded . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, they’re 200 more. 

Whether you want to buy that or not, that is in fact true. Go talk 

to Freddy Mitchell if you don’t believe me — 200 more people 

working there. 

 

There’s a plant in North Battleford. There’s a new plant in 

Melfort and, in fact, under the IIP program there are over 70 

new companies or existing companies in Saskatchewan that 

expanded in the food processing since 1983 — 70 new 

companies involved in food processing. Now you might sneer 

at that and you might say that’s not very many. That is 70 new 

businesses creating a lot of jobs in this province and I think that 

is a credit and that is facts and that is real. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, we’ve 

been through this before and I want to go into some particular 

areas where you indicated that there was going to be some 

development. I want to talk a little bit about some of the 

phantom industries that you indicated during the last election. 

And I remember the headlines that you put out in respect to the 

potassium sulphate plant that was going to be at Kandahar. 

There was going to be hundreds of people employed, both in 

the construction end of it and subsequently employed full-time 

in the potassium sulphate. Announcement was made; 

expectations you built up. 

 

And today, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you, perhaps you 

don’t know the details, but there is what you put out in the press 

releases and what are the facts today. Today instead of 300,000 

tonnes of potassium sulphate which you indicated that you were 

going to be producing at the potassium sulphate plant where 

you set up the pilot project, just south of Kandahar, or just 

beside Kandahar. And do you know what happens today? You 

did the impact study, you invested money in it, and what has 

happened to that plant, Mr. Minister? Why did it not  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2844 

 

expand to the expectations that you indicated and held to the 

people of this province out with expectations? 

 

Obviously it was an election ploy. You’re credibility is shot. 

You have no respect by the people of this province any more. 

They can’t believe what the government says. 

 

And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, can you in fact indicate what 

has happened to the potassium sulphate plant that was going to 

hire over 75 people on a permanent basis; 150 people that was 

going to be employed? I mean this was supposed to be an 

economic diversification of a new product of potash. And here 

is the result now, not 300,000 tonnes — 30,000; nine people 

employed and no future, as indicated in your press releases. 

 

And so what I’m saying to you here, Mr. Minister, there is no 

credibility left with this government. That’s one instance, and 

perhaps you can give me some details of what went awry on 

that. 

 

But then also the Premier last spring — big announcement. 

There was a French company investment in the fertilizer plant, 

and it was going to go. The feasibility study was under way. 

Well where is the fertilizer plant that you were building? 

 

Then there was the chemical plant which the member from 

Elphinstone indicated. What stage is that at? Or is that just a 

press release again? And then you had a band-aid plant that you 

were going to set up down in Swift Current. Where is the 

band-aid plant? Then down in Lloydminster you were going to 

have some kind of an airplane assembly plant. Do you 

remember that? You probably . . . The member from Cut 

Knife-Lloyd probably went around and convinced people to 

vote for him because they were going to have this big plant. 

 

So I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, not only is this government — 

and I’m going to demonstrate your incompetence in the whole 

economic field — but the credibility is shot. I mean you have 

no credibility left. 

 

And so I want you to deal with those particular items and give 

us an update. What happened to the potassium sulphate plant? 

Didn’t you do your studies? Did the markets disappear? Or was 

it a press release? What about the fertilizer plant that you hyped 

people up that there was going to be a big fertilizer plant? 

Where is it? Where is the chemical plant? Where is the band-aid 

plant? Where is the airplane assembly plant? Just to start with a 

few. Could you summarize and indicate what went wrong or 

was it misrepresentation to the public and you never intended to 

have them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — With regards to the potassium sulphate 

plant, that was not handled by this department. I think that was 

an initiative of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and so 

perhaps you could ask that question to that . . . that particular 

question. 

 

The fertilizer plant is still actively being pursued and we are 

hopeful that there will be an ammonia plant built in the south 

part of the province. That is still very much an issue being dealt 

with. 

The chemical plant, I didn’t catch the particular name of that, 

but last week there was a $7 million chemical plant started in 

the city of Prince Albert — $7 million plant. And you can laugh 

at that if you want, that it’s not significant. With regard to the 

Swift Current plant, there is an official from the department in 

Germany right now negotiating with regard to that particular 

deal. So those are done, but the member opposite comes out 

with the same rhetoric. 

 

Now I remember, in the 1982 election, the NDP going around 

saying, there will never be a paper plant built in Prince Albert, 

never. Weyerhaeuser simply came in there. Remember that? 

Weyerhaeuser just came in and took over this plant; they will 

never build a paper plant. We heard you guys talking about that 

in the House, then around during election time. It’ll never 

happen; it will never happen. Well, go up to Prince Albert; it is 

in fact being built. 

 

And you said, well there’s an upgrader here in Regina, another 

idle promise. There will never be a heavy oil upgrader built. 

Well just go out into the north-ease side of town and see 

whether or not there’s an upgrader being built, and see the size 

of that particular upgrader being built. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are projects that are being built. Now the 

members opposite never built anything, but those projects are 

being built. Or go to North Battleford and see whether or not 

there’s some projects in North Battleford hiring quite a few 

people — quite a few people, Mr. Speaker. Those are being 

built and there will be more built in the future. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Madam . . . Mr. Minister, rather. Sorry about 

that. I was thinking of the Minister of Energy when I was 

thinking of the potash. 

 

I want to completely divest your misrepresentation to the House 

in respect to some of the facts, and I want to do it with your 

own publication. I know that in your own publication you have 

put forward nothing but facts, Mr. Minister. 

 

When you took over, you decided on your open for big business 

idea. And I want to again demonstrate to you with your own 

statistics, with your own indicators, of the economic growth 

from ’72 to ’82. And you put together a brochure which I have 

been able to use in my constituency, because the people want to 

look back at the progress that was going on. And you deal with 

’72. Saskatchewan Promise, and here is what you say: “Growth 

— we outperform,” it says. And it goes on: 

 

The Canadian west has outperformed the rest of the 

country during the past decade and has become a major 

North American growth centre. Saskatchewan continues to 

have a leading role in the regional industrial expansion. 

 

And this is what you go on to say: 

 

The province’s compound annual rate of real growth was 

4.2 per cent between ’72 and ’82,  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2845 

 

compared to 2.7 per cent for Canada as a whole. 

 

You say the gross domestic product grows strongly from 3.4 

billion to 5.2 billion, and you go on to say that total personal 

income rose rapidly from ’72 to ’82, in that 10-year period from 

2.8 billion to 12 billion. And per capita incomes have grown 

similarly, exceeding the national average. 

 

Those are some of the things you say. You go on to say in this 

editorial which you are spreading to outside investors, how 

good it was and the base of economic growth that we had here 

before. And you say: 

 

Combined with the pro-business government and one of 

the lowest per capita debt burdens in the country, that’s the 

Saskatchewan opportunity. 

 

And then you go into the growth indicators: 10 years as a 

growth leader in Canada, 1972 to 1982. And you say the 

economic policies of those 10 years were a disaster. That’s what 

you’re trying to tell the people of Saskatchewan. But in your 

own publication you indicate the gross domestic product in 

Saskatchewan, the percentage increased by 51 per cent, Canada 

30 per cent; non-residential investment increased 338 per cent, 

and in Canada 275; retail sales, 197 per cent, higher than the 

rest of Canada. Personal disposable income increased 333 per 

cent. 

 

So what I’m indicating to you, Mr. Minister, you took over as a 

government, and the financial institutions that we did work with 

in New York said that Saskatchewan was the best fiscally 

managed area in all of North America. That’s precisely what 

they said and that is what you took over, and the legacy that you 

have left behind in five short years is devastating. 

 

And it has been said, as the member from Riversdale has said, 

look at what this province has on its hands today. It has the 

massive deficit and massive operating expenditures of 3.2, $3.4 

billion in five years. The Finance minister that underestimated 

the deficit by $800 million to get elected. 

 

We have a province here where food banks were absolutely 

unknown, and today not enough food to feed the people that go 

there. We have a taxation level in this last budget of between 

200 and $200 million of increase in taxation laid on the backs 

of the people at the same time that you’ve massively had to cut 

the programs. You had to take it from the little . . . the school 

children, the dental program, because . . . and you say we’ve got 

economic growth and viability. 

 

Now if you have economic growth and economic viability and 

if we’re moving forward, then I guess the question is, why is 

our welfare budget doubled over what it was when you took 

over? Two hundred million dollars a year and more you pay out 

in welfare because you haven’t got an economic system that 

will provide jobs and opportunities for the people that want to 

work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — If you have a good economic system  

going, you shouldn’t have the welfare expanding and money 

being spent, you shouldn’t have the food banks, you shouldn’t 

have to increase taxation and cut programs. And I say to you: if 

you have an economic policy that’s working, why have you run 

up the most massive debt that this province has ever had to 

endure? 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, look at the credit rating of this 

province since you took over. The credit rating has dropped 

four or five points in its rating. That’s the position. That’s the 

hard, cold facts and realities of your economic policies. It’s 

been hardship for the people of this province and for the 

small-business men in this province. 

 

And you talk about diversifying the economy. Well I’ll tell you, 

under the previous government we had diversification. And I’ve 

used this before, I’ve used it before in my constituency, and I’ll 

tell you, not one of them came as a result of your economic 

policy. 

 

I’m going to run through the economic diversification that I 

have in my area. I’ve got over at Annaheim a manufacturing, 

manufacturing steel boxes and trailers for the transportation of 

grain, Doepker Industries. I’ll tell you, that came in under our 

administration. 

 

I go into the small community of St. Gregor, and what we have 

is Western Industries hiring people — local people — 

manufacturing steel boxes for farmers’ trucks. You just go half 

a block away and you got another manufacturing plant 

manufacturing windows, Michel’s, and manufacturing tarps, 

Michel’s. 
 

You go into Watson and you got exactly the same thing. You 

got the manufacturing of furniture, the 7 Oaks, which started 

under us. You go north of Watson, you got Dyna-Fab, 

manufacturing started under our administration. I go into 

Wynyard, and Wynyard you got the same thing. You got a 

whole base of industry that was started under our 

administration. And you go to Englefeld, you got Shulte 

Industries. 
 

I’ll tell you, the times were good for the business men in this 

province under the New Democratic Party. Their tills were 

ringing, I’ll tell you, when we were in government. The 

business men today say it’s never been so tough before, and 

they say it’s time for a change. 
 

So that’s the legacy that you’ve left behind. And you know, you 

say, we have no new ideas. And you know who they’re bringing 

into the province of Saskatchewan, into Saskatchewan, the 

privatizer for Margaret Thatcher, a member of the Adam Smith 

society. The Adam Smith — that’s right, the 18th century, he’s 

coming in — I think his name is Pirie Madsen or some . . . 

Madsen Pirie, that’s it, coming in. Adam Smith philosophy and 

they say it’s new. 
 

Old line, right-wing, free enterprise system that hasn’t worked 

in the past was discarded. They bring it back and they say, they 

got us something new going. And yet they don’t . . . And then 

they got their friends down in Vancouver — that right-winged 

organization called the Fraser Institute and they send their EAs 

down to get enlightened on how to think, think like Adam 

Smith did. He’s trying to indoctrinate them into thinking like 

Adam  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2846 

 

Smith or he will, in fact . . . they got some new ideas. 

 

This is the economic philosophy. There’s nothing new about it, 

Mr. Minister. It’s just jargon that you use. What’s so new about 

humming to a multinational corporation and saying, come into 

the province and we’ll give you our assets. Well right-wing 

governments have been doing that for a long time. That’s not 

new; that’s goofy though. It doesn’t make sense. It’s bad for the 

people of the province. 

 

But I’ll tell you the idea’s not new. You have been giving away 

the assets to multinational corporations and exactly as has been 

said before, the economic strategy that’s followed is the same, 

exactly the same, as what the late Ross Thatcher had, exactly 

the same clichés — open for big business. You can go into the 

library and you can pick up the document, and it’s word for 

word for what they used in the initial year of their operation. 

That’s what it is. 

 

And so I say to you, Mr. Minister, I don’t think there’s anything 

new in what you’re doing. I think what you’re doing is setting 

Saskatchewan back and now that’s . . . I suppose that’s new to 

Saskatchewan because we have been going ahead for many 

years in this province, a slight delay in the mid-60s, and again 

prosperity and growth under the New Democratic Party. And 

look at every single indicator you have, and I’ll tell you, you 

can’t be very, very proud of your record; at least, you shouldn’t 

be. 

 

You say, well, we’ve got to do something new with Saskoil, 

we’ve got to privatize it. That’s going to make it great for 

Saskatchewan. And they’re going to give them the chance to 

buy some undervalued chairs so they can make a few bucks, 

and they’ll follow you; that’s the old game. But you know what 

happened with Saskoil? You know what happened with Saskoil, 

Mr. Minister? Seventy-five per cent of the shares in Saskoil are 

now owned outside of this province. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Seventy. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Seventy-five per cent. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Seventy. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Seventy-five per cent, Mr. Deputy Premier. 

And they say that’s better for the Saskatchewan people. 

 

We owned all of Saskoil. In 1985, the last time a report was 

filed in the Crown corporation, we made $44 million in Saskoil 

— $44 million to the people of this province. And I wonder, 

Mr. Minister, whether the people of Saskatchewan are getting 

the same return from Saskoil, or are the shareholders outside of 

Saskatchewan doing the benefit now. 

 

And the other thing that happened is that when you privatized 

it, Saskoil left Saskatchewan, laid off employees here and went 

into Alberta. And you can’t deny that that happened. And 

they’re working in Alberta, and I’m not against developing the 

rest of the country, but one of the essential purposes of Saskoil 

was an exploratory company for Saskatchewan. And what 

you’re  

doing is losing the benefit of it. 

 

And you say it’s new ideas, giving a pulp mill away to 

Weyerhaeuser, that’s new; giving Saskoil away to outsiders 

outside of Saskatchewan, that’s really new. 

 

I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, in light of what you say that 

your stewardship has been so wonderful for the people of 

Saskatchewan, why are all the indicators . . . Why is the 

province in such fantastic or such dramatic shape that it is — 

such bad shape? I mean, look at . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Laugh, laugh. Sure. 

 

It’s not a laughing matter to the old people who are losing their 

drug programs. It’s not. It’s not a laughing matter, Mr. Deputy 

Premier. I’ll tell you it’s not a laughing matter that you’ve cut 

out the health care to that. The generator for the government’s 

revenue is dependent upon its economic growth, and what has 

happened here is, obviously the province is in very, very bad 

shape. You can’t deny that. 

 

(2115) 

 

And so what I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister: could you outline 

if you have done any studies, if you have any projections of 

what type of development that you are anticipating? Can you 

indicate to this House what negotiations that you’re carrying on 

at the present time and the likelihood of subsequent investment? 

And can you put it into some kind of a time frame, or do we 

have to wait to just before the next election? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — For those that follow closely the debates 

of the legislature, the member from Quill Lakes has posed that 

same, has posed . . . the member from the Quill Lakes has posed 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if the member from Quill 

Lakes, Mr. Chairman, is going to . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Allow the minister to make 

his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The member from the Quill Lakes has 

posed almost the identical question last year and the year before 

with regard to going through his details. And I would refer him 

back to Hansard, back to Hansard of a publication of 1983 or 

1984. The only thing new he’s got into this time is about public 

participation. 

 

Now he says this is a wrong-headed, right wing mentality; that 

you should rely on the private sector and private initiative. 

That’s what he’s saying. Now if you’re to look around the 

world at two fairly significant economies, People’s Republic of 

China under Deng Xiaoping, and what is he doing? He’s 

saying, let’s get the government out of this and let the private 

sector take hold, and let’s see if we can build something. And 

where he’s done that the most is in the agriculture sector, and 

he’s in fact allowed the economy and the agriculture economy 

of China to grow. 

 

Now the next guy that has now discovered that theory of the 

private sector and private initiative that he says is back to Adam 

Smith, is Gorbachev in the Soviet Union. And what Gorbachev 

is trying to do now is get through the  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2847 

 

bureaucracy, to get through the bureaucracy so Soviet people 

will be given private initiative so that can, in fact, build as well, 

because what they have said, and what Gorbachev has said 

publicly to the world and to the Soviet people, is the system 

does not work — the system of government control and 

government building stuff does not work. It doesn’t work in 

China, it doesn’t work in Russia, and it doesn’t work here. 

 

Now the member from the Quill Lakes is still to the view 

somehow that the government should own the oil companies, 

and it should own the mining companies, and it should own the 

farm land, and it should own the packing houses, and it should 

own everything. Now that is what he is saying. 

 

I read recently, I think last week or the week before — the week 

before — what it was saying in Business Week, and I would 

direct the member from Quill Lakes to read this column. What 

it said — that the Soviet Union today, that Gorbachev is to the 

right of the Democrats in the United States. So what’s that put 

him with regard to the New Democrats of Saskatchewan? 

Gorbachev, if you can believe, has got better right wing views, 

mentality, than you do. 

 

Now the member opposite says, you made a terrible mistake 

dealing with Saskoil and allowing the people to participate and 

own shares. Now that was not something done by the 

Department of Economic Development and Trade, but if he 

wants to raise it, we will sort of cover the waterfront, if you 

like. 

 

Now I happen to believe that it makes more sense for the 

private citizen to buy shares in a company like an oil company 

rather than for the government to own the shares of an oil 

company. Now as I argued with the member from Riversdale, 

you believe, as the member of Quill Lakes so eloquently stated 

the position, that you should not, we should not have sold or 

privatized or issued shares to Saskatchewan people in Saskoil. 

Now I happen to believe that we should have; and I think the 

people of Saskatchewan, quite frankly, believe that we should 

do that as well. I think the people of Saskatchewan would like 

to own some shares in a potash corporation or in a mining 

corporation or in an oil company. Now you don’t agree with 

that; I happen to agree with that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you talk about investment, and the NDP are really 

great at saying, you can’t have this big multinational investment 

in Canada. We don’t want you. Thank you very much; go on 

back home, particularly if you come from United States. Now 

look at the hypocrisy of the NDP. There’s Eddy Broadbent — 

Ed Broadbent’s riding in Oshawa. Now who has invested in 

Oshawa? Canadians? Hardly. It’s General Motors, Ford, and 

Chrysler. And that’s who has invested there, and that is 100 per 

cent American owned. 

 

Now it’s fine for Ed Broadbent to say, yeah, but that’s okay, 

those American investing in Canada, particularly if it’s in my 

riding. That’s okay, that’s fine. But we don’t want anybody 

investing out West. Don’t let them invest in Saskatchewan 

because they’re bad and dirty Americans. Okay for him. 

They’re okay for Ontario. They’re okay to drive their economy. 

They build good enough jobs for  

them. But no, no, don’t bring it out here. Don’t bring it out here. 

 

It’s okay for General Motors to invest in central Canada, in 

Oshawa and in Windsor, but no, no, you don’t do it out here 

because they are bad and they are ugly and they drain off 

dividends from us and they don’t do any research and 

development. It’s okay for my riding — I’ll look the other way 

on that. In fact, he probably tells the people of his riding that 

they are actually Canadian investments because it’s called 

General Motors of Canada. So that makes it okay because it’s 

got a different name on it, but it’s still owned by the Americans. 

 

I say to the people of Oshawa: good for you if you can attract a 

good investment, but it from United States or be it from Japan 

or from Europe or right here in Canada. If they are prepared to 

invest in that region and create jobs in that region, to build a 

product to sell around the world — good for you. 

 

But we say, why shouldn’t they be able to do it here as well. 

And why would you oppose somebody from the United States 

coming into this province to invest some money, to make some 

jobs; or somebody from another part of the country; or 

somebody from Japan? What’s wrong with foreign investment 

coming in here? And what is different of foreign investment 

coming into Saskatchewan or General Motors, Ford, and 

Chrysler investing in central Canada? What’s the difference? 

It’s just that they have a lot more of it than we do. And as the 

Premier says, I’d kind of like to have our share up so it’s about 

equal with Ontario. And I think that’s a fair request. 

 

I don’t know why the members opposite constantly stand up 

and say we are against public participation in Crown 

corporations, and why they constantly stand up and say certain 

investments are not welcome. And if that investment happens to 

have a headquarter in United States, you are not welcome here. 

That’s your theory, and that theory is wrong. It’s not whether 

it’s old or new, it’s wrong. And the Chinese are discovering 

that; and the Soviets are discovering that, and all of Europe is 

discovering that. But you still stand back and say, no, we want a 

Crown corporation and we want investment only from here, if 

we like them. But certainly not Americans — no, no, we don’t 

want Americans in here. And we don’t want Europeans if their 

company is too big. Let’s look for only the small guy. Let’s not 

expand our companies; let’s not expand our economy. And that 

mentality is not whether it’s right or wrong, because it is wrong. 

It is wrong all the way, and whether it is new or whether it is 

old. 

 

And perhaps if we go back in history, you can argue economics 

in two ways. You can argue left-wing economics or right-wing 

economics. I happen to believe that the world is moving 

towards private initiative, private investment, return on 

investment, and that’s a profit. That is ugly to you. We don’t 

look at it that way. And the people that have jobs in this 

country; that have relied on investment, shouldn’t look at it that 

way either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2848 

 

An Hon. Member: — Eric is the only sensible one. He’s not 

clapping. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — The only member that’s clapping of any degree 

is the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd, I guess, but he’s been 

clapping all night. 

 

I did as the minister a question. I wondered whether you could 

outline what significant new business developments and 

investment that you have under way, or negotiations, or 

studying, and could you give sort of an outline of the timetable 

of the expectation of it. But before I allow you to answer that 

question — and it’s the second time I’ve asked it now, and I 

hope you will remember it — I really appreciate your expertise 

on the Chinese economic system and the Russian system. I 

think that was so illuminating here, your great depth of 

knowledge that you have put forward and that was appreciated 

— not asked for, but very important — and I think 

tremendously significant to the topic at hand and the question 

that I asked. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And the unemployed Saskatchewan 

workers. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, and to the unemployed Saskatchewan 

workers, as my colleague said. 

 

So I want if you could outline, you know, your economic 

strategy. What are the expected investments, the timetable of 

them, and can you lay that out before the legislature here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I hope the hon. member can appreciate 

that if we’re in negotiations with a particular company, then we 

don’t want to announce that until such time as it has been 

completed. 

 

But let me deal with some of the things that we are looking at 

over the next five years. We fully expect in the next five years 

to build a new uranium mine in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Okay? Now you’re against that, but that’s fine. We’re going to 

build that. As I indicated . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Cigar Lake. Well you say there’s 

nothing new about it. We intend, with the partners that have 

been put together from Japan and from Korea and from 

Germany and from France and from Canada, to build a new 

uranium mine in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have just opened a new gold mine, and we would expect 

three or four more gold mines in northern Saskatchewan. Now 

that takes time to put them together, but we believe that’s a 

good initiative, the building of gold mine and the gold mining 

strategy. Now there’s been nothing built for 50 years and 

there’s a new gold mine now — we expect four more. 

 

In the forestry sector we are pursuing further development and 

refinement in the forestry sector, and we would hope to have an 

announcement in the near term on that. 

 

In the area of gas and oil, we would expect to see some further 

development over the next year or two, significant  

development in the area of oil and gas and further refinement of 

oil and gas. 

 

There is a series of perhaps 10 or 12 manufacturing 

opportunities that we are pursuing. I would dare say that you 

are likely to see a series of new manufacturing initiatives, many 

of them in the area of 100 new jobs, being announced over the 

period of the next 12 months from now. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think it’s a fair 

indication of the attention that you’re giving to the matters 

you’ve been talking about tonight, Mr. Minister, to look at your 

estimates and note how much money you’re spending in the 

running of your department, and I’m referring here to the 

ordinary expenditure estimates for the year ’87-88. I see the 

figure of $7,997,000. Now I asked for a comparative number as 

to how much you had spent in your first year when you were 

open for business. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hoping for business. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — When you were “hoping for business,” as my 

colleagues say. 

 

And I’m told that in the year 1982-83, which was before your 

tenure as minister, Mr. Minister, that the estimate for that year 

was $11,582,000 — a difference of $3.5 million. But the figure 

for 1987-88 includes payments to the Saskatchewan property 

management board which total over a million dollars, 

$1,130,300, and that of course, was a number that was not in 

existence until . . . well, you can tell me . . . well, no, I’m 

talking about ordinary expenditures, and I’m comparing 

ordinary expenditures for the running of the department, the 

administration of the department, for the administration of all of 

these things that you say you’re doing. And my information is 

that, if you look at the comparable figure for the same activity 

in 1982-83, it was $11,500,000. If it’s a mistake, no doubt 

you’ll point that out to me. 

 

I was saying to you though, that the figure for 1987-88 includes 

this payment to the Saskatchewan property management board 

which is a new number that didn’t exist in 1982-83. And so if 

you deduct that number, the amount that you’re dedicating to 

the administration of your department during this year is 

$6,867,000, which is quite a dramatic decrease. I mean we’re 

talking about almost $5 million, $4,700,000, and that would 

seem to be a rather dramatic drop. 

 

Now if my numbers are correct, Mr. Minister, how do you 

explain this drastic cut in expenditures over a five-year period 

which don’t even take into account the inflationary 

developments that have occurred over that five-year period? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well you’re comparing, and to be fair to 

the hon. member, if we want to compare the old industry, trade 

and commerce, or industry and commerce of the NDP, which 

you say was $11 million; now that has been expanded under our 

administration to Economic Development and Trade to Science 

and Technology and to Tourism and Small Business and to the 

fund. Now if  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2849 

 

you’re proud of $11 million, what those totals add up to now is 

$44 million, or four times as large as it was in 1982. And that’s 

the number you’re comparing. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well I’m surprised to hear that answer. My 

research doesn’t indicate that. My research indicated that the 

figure which is your figure, your first full year of government, 

1982-83 was $11,582,000, and that that was for the same items 

as are now included under ordinary expenditures in your 

department — not to do with the grants that have been brought 

in from tourism, and the grants that have been brought in from 

other parts of the department to be included in your figure now 

— but just the basic administration of the department? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Define that for me. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well, I’m asking you the question, Mr. 

Minister. It was your budget in 1982-83, and it’s your budget in 

1987-88, and if I’m wrong, tell me where I’m wrong. Now 

you’ve suggested that I overlooked the fact that there were 

things included in the 1982-83 budget that are not included 

here, and I’d like to know what they were. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I’m going to get the 1982-83 

Estimate book so that we can check that. Now you say 

administrative costs; that is the first item on most estimates. 

And I assume that that’s not what you’re talking about. I 

assume that what you’re talking about is the old department of 

industry and commerce of 1982-83, and the entire budget for 

that particular department. Is that what we’re talking about? 

 

Now but you’ve got the bottom line there. You must have your 

estimates if you’ve got your numbers you’re giving to me. Now 

if you’re saying, in 1982-83 the entire budget of industry and 

commerce was $11 million or the administrative costs was $11 

million; if the administrative costs today in this department is 

less than a million, so I would very much doubt and very much 

hope that there would not be 11 million in administration of the 

department of industry and commerce. I would expect that not 

to be the case. So I wonder if the hon. member could be . . . 

could clarify what his exact numbers that he’s referring to in 

1982-83. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Minister, what I’m referring to are all of the 

items under the ordinary expenditures of your department for 

this year, for this year, which are less than $8 million. And I 

don’t have the ’82-83 Estimates here on my desk, but my 

research information is that the estimated ordinary expenditure 

budget for ’82-83 was 11,500,000 — 5 million larger. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I think that was the entire . . .(inaudible) 

. . . 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well sure, and you’ve sent out for the 

Estimate book for 1982-83, and when that comes in, perhaps we 

can go back to this question and address it at that time. 

 

I want to turn to the industrial development grants . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Industrial incentive grants? 

Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, the industrial incentive grants. We’ve 

tried to analyse just where this money has gone, Mr. Minister, 

and to whom it’s gone. The information I have is that the total 

pay-outs under the government program since its inception was 

$24 million. Now if that’s not a right figure, I’d like to hear 

what it is, Minister, before I launch into the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Give me the question again, Bob. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — . . . $24 million under the IIP (industrial 

incentives program). 

 

An Hon. Member: — And what page of the Estimates are you 

referring to here? 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well, under the estimates that you now have 

it under the industrial development grants, which apparently 

includes the amounts committed under the IIP, and my question 

is: over the life of the IIP program, am I correct that the total 

amounts committed were in the vicinity of $24 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would advise the hon. member that the 

program was operational in three fiscal years. If you include the 

$7 million estimate of this year — it’s in this year’s estimates 

— that would come to about 14.5 million to date. There are 

presently 350 approved applications that have not yet met their 

commitment, because of time, and having the time passed and 

verified that the jobs that they’ve created. We would anticipate 

those 350 approved applications of perhaps $12 million; 11 to 

$12 million would be expended on that. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — So that would be 25, 26 million in total. And 

you’ve indicated that that’s a correct figure. 

 

With respect to this year’s estimate of $7 million under the 

industrial development grants, is that all industrial incentive 

program money or is that only partially IIP money. And if it’s 

only partially, what portion of it is industrial incentive program 

money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that about 95 to 98 per cent 

— and we don’t have that calculation here, is why I can’t 

respond — is IIP. Then there will be a smaller amount of 

money — 200, $300,000 — that is used for maybe a special 

project out of that fund, paid for special project or the people 

that don’t maybe quite qualify for it, that you can help them 

along, that type of thing. But IIP itself would be 95 to 98 per 

cent of that entire cost. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now I want to ask two questions at the same 

time because they’re short questions, Mr. Minister, but they’re 

related. 

 

First of all, you’ve mentioned the figure of 350 applicants that 

are awaiting finalization because they haven’t ripened, or you 

can’t yet calculate what their total entitlement is. And then 

there’d be another category where the amount has already been 

paid, or the entitlement has been earned. The figure that I have 

is a total of 480. My first question to you is: is that a correct 

number, or what is the correct number? 

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2850 

 

An Hon. Member: — Paid out so far? 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well paid out so far, and to that add the 350 

to give me a grant total. 

 

My second question has to do with the amount of the grant, and 

it is this. My understanding of the program when it was 

announced is that you would pay $7,500 per job for new jobs 

created. My question is: is that the formula that has been 

applied to all of the grants paid under that program? 

 

So I’ve got the two questions, Minister. What are the total 

number of applicants, either paid or pending? That is approved 

applicants. And secondly, has the $7,500 formula been followed 

invariably, or have there been exceptions to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that there are 

approximately, to the end of the last fiscal year, 150 pay-outs 

under IIP, and there are 350 to go. That would be a total of 

about 500 when the program has run its course. Any pay-outs 

under IIP are to $7,500, and that’s as high as you can pay under 

IIP. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now, Minister, of the 500 that have either 

been paid or are pending, can you take the 10 largest ones, the 

10 that are going to involve the largest pay-outs — either 

money that you already paid out or that you estimate that you 

will be paying out. Take the 10 largest payments and give me 

the total figure on that, the total amount of money that will be 

paid out in respect of those 10 largest projects. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’ve got the numbers here for ’86-87. 

The ones before that I think I would refer you to the Public 

Accounts under the . . . if you look through the Public Accounts, 

you will see the IIP set out, I believe in Public Accounts, in how 

much was paid out to each company. 

 

But if I can go through the ones here, let’s say that exceed 

$50,000. Brake & Drive Systems — $52,000; Carlyle Alfalfa 

Processors — $47,000; Creative Touch Millworks Inc., wood 

classic custom cabinets — 101,000; Dyna-Fab Industries Ltd., 

Quill Lakes Savings and Credit Union, I assume that that’s 

probably just paid out to the credit union on assignment or 

something; that was $55,000; Falconridge Development — 

$90,000; Flexi-Coil in Saskatoon was $757,000 — that was 

probably the largest one that year; Humboldt Credit Union, 

Commercial Industry Manufacturing — $117,000 — that was 

again paid to Humboldt Credit Union; Intercontinental Packers 

in Saskatoon — $727,000 in last year; L.E. Matchett Trucking 

Company — $52,000; Rose Beverages (1964) Ltd. — $45,000; 

Saskatoon Oilfield Manufacturing — $218,000; SED Systems 

— $157,000; SED Systems Ltd. — $262,000; Syri-Con Ltd. — 

$84,000; West Can Photo Ltd. — $112,000. 

 

And there’s lot of them at 7,500 and two times that or three 

times that. So those were the largest ones during last year. The 

ones this year, of course, you haven’t got them until such time 

as the people have completed the  

conditions. And until they complete the conditions, we pay 

nothing out. And the ones before that you’ll find in Public 

Accounts. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Well, I asked a much larger question of 

course, than the one that you answered, and I am interested in 

knowing the answer to my first question. Based on the research 

that we’ve done, Mr. Minister, I’m going to tell you what we 

think we’ve found. Now you’ve got the figures, and you’ll be 

able to confirm, overnight probably, whether we’re on the 

wrong track and whether we’re wrong, and if so in what 

respects. 

 

But looking at the Public Accounts, and looking at the press 

releases, and looking at what we’ve been able to find out, 

Minister, it would seem to us that some very small number of 

successful applicants account for a very, very large share of the 

total dollars spent and to be spent in this program — that is, of 

the successful applicants today, including the ones who have 

been paid and the ones not paid. And it would seem to us that 

the seven largest companies — I used the figure 10, but I’ve got 

figures for seven in front of me — seven largest companies 

account for something like 40 per cent of the grants that have 

been paid, or will be paid, under this program. 

 

Now if that’s more or less correct, Mr. Minister, what does that 

say about the philosophy of this program? I mean, how does 

that help the small-business people in this province who are 

looking for modest expansions and unable to afford them, 

looking for ways of funding modest increases to their plant or 

modest new plants? It seems to me that most of the money 

spent under this program has landed in the pockets of your big 

operators. 

 

Now we use the name Gainers over and over again, and I think 

I’m correct in saying that Gainers stands, Pocklington stands, at 

a very high level in this program. He’s certainly in the top two 

or three for beneficiaries under this program. And there are 

others too. But the point that I want to make, and that I’d like 

you to respond to is: a relatively small number of applicants 

have hogged the lion’s share of this program, perhaps as much 

as 50 per cent of this program since its inception in 1984. And I 

wonder what kind of a philosophy that reflects so far as 

Saskatchewan small business is concerned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me make a couple of observations. 

Number one, I think you have to appreciate the Department of 

Economic Development and Trade tends to deal with the larger 

firms and with more into the manufacturing sector. We also 

have a Department of Tourism and Small business whose prime 

job is to deal with the small business sector of the province. 

And so I think it’s unfair to sort of somehow suggest that this is 

only for small business. That’s number one. So that you might 

ask the Minister of Tourism and Small Business, when his 

estimates come, on other programs delivered to small business 

— and there’s many of those, and I think many of them are very 

successful. So I don’t think it’s fair to say that we’re not 

concerned about small business, because clearly we are. 

 

The second deal is that when this program was brought in, it 

was brought in based on two factors. If you created a job, it 

seemed to us that if it was a job in a small business  

  



 

September 24, 1987 

2851 

 

or a job in a big business, it was still a job — and a job is a job. 

And sometimes . . . if it was the Intercontinental Packers and 

they would expand with this program — and would not expand 

but for this program — it was still a good job, and that job 

carried on year after year. 

 

It cost the government $7,500. And I think by any standards, if 

you look at governments across this country, if they could 

spend $7,500 to create one job and that job lasts for a long 

period of time, then I would say that was positive. So I don’t 

think you want to distinguish — and I don’t think the hon. 

member would want to distinguish — and say well, we 

shouldn’t. The biggest ones that were given last year were SED 

Systems. Now is it wrong to give SED Systems that grant if that 

grant was enough to encourage them to hire people and create 

jobs in the high-tech field? I don’t believe so. 

 

Or Intercontinental Packers, or West Can Photos. And you go 

through each of those. I don’t think it would be fair to say 

Intercontinental Packers was the biggest one. Then SED 

Systems; now Flexi-Coil would be the second biggest one, both 

Saskatchewan companies, and I would hope that the hon. 

member would say that just because there are a certain number 

of employees, or they’ve expanded a large number of jobs, that 

they should not be included. I think that’s not fair. 

 

With regard to the first question asked by the hon. member. I 

have the estimates from ’82-83, and there was a total 

expenditure of $11,926,890, total expenditure for department of 

industry and commerce. And the year before that was eleven 

million eighty-one sixty-four. Now if you compare apples to 

apples, we have three departments plus the fund, and the 

expenditure on business side if you like — if you want to lump 

those all into business side — is now $44 million as opposed to 

$11 million. Now you might say that that is too large of an 

increase, but we believe that there should be more dollars, in 

fact, allocated from government to the business sector than 

perhaps was under your administration. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 p.m. 

 


