




















































September 23, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 September 23, 1987 
 
 

2783 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Private Members’ Bills 

 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Britton, as Vice-Chairman of the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills, presents the 
second report of the said committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the following Bills and 
has agreed to report the same with amendment: 
 
Bill No. 01 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities 
 
Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend an Act to incorporate the 
Briercrest Bible College 
 
Your committee has considered the following Bill and 
agreed to report the same without amendment: 
 
Bill No. 03 — An Act respecting Our Lady of the Prairies 
Foundation. 
 
Your committee recommends, under the provisions of 
Rule 58, that fees be remitted less the cost of printing with 
respect to Bills No. 02 and 03. 

 
Mr. Britton: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move: 
 
That the second report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 
 
Moved by myself and seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
South. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
to you and to all members of the House a distinguished visitor 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, in the Speaker’s gallery, Senator 
Eugene Forsey, from Ottawa, who all will recognize as a 
distinguished political scientist and scholar. If anyone could 
justify the existence of the Canadian Senate, it’s Senator 
Forsey. And I would ask all members to join in welcoming Dr. 
Eugene Forsey. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 
Leader of the Opposition and all hon. members in welcoming 
Senator Forsey to our Assembly this afternoon. In the time that 
I had to serve in the House of Commons in Ottawa in the 1970s, 
I had the opportunity to meet and to work with the Senator in a 
number of  

capacities at that time. He obviously has served his country 
well, and I am delighted to join in the welcome to him to our 
Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Suspension of Free Trade Negotiations with United States 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Economic Development and Trade, and it deals 
with the announcement a couple of hours ago that Canada has 
suspended free trade negotiations with the United States. My 
question to the minister is this: when did the Prime Minister 
inform the Government of Saskatchewan of this decision, and 
can the minister give to this House and the people of 
Saskatchewan a status report on these negotiations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to 
the hon. member’s question, the Premier was advised this 
morning, I suspect about the same time that most of the nation 
was advised, that Mr. Reisman had suspended negotiations; that 
the Canadian negotiating team was returning to Ottawa for 
meetings in consultation with the Prime Minister and the 
cabinet. 
 
The Premier is, at this moment in time, meeting with the Prime 
Minister on this particular question and other trade-related 
questions. It would appear, from statements by the Prime 
Minister and from conversations that I’ve had just moments ago 
with the Premier, that the Americans are not prepared to move 
on the most basic of Canada’s demands, that being clear rules to 
deal with trade disputes arising between the two countries. 
 
The Premier has made it clear some time ago, and continues to 
make it clear, that we want a system where the Americans do 
not make the rules, change the rules, and appoint the referee to 
deal with those rules. If the Americans are not prepared to agree 
to make a deal on that basis, then I think it is very clear that we 
are not prepared to make a deal with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Reisman in quoted as saying that he left the table because the 
U.S. negotiators were not, as the minister suggests, addressing 
issues that Canada felt were fundamental to an agreement. 
 
Now is the position of your government that the issue of a 
binding trade dispute mechanism is the only fundamental 
difference responsible for the suspension of negotiations, or 
were there other fundamental differences such as, for example, 
the structure of Canadian agriculture? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can read from the release of the  
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2784 
 
 

Prime Minister which indicates, I think, as all have read: 
regional development was also a concern. I think what we’re 
talking about there is the DRIE (Department of Regional 
Industrial Expansion) type of structure of this country where 
regional development is pursued, as well as some cultural 
assistance. It makes no mention of agriculture, and I would dare 
say that the agriculture at this point in time of the negotiations 
is clearly not holding it up. 
 
What I can say to the hon. member is this, though, and I think 
that we all should recognize the fact that American 
protectionism is real, and American protectionism is extremely 
ugly. And that impacts not only most Canadians, but 
particularly it impacts people of our province. 
 
We have a total embargo now of all sales of 
Saskatchewan-produced uranium into the United States. We 
have severe tariffs on our potash being exported into the United 
States. We have a 15 per cent tariff on softwood lumber 
produced in this province being exported into the United States. 
We have countervail duties against Ipsco (Interprovincial Steel 
and Pipe Corporation). We have problems associated with the 
export of live hogs or dressed hogs into the United States. 
Those restrictions, that protectionism, strikes the heart of every 
citizen of our province. It is fundamentally dealing with 
virtually every industry in this province. 
 
Now I say, Mr. Speaker, and to the hon. member, that is 
extremely serious. Now this country set about to rationally 
negotiate a deal with the Americans. We still hope, even though 
they are suspended, that two countries, the two largest trading 
countries in the world, can come to a rational bilateral 
agreement. If that is not to be the case, then clearly this country 
is going to have to reassess and deal with the Americans in a 
tough way, in a tough way that we have demonstrated to the 
people of our province when we dealt with the potash issue as it 
had faced our people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I want 
the minister to be as clear as possible about the status of 
negotiations. Other than a binding dispute resolution 
mechanism, which I take it you have said is fundamental, are 
there other issues which your government considers 
fundamental and which must be part of any agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I think our Premier has 
made it fairly clear from the outset. And a very, very significant 
point of these negotiations has been the following: what we as 
Saskatchewan need, whether it’s our workers or whether it’s 
our industries, is access to a very large and very lucrative U.S. 
market. We trade over 50 per cent of all that we produce to the 
United States — 50 per cent. That’s lower than most provinces, 
but it’s still significant. We trade our oil, our potash, our 
uranium, our softwood lumber. That is a very fundamental and 
important market. 
 

What we wish to obtain from these agreements, or these 
negotiations, is an access to that market, an assured access to 
that market. And in order to have an assured access to that 
market, we must have a method by which we settle disputes, by 
which we have clear sets of rules to settle those disputes. So 
those are the two fundamental things that we must deal with. 
And why do we need access to that U.S. market? If we are to 
diversify our economy, to expand our economy, that means 
developing the red meat industry for example — a most 
important one — then we must have assured access to that 
market. Without it agriculture will be in trouble, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So fundamental to us is access to market for our resources, 
access to market for our agricultural products, and in return, Mr. 
Speaker, we allow the American product to come into here, 
probably cheaper than we’re paying now. That’s a win-win 
situation for Saskatchewan consumers and Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address a 
question to the Minister of Energy. 
 
As you may be aware, I have a Canadian Press report indicating 
that the final U.S. ruling on whether to penalize Canadian 
potash has, in fact, been delayed by the Department of 
Commerce until early next year, increasing the possibility of a 
negotiated settlement. Indeed, there are comments indicated by 
some of the officials that this delay means that the American 
and Canadian governments may very well sit down and start 
negotiating a settlement in respect to the levies or the tariffs that 
have been put on our potash. 
 
When this question . . When we referred this to you, Madam 
Minister, when you were putting through the resources Bill . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I know that the 
hon. member has a great deal to say, but his preamble is getting 
a little lengthy, and a long preamble will, unfortunately, 
provoke a long response which we don’t want. I know the 
member can . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you. I was about to ask the question 
with the background so the minister would be aware of the 
question that I was going to ask. 
 
In the House when we indicated to you, Madam Minister, that a 
negotiated settlement is what you should be looking at, initially 
getting the federal government involved — that is what the 
member from Riverdale indicated. And at that time you said: 
this process of anti-dumping is . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Now I realize 
that the hon. member wants to build his case, but I do also 
realize, and I’m sure the hon. member does, that there has to be 
a reasonable limit to that. So I’m asking him to please put his 
question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I was about to ask the question, just as I was 
the first time. The question . . . As you indicated,  
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2785 
 
 

Madam Minister, you said negotiated settlement wouldn’t 
work; it was legal presentation; no amount of government 
intervention would help. Today it says in the press . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please! I 
think the hon. member, who is very well experienced in this 
House and is a respected member — he’s been here for many 
years — knows that his preamble is getting much too long. And 
now I ask the hon. member to put his question directly, without 
any further preamble or else give up his place. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Madam Minister, I think you will know the 
purpose of my question. I’ve indicated it three times. And I’m 
going to ask you now: the press is indicating that negotiated 
settlement, intervention by the government . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, please! 
Next question. 
 

Investment by SaskPen in Real Estate 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the question we will 
address yet in this question period. I have a question to the 
Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, in 1983 you created a vehicle 
for government-administered pension funds to speculate — and 
I emphasize the word to “speculate” — on commercial real 
estate, and I refer to the SaskPen Properties Ltd., a Crown 
agency which you established. That decision was strongly 
opposed by the Provincial Auditor at that time. Yesterday, a 
senior official of your department sent this memorandum to the 
legislature’s Public Accounts Committee, and it raises cause for 
great concern. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, that it reads in part as follows: 
 

SaskPen audited financial statements for the years ended 
1984 and 1985 are now being finalized. The delay in their 
finalization has been due to concerns expressed by the 
Provincial Auditor about the evaluation of certain real 
estate properties. 

 
Mr. Minister, will you inform this House which those real estate 
properties are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I think the hon. member is, as the 
practice opposite, over-reacting to, and putting his own 
interpretation on, the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the pension plans have been investing in real 
property even under the hon. member’s term as minister of 
Finance. And, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member wants 
documentation of that, and I notice that he is not denying it, that 
the vehicle was established, I gather, some three years ago to 
actually handle those investments within the pension plan. 
 
I’m not aware of the specific problem that the member refers to. 
I’ll take notice of that, but to indicate that this is something new 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question to the Minister of 
Finance, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, this system was established 
in 1983. It had never before existed, and never before has the 
Provincial Auditor questioned the investments that were made 
as he has done since 1983. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You, Minister, are responsible for the 
investment of the pension money of tens of thousands of 
Saskatchewan citizens, and that includes teachers’ pension 
funds, all government employees, and now for anyone who 
contributed to the Saskatchewan pension plan. 
 
This memorandum from your official says that the Provincial 
Auditor has expressed concern about the valuation of some of 
the investments which you have made in the commercial real 
estate market. And I will wait to see what your response will be 
to the question you have taken notice, but I ask you one more 
question: will you also provide to this Assembly information on 
how much the Provincial Auditor is suggesting that these real 
estate investments have been overvalued? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I will, as I’ve indicated, be 
taking notice of the question. I will advise the hon. member that 
as to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. If the hon. member’s taking notice of 
the previous question, he has done that. Order. But if he wishes 
to make any comments, it must address the question the hon. 
member just asked without taking advisement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand corrected. 
I would advise the hon. member that it was that minister of 
Finance and the now Leader of the Opposition that invested in 
Northlands Bank — invested in Northlands Bank — and the 
Hon. Members know that they invested in that bankrupt bank, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Why is the 
member . . . Order! Why is the member on her feet. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The member is on her feet . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — There’s no points of order during question 
period. I recognize the member for Regina Victoria. Order, 
please. I think we’ll go to the member for Regina Victoria. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, the Provincial Auditor has expressed concerns about 
your real estate investments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Do you deny that in 1986 auditors 
expressed concerns about the value of real estate held by First 
Investors Corporation and Associated Investors corporations, 
and that a year later these companies were out of business? Do 
you deny that federal authorities  
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2786 
 
 

expressed deep concern about the value of real estate held by 
Pioneer Trust, and that within a year that company had 
collapsed? Did you learn nothing from the collapse of those 
corporations, Mr. Minister? And do you really think that 
speculating in commercial real estate is a safe and prudent way 
to be investing the Saskatchewan pension funds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, after that display of someone 
doing a characterization of a barking seal, I would calm the hon. 
member down, ask him to relax for a minute and enjoy the roses 
a bit and take a look around and settle down. 
 
The fact is that the investment funds within this province, over 
a long period of time, including previous administrations, have 
made real property investments. They try and make them in the 
most secure investments that they can. They have also made 
some equity investments, and that goes back over a long period 
of time and have been debated in this House previously, Mr. 
Speaker. So for the hon. member wanting to suggest that there’s 
any change in policy — no, there’s been no change in policy. 
 
Secondly, I’ve indicated to the hon. member that I will take 
notice and get the information back to him. In the meantime, 
relax, because the Minister of Health is not here to help out with 
whatever attack he just had. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. To listen 
to the Minister of Finance is to gain an impression that 
somehow this is a minor and irrelevant affair. Mr. Minister, if it 
has been so minor that it is still unresolved more than three 
years later after your government first presented the Provincial 
Auditor with a proposed financial statement, if this problem is 
so minor, why are you still fighting with the Provincial Auditor 
about SaskPen Properties’ financial statements for ’84,’85, and 
’86? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think it fair to say that it is not uncommon 
for the Provincial Auditor and other auditors to differ as to the 
valuation of assets. We have the issue which has already been 
discussed which is the valuation of the Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker. So again I simply indicate to the hon. member if he 
believes that the investment in real property is new, that there is 
from time to time a difference in valuation is new, then he is 
sadly mistaken. 
 
I have indicated that I will take notice, and indicate as well that 
in the past there have been equity investments, there have been 
real property . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a short supplementary to 
the minister. Is he aware of any other  

Crown agencies that have not presented audited statements for 
the 1984 year, or any subsequent year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I notice that the hon. member didn’t ask me 
about the NDP investment in Northland Bank, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
get him the answer on both. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the 
Minister of Finance saying that he doesn’t know whether there 
are Crown corporations who have not presented an audited 
financial statement since 1984. Is he saying that he has to look 
that one up. Are there so many? Or are you saying that you 
won’t tell this House today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I said I would get the information and also 
get the information of the NDP investment in the bankrupt 
Northland Bank, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Delay of Ruling on Potash Levies 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We are going to hold the minister to 
his words. The bank must be bankrupt when we invested. 
That’s what he said. That’s what he said. 
 
Now I want to ask a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes indeed, 
yes indeed. There were years to sell if you didn’t like to . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. 
 
I want to ask a question of the Minister of Energy. Madam 
Minister, you will be aware of today’s press reports indicating a 
delay, a delay in the application of the duties. You’ll be aware 
that people are suggesting that this gives an opportunity for 
negotiations. 
 
Recently in this House you suggested that negotiations were 
irrelevant; that this was a matter which would be dealt with at a 
quasi-judicial hearing, and lobbying wouldn’t help. Madam 
Minister, are you telling us that you didn’t engage in political 
discussions, in political negotiations, in early 1987? Did you 
engage in those negotiations? If not, why not? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’d like to ask 
the hon. member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden to please allow the 
minister to answer the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I’m aware 
of the delay. I might add that that delay has been on the part of 
the request coming from the companies, or the producers, who 
some time ago requested some extra time in order to prepare 
their case to present to the Department of Commerce in 
Washington, before the final determination came down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there’s been a very liberal interpretation, 
and I would ask the Leader of the Opposition to go back and 
review Hansard. 
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2787 
 
 

The issue of negotiations, the question put to me was: why did 
you not negotiate with New Mexico? And I believe my answer 
is fairly clear — we did not. And I also believe that’ what the 
member from Quill Lakes was going to eventually get at when 
he finally got his question out. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it is still clear: our discussions took place with 
the Department of Commerce when the first step of the process 
was in place, and that was to do with the International Trade 
Commission who examines if, in fact, injury is caused. 
 
And we, in support of our producers, talked to the Department 
of Commerce; we talked about the impact and why we did not 
think there was injury caused by the producers of 
Saskatchewan. Those discussions took place, Mr. Chairman, 
and through our counsel further discussions took place with the 
Department of Commerce. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can the 
minister confirm that today in Ottawa the Premier is asking the 
Prime Minister to intervene at the political level to negotiate a 
settlement of this dispute on potash duties and levies? And if 
you can confirm that, can you advise the House why this didn’t 
happen months ago before the situation reached this level of 
gravity? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not at liberty to answer 
for what the Premier is discussing with the Prime Minister on 
the trade matters. 
 
Licensing Companies under The Investment Contracts Act 

 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Consumer Affairs. Madam Minister, we’ve just 
heard how your government has been completely unable to 
police and to regulate itself with respect to sound financial 
management, and that explains a lot why you failed so 
miserably to protect the Saskatchewan investors and depositors 
in the collapse of the Principal Group. 
 
Can the minister confirm that her department licensed only 
three companies under The Investment Contracts Act to do 
business in Saskatchewan this year, and that two of those three 
companies, First Investors and Associated Investors — and can 
she explain how the regulation of just three companies was too 
massive a job for her department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 
member’s question that she cackled and squawked out: that 
question was asked initially in some time early July, and 
Saskatchewan has only ever, ever since the introduction of The 
Investment Contracts Act, licensed three companies to sell 
investment contracts in the province. 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before order of the 
day, I rise to present and table a document signed by hundreds 
of Saskatchewan people who are concerned about the 
government’s mismanagement of the Saskatchewan 
transportation corporation and opposed to the government 
selling it. 
 
These people are from communities as far apart as Leross and 
Admiral. The minister responsible for STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) has also received many similar 
documents . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I’m sure 
that the hon. member has many comments he would like to say; 
however, in tabling documents the tradition and practice of the 
House has been that the hon. member rises, states what the 
document is, and tables it. There isn’t really any room for a 
debate on it. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just going to 
invite the minister to table the documents he has also received 
on this very subject. 
 
I hereby table the documents. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Constitution Amendment, 1987 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Devine. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be presenting my amendment, 
like I said, at the end . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The hon. 
member from Cumberland wishes to begin his remarks, but the 
noise level is a little too high within the whole House, and I 
therefore ask hon. members to please co-operate and allow the 
member to make his remarks. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In my talk today, Mr. 
Speaker, I will be presenting my arguments and make an 
introduction to my argumentation. I’ll also do a short historical 
overview of the situation. 
 
Yesterday when I spoke in Cree, you will notice that I went 
through some dates, which signalled the fact that I was dealing 
with a situation in an historical context; and also I will be 
dealing with the situation in detail. My amendment will be 
dealing more specifically with the issue of aboriginal people, so 
for all intents and purposes I have shifted most of my historical 
information, and also the specifics in regards to the Meech 
Lake-Langevin accord, in that context. So I will be debating, 
you know, the issue in regards to the aboriginal people’s 
question, and also the issue of also the French in Canada, and 
also  
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2788 
 
 

the provinces. 
 
I stated yesterday that it was indeed extremely important for me 
in dealing with this particular issue, I mentioned, not only are 
we dealing with the supreme law of this land, you know, at an 
historic time, but we are also dealing with a situation in a 
particular context when we are dealing with two and three 
major nationalities in Canada — the English, the French, and 
aboriginal people. And the context was such that they were only 
one month apart in the process where the accord with aboriginal 
people was finished, you know, in March 27 of ‘87, and the 
Meech Lake proceeded at the end of April. So as I look to it in 
an historical context, I notice its importance. 
 
But I also mentioned yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that on a personal 
level it is very important for me that I am also a Cree, as I spoke 
in Cree yesterday, but I am also a Metis in terms of nationality 
in Canada. I am also of French ancestry. So as I deal with the 
issue, it is also not only of a socio-historical problem for me, it 
is also a personal problem as well as a personal issue, as well. 
 
I must state at the beginning, at the outset, that the 
self-determination of aboriginal people, a self-determination of 
the French, and indeed very important issues which I support in 
the Canadian context. And as I will proceed with the 
argumentation, that’s the basis that I look at from a personal 
level and also from a socio-historical level. 
 
As I look back in the short period of time in the past as I was 
trying to get some information, because I knew that our school 
system was deficient in providing me with the information in 
having a complete and dynamic understanding of our Canadian 
history, I was also deficient in understanding the constitutional 
and the political interests that lie behind decision making in 
Canada. 
 
As I looked at the process, it struck me that we were indeed 
proceeding at too great . . . in haste. We were rushing through a 
process. On the one hand we were saying, it’s extremely 
important. On the other hand we were rushing through the 
process. So as I make these statements . . . they are made with 
the basis of, again, the historical background of our schooling 
system that needs to do a lot more improvement, not only in the 
learning of Canadian history, but also being able to practise the 
dynamic political processes that exist for us, you know, for a lot 
of people. 
 
I would say that I am very disappointed that this process is too 
short. It bothers me, too, that when we put forth the information 
in regards to getting public participation, the people in this 
legislature, the government, the PC government, said no to the 
people of Saskatchewan. That, I indeed had a problem with. It’s 
as if you were saying: here we have this great, supreme law of 
Canada, but we do not respect the people of Saskatchewan and 
their input and their opinion. 
 
So as I deal with the issue, I had a problem on a substantive 
basis with the overall process that we were going through. So 
what I hear and I am learning, for example, from the different 
people who are right now  

dealing with the issue, I am learning along the way like 
everybody else. 
 
Some people state that politics and also the constitution are not 
bread and butter issues. But my own view, Mr. Speaker, is that 
it’s the opposite. I think we know very clearly that the effect of 
the new constitution, in regards to the Meech Lake-Langevin 
accord, will show that it affects programming at the 
federal-provincial levels. It also affects programming in regards 
to the questions that we have to deal with in the future on 
multiculturalism and also in regards to aboriginal people. And I 
feel that when somebody sometimes tells me that this is not a 
bread and butter issue, it is indeed a naive knowledge about our 
system. It would be the same way as saying that the 
proceedings of this legislature does not have economic and 
social consequences. We know that of course they do, and of 
course the constitution will also have the bread and butter issues 
that we will have to deal with as we move into the future. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll give a bit of an historical — my 
own historical understanding of the issue of dealing with the 
French in Canada. 
 
My understanding is this, that in the period after the early 
1500s, and the 1600s, of course there was fight for territory in 
Canada, and alliances were made with the aboriginal people 
from the two different groups, and even four different groups of 
European continents that settled in North America. And the 
process culminated of course with the defeat of the French in 
the Seven Years War, and the proclamation then was made for 
British North America. 
 
In that regard, in 1763 it must be remembered that existing laws 
had been there already with the French, that a French civil 
system had been established, and French seigniorial law had 
been established already in Canada. And that was well-known. 
As a matter of fact, people at that point in time called it New 
France. But a lot of the things during that period in time pointed 
then, you know, to the aspect of expansion, the expansion of 
territory throughout the world. 
 
With the British gaining, I guess winning the war at that point 
in time, there was also another important second aspect to 1763 
that a lot of people forget. And I will shift now into the 
aboriginal question. 
 
Many people do not recognize that just in that period in time an 
Indian chief by the name of Pontiac made an alliance with 18 
tribes and nations — as the terminology was in those days — 
and that Pontiac had taken several British ports, which showed 
their political and military strength at that point in time. It was 
well recognized that the Iroquois had kept at bay the French for 
about 100 years during that period in time. So that it was there 
that a certain amount of respect between nations was taking 
place. 
 
When the proclamation of 1763 was signed in regards to 
aboriginal people, that land west of there belonged to aboriginal 
people; that indeed it had to be done on the basis of a treaty; 
that indeed this treaty could no longer be done on an individual 
basis; that it had to be done in  
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2789 
 
 

public and in public context. It’s much the same way when we 
do constitutional arrangements and we’re on camera. It had to 
be in session. It had to be to the public, so that nobody could 
make any secret deals on an individual level. 
 
(1445) 
 
So that was well recognized at that point in time. And the 
significance of that came about through the pressure of the 
aboriginal people in that historical period. 
 
But there was also a second aspect of that historical period that 
we are dealing with today still, and that was the beginnings of 
what I can “American expansionism.” It was the genesis and the 
roots of the United States of America. You must recall — 1763 
was just a few years prior to the American Revolution which 
occurred in 1776. We also recognize that the problems were 
occurring with then the 13 colonies at that point in time in 
history. So there was, when the agreement was made with 
Indian people that all lands west of the mountains — it included 
all the United States, right up to the Ohio area, Kentucky, and 
all these areas. That was Indian territory, and it was agreed 
upon that that’s the way it was. 
 
And there was another reason for British interest in regards to 
looking at two separate growing nations because things were 
already developing also in other parts of the world, and that 
there was already beginning to be a feeling of independence 
even with the 13 colonies — that there had to be a way of 
keeping the 13 colonies intact, so that they don’t take over the 
lands in the more fertile Ohio and Kentucky regions. And this 
pact, this treaty, was then made with the British knowing that it 
was basically as a curb in the future American expansionism 
that would happen later on. 
 
As I talk today, we talk about free trade, and it’s the same type 
of expansionism, only on the economic realm. In that time it 
was of a military nature. 
 
As we went forth in history, aboriginal people, of course, a lot 
of them died through the smallpox — one-half to three-quarters 
of the Indian people in Saskatchewan area died in 1781-82. 
People debate in history whether or not it was deliberate, but it 
was clear right from the 15 and 1600s that smallpox and the 
immunity of smallpox, that particular knowledge that Indian 
people did not have the immunity. And the particular general, a 
person by the name General Amherst, who fought Pontiac in 
1763, wanted to use germ warfare against Pontiac in regards to 
smallpox, and that was clearly in the historical record by E.E. 
Rich in his three volumes of the Hudson Bay Company. 
 
But later on there was a debate, because General Amherst 
happened to show up in the United States where the smallpox 
blankets would spread the smallpox all over the place — 
spread. And of course there is specific debate as to whether or 
not it was deliberate. Of course, General Amherst knew what to 
do with smallpox because he had stated so during the battles 
around 1763, and it was later on that they found in the same 
area where these blankets had come from. Of course there is 
still historical debate on that particular. 

The point I’m trying to make is that in that particular time the 
military and political strength of aboriginal people was greatly 
diminished throughout Canada, and even including western 
Canada. And a lot of the changes occurred, you know, also in 
regards to becoming part of the fur trade and getting involved in 
the fur trade, and also with the Northwest Company, and also 
with the Hudson Bay Company. 
 
There is a lot to tell in the history also with the French, because 
at that particular point in time we had the Quebec Act, 1774 — 
1775, I mean. And that Quebec Act was basically done because 
they were scared that the revolution that was taking place in the 
United States might move into Canada, and that the British 
presence might in fact be taken over in Canada through the 
American influence. 
 
And that agreement was therefore made with Quebec people 
which would give them their first distinct society clause in the 
history of British and French interaction in Canada. The first 
distinct society clause shoed that the French civil law would 
then become part of the Quebec Act; that in fact, you know, the 
culture, religion, and language of the French would now 
become recognized in the system. And as things moved on, 
there was also a promise of an assembly, but that never really 
did happen until the Constitutional Act of 1791, and when the 
assembly established Upper and Lower Canada. 
 
Later on, of course, because there was lack of self-government, 
there was lack of self-determination for the French, it moved 
into an area where there was the rebellions of Upper and Lower 
Canada in 1837-1838. And it was particularly at the time of the 
monopoly for the aboriginal people; that was particularly at the 
time of the monopoly of the Hudson Bay Company. And at that 
time the Hudson Bay monopoly was . . . their basic message 
was, you have to treat the Indian people with a rod of iron. You 
know, you have to treat them extremely strict and because they 
had the monopoly on the trade after the French companies had 
been done away with by 1820. So that’s the context; that’s the 
historical context. 
 
There was a fight for self-determination as you saw it with also 
the Metis in the early 1800s. And also at the same time treaties 
were being made, there was pre-confederation treaties that were 
being made at that point in time. But because of time, I will 
make a bit of a historical jump and go into 1849 period. 
 
It’s interesting at that point in time that they made an 
amendment to the 1841 Act of (the) Union, you know, 
according to the recommendation of Durham. Of course that 
would be representative government in Canada, but later on it 
would move into an appointed . . . it was an appointed council 
system. 
 
But a lot of people were dissatisfied with that, and that was the 
reason why of the rebellions of 1837-38. But the Act of (the) 
Union supposedly gave representative government, and to a 
certain extent it did. But as it unfolded in that regard, the 
aspects of French-English friction were also coming into the 
fore as had been done right from 1763 onwards. 
 
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2790 
 
 

The Durham report also said that there was to be complete 
Anglicization, only English, and that was the recommendation 
that was done. But it was done away with by 1848 and ‘49 
because of popular movements by both French and English. 
There was French and English that disagreed with the 
Anglicization move, and by 1849 those types of things had 
changed. 
 
So when I looked in my own understanding of history, you 
know, the fight that we are looking at for self-determination of 
French people in Canada is not a new phenomenon; it’s been 
here for a long time, and that’s the point that I’m making. 
 
When I said at the beginning that I appreciate the fight for 
self-determination by the French, which I support 
whole-heartedly, and also the fight for self-determination by 
aboriginal people, which I also support whole-heartedly, a 
person has to start looking then and examining history. 
 
I must say that I have a limited knowledge of history and that 
I’ve only learned, you know, the historical context on my own 
interest in the past few years in delving into it in a little more 
detail. But even as of now there is a lot more things that I would 
like to understand on specific details on the new histories that 
are being presented to this day. So I guess when I’m dealing 
with this issue, I hope I try and at least deal with the issue with 
a little bit of knowledge and understanding of how things have 
come about in history. 
 
And I could talk in more detail about the Manitoba Act in 1870, 
and the fact that the French and English question arose, and that 
the French language was allowed in the legislatures of 
Manitoba. We also know that this past year there was a problem 
for the government in Manitoba who presented that law from 
way back then and tried to bring it back and deal with that 
constitutionality, that some people were against that. 
 
And we well know also that a lot of the aboriginal people, the 
Metis, were instrumental — as a matter of fact, they were the 
ones who made Manitoba the province that it is today, and a lot 
of people do not know that in a historical context. A lot of 
people do not recognize that the aboriginal people also wanted 
equality for all nationalities during that period in time in 
history, and that was explicitly stated by the people as such 
during that period in time. 
 
So when I deal . . . There are many problems throughout history 
that I could deal with, but I think the main point, as I looked at 
the different periods from 1763 to 1867, the chief question was 
that in 1763 there was a rising American expansionism, and 
there was a protection in that period. We had, of course, the war 
in between that period of 1812-14 where Canada fought against 
the United States. 
 
One thing I forget to mention, Mr. Speaker, is that we knew 
about General Brock in our history books, but we never hear 
about the person who made alliances with all the tribes way 
down south from Georgia area, Kentucky, Ohio, to make 
alliances to fight the Americans; that  

Tecumseh died fighting hard for Canada in 1812, 1814 battles. 
A lot of people do not know that in our history. 
 
In much the same way that a lot of aboriginal people would die 
in the two world wars for Canada, a lot of aboriginal people 
would have fought for Canada even in the 1812-14 period. And 
a lot of people forget that. And I would like to include that, you 
know, as part of the comments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — During the early period of American 
expansionism, we went into the 1867 . . . again there was talk of 
expanding the United States into western Canada, so you ought 
to create an alliance across Canada. And we had a 54-40 or 
fight situation, you know, coming in from the North, from 
Alaska; we had the 49th parallel situation, and so on. 
 
It is interesting that the economic expansionism of America 
became a central issue in that period in time again. Today when 
we deal with the constitution, and we talk about the 
present-day, again it’s American economic expansionism that’s 
in context of our constitution. It is very interesting that the 
powerful economic influences in the world have a powerful role 
and influence into what we do in constitutionalization. 
 
And when I examine this context, many people during this 
period of time — there was a few people who supported the 
Americans, but most of the people wanted to have an 
independent Canada who would be able to deal in the same way 
as they would in their limited trade . . . (inaudible) . . . in their 
periods in time, and today we are dealing with the same 
instances where we either trade only with the States, or we trade 
with everybody, and in an independent Canada we’d want to 
trade with everybody. And the same issue, again, still in the 
historical context, addresses us today. 
 
Now I will go into the actual Meech Lake-Langevin accord in 
itself. The accord to me is very contradictory, Mr. Speaker, and 
that would surprise you in the context of my own experience. 
But I see contradictions in many situations and in may lights, 
and of course I see this not only in the process that we went 
through but also in the substantive aspects of the Meech Lake 
accord itself. 
 
(1500) 
 
When I mentioned a little bit about the process, I said: why is it 
that we do not trust our people? Why is it that we are not 
dealing with our Saskatchewan people in formulating this law, 
except only in our sense here at the legislature? That’s an 
important question. 
 
I don’t want to get into the situation of trying to explain it again 
except to state: I wish we had more time like many, many other 
people. I wish we were able to understand the history. I wish we 
were able to be living and dynamic participants of the process 
in this province. And in that sense we would have not only 
made a substantive decision, we would be involved in an 
educational process as well. 
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2791 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, as an educator yourself, you should be able to 
understand the importance of the process that you don’t only 
deal with things in abstract, legalistic theory, but you have to 
put it into practice, and that is what we are missing in the 
context of this debate on the Meech Lake-Langevin agreement. 
 
In regards to the specific issue . . . So I will leave the question, 
Mr. Speaker, on the process. I think that’s very clear and I was 
disappointed, you know, this week when we didn’t deal with 
the process of involvement. 
 
There was two aspects that I want to talk about on the Meech 
Lake-Langevin. One, in relation to the North. I’ll deal with that 
relatively quickly, then I’ll deal with the specific aspects in 
relation to aboriginal people. 
 
First of all, in relation to the North — and by the North I mean 
the Northwest Territories and the Yukon — this is where I face 
a great contradiction, Mr. Speaker, because on the one hand we 
are saying in our preamble that we want to treat all provinces 
equally, of course with the special exception of the distinct 
society clause for Quebec, but that we have to treat all 
provinces equally. When we looked at it in history, the 
provinces came into Canada on their own accord; even the most 
recent one, Newfoundland, made their decision directly with the 
federal government. 
 
And when I looked at that whole history, the creation of 
provinces was done by the internal mechanism of the 
involvement of people in the politics of self-determination of 
their own situation. And in every instance in the past that I 
know of, that was the case. 
 
What are we saying now is this: We are denying the 
possibilities of the creation of provinces in Northwest 
Territories and the Yukon in the same sense as we had in the 
historical tradition of Canada. We are dealing with a significant 
group of people with one of the largest resource areas in 
Canada. The people there have historical knowledge already of 
the limitations that we went through in history with an initial 
compact of four provinces, with an Upper and Lower Canada 
concept, with later on the expansion into the West. 
 
You know, the Northwest Territories was this area at one time. 
Saskatchewan was the Northwest Territories, and we forget that 
we had lived that experience already here in this province. And 
yet in this agreement we are going to deny the Northwest 
Territories and the people of Northwest Territories and the 
Yukon the same historical tradition that we appreciated 
ourselves. 
 
And the reason why I say that is because if you take a 
unanimous agreement of all the provinces, all it takes is one 
province to say no. In the North we have the majority of 
aboriginal people in Northwest Territories and the Yukon — a 
significant number of them. The political record and the 
political reality of our system shows that we couldn’t even get 
seven provinces to agree with aboriginal rights. How are we 
going to the same type of system to agree with a unanimous? 
How is it going to change? Why are we making it difficult? 
 
With the equality concept, supposing we are making it  

easier to respect the self-determination of Quebec, supposingly 
we are making it more easier for the self-determination of other 
groups in Canada, but in Northwest Territories and the Yukon, 
we are not doing that — we are doing the opposite. Why could 
we have a law that is established in Canada that will naively, 
well not naively because it was well-known, that will make it 
extremely difficult, maybe virtually impossible to come out 
with an overall agreement. Because the four provinces may 
themselves want to expand into those areas, and who knows 
what Alberta will do; who knows what B.C. will do. What are 
their plans? Do they want to expand into those territories? We 
don’t know. But in any case, whether they want to expand, or 
whether the people from the Northwest Territories or the Yukon 
want to create their own province, it becomes extremely hard. 
 
My position is to remove that context from that clause, that 
unanimity clause in regards to the North, from that special 
section. 
 
Now I will deal with the question . . . Oh, before I deal with the 
question of aboriginal people, the other thing that strikes me 
that is at the heart of this thing is that the Northwest Territories, 
in their fight for representative government in the modern age, 
since the ’60s, has been an important and outstanding issue for 
the people of the Territories. And throughout that period they 
had to fight the greatest barrier of the past, the past colonial 
mentality and the colonial practice that existed in that area. 
 
And when I look at the Territories, I still see the same type of 
national psychology of Canada; that it seems to deal with the 
Territories from a very colonial approach. As a matter fact, my 
own position is that it is denying the Northwest Territories and 
the Yukon the right of self-determination that we are proposing 
for Quebec, and that we have had for all the other provinces in 
Canada. 
 
Questions can be asked why this is. A person can say, according 
to the colonial mentality, is the North too backward? Is that the 
reason? Another person may ask, is it because the North is 
composed of a large percentage of aboriginal people? And it’s 
the same type of mentality that led to the lack of, or the failure 
of, the aboriginal constitutional process. 
 
Or is it because of the free trade talks of the United States? I 
mean a lot of people state the Northwest Territories may 
become a de facto free trade zone for the multinationals. Is that 
the reason? Is it an economic reason like that? What is the 
reason behind the lack of proper respect for the Territories? And 
that’s a fundamental question. 
 
If I stand here and grant equality in relation to Quebec, then I 
have to stand here and also agree to equality with the Northwest 
Territories and the Yukon, and that is also my position. 
 
In regards to the question of aboriginal people, I will deal with 
it in both a process and substantive basis at the same time. 
When I looked at the general process, there was one way of 
dealing with aboriginal people in the constitutional process of 
five years, 1982-87, and the dealing with Quebec in the most 
recent Meech Lake-Langevin period. But there was a 
difference. 
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2792 
 
 

I remember very clearly the Premier of Saskatchewan going on 
record, going at great lengths, and stating: when we deal with 
self-government of aboriginal people in Saskatchewan, we have 
to involve the people of Saskatchewan. And that was his 
position. All of a sudden, in history, he has become the greatest 
democrat Saskatchewan has ever known when it came down to 
aboriginal people. And he went in a tremendous length to talk 
about that. 
 
Now you look at the general process that the Premier of this 
province wants in regards to Meech Lake-Langevin accord. The 
process is pretty clear that he wants us to accept the accord with 
no public participation. And people may ask: is it the same 
Premier? Of course, it is the same Premier. The agreements 
were done only one month apart — only one month. He would 
say one thing in regards to the process for aboriginal people, 
and another thing for the question of Meech Lake-Langevin 
accord. 
 
The other thing that struck me, Mr. Speaker, is this. It came 
down to the question of definitions. Now a lot of aboriginal 
people at that point in history wanted a general principle of 
self-government brought into the constitution. But the Premier 
said, no, we need to define it; we have to define it in detail; we 
have to know what it means. All of a sudden, the Premier 
became the greatest expert on clarity and precision that this 
province had ever seen; that you had to be in such a detail, and 
you’d have to report it back to the people of Saskatchewan. 
This is the same Premier, one month later, who comes in here 
and he says, trust me. Trust me that the distinct society clause is 
all okay. It is not defined, but don’t worry about it. We all know 
what it means. 
 
(1515) 
 
But I don’t know what it means. I don’t clearly know what it 
means. I may agree with the general principle of distinct 
society, and from a logical sense, of course I do. But the 
question I raise is this: why does the Premier have one method 
when it comes down to dealing with definitions with aboriginal 
people, and another one when it comes down to dealing with 
Quebec? That is the question that the Premier of this province 
has been unable to answer. 
 
When I’m dealing with definitions also, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to bring back the fact that we went through a five-year 
period of dealing with aboriginal people and the constitution 
without getting a definition of self-government — five years. 
But the Premier of this province was able to get over 300 
definitions when it came down to a multinational corporation 
like Weyerhaeuser — over 300 precise definitions. But he 
couldn’t come out with one when it came to aboriginal people 
— not one. 
 
The other issue that he seemed to talk about in that context was 
the issue of land. While he was at . . . (inaudible) . . . Premier 
was extremely slow in regards to dealing with the land claims 
and land entitlement questions in this province and was getting 
help from the federal PC government because they refused to 
do any more funding, or very little funding. On the one hand  

again, Weyerhaeuser got more land — Weyerhaeuser got more 
land to use than all the treaty land in Canada. And that is 
amazing to me. 
 
The other thing that the researchers from the report on Indian 
self-government — called the Premier report — one of the 
information that they have in there is this, that the amount of 
land in the past few years given to parks — I forget the exact 
figure, whether it was five times or 10 times larger than all the 
land for Indians in Canada. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ten. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — It was 10 times, the member for Moose Jaw 
says. Our priorities of giving more land to protect our wildlife 
and preserve our wildlife, to me presents a deep problem in 
Canadian history of what priorities we have. I am a strong 
supporter of parks, but I am also a strong supporter of people. I 
feel that people also have a right to their land. And it is very 
important that when we deal with the context of that question, 
that that is brought out. 
 
The other thing that I noticed, Mr. Speaker, is this. Section 35 
of the Act talks about affirmation and recognition of aboriginal 
rights. When you look at the Meech Lake-Langevin accord, all 
of a sudden it becomes preserve and promote. Preserve and 
promote, to me, implies a positive, proactive position; that there 
is tremendous support for it. You’re not only going to preserve 
it, you’re going to promote it. 
 
But when it came down to section 35, it says: affirm and 
recognize — and the key point in there is — existing aboriginal 
rights. The premier of Alberta at that point in time in ‘85, 
Lougheed, insisted that “existing” be put in, because he wanted 
to keep the situation of aboriginal people in the law in a 
restricted, narrow sense. And that was in Tuktoyaktuk. 
 
So that the laws that have been determined do not provide the 
true spirit and intent, for example, of the treaties in Canada. 
And that’s an important issue. Just this past week in 
Saskatchewan, you had the chief of the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Roland Crowe, state the treaty 
right of education. Then you had a reply by an Indian Affairs 
bureaucrat, and the reply was that it is not a treaty right; it is 
only a policy. 
 
And all of a sudden you start recognizing that not only is a 
clause a restrictive clause, the process is one of continually 
doing away with it. They even try and do away with existing 
treaty rights that are here. 
 
The other example, Mr. Speaker, is this. The other day we had 
another member, the minister in charge of Parks, Recreation 
and Culture, who looks at new provincial regulations to deny 
treaty rights of hunting, and new regulations on corridors, on 
roads, have been made. And of course these particular 
regulations deny the treaty right of Indian people to hunt. But a 
lot of people will say, of course, the treaty hunting right . . . The 
minister will say the treaty hunting right of Indians exists. It 
may exist in law, but the practical policies of this government 
deny the practical right for the people to hunt for food to feed 
their families and their children. 
 
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2793 
 
 

That is what I mean by discrepancy between . . . on the one 
hand promoting, and on the other hand recognizing existing 
rights. There is a big difference on those two. 
 
As I also looked at the question, an issue pertaining to the issue 
of women; I would just state this: my own belief is that section 
28, I hope that it covers all aspects of the constitution on the 
equality clause for men and women. 
 
But in regards to aboriginal people, Bill C-31, which intent was 
to do that, does not do that. It deals with only first generation 
women and their children, but it denies the opportunity for 
second and third generation women, and it will leave out 
another group of aboriginal people in this province and all 
across Canada. 
 
Bill C-31, which was supposed to provide the equality 
provisions following the 1985 constitutional process, was 
definitely not a solution to the equality question raised for 
women, for Indian women, you know, across Canada. And I 
must say that I hope that something in the future can be done in 
that regard, although I know that particularly in this constitution 
I feel that it is not really addressed, and that I feel that in the 
final analysis that it will have to be addressed through section 
28 some time in the future. 
 
In regards to another aspect that I will be dealing with in my 
amendment, and that’s the concept of fundamental 
characteristic, I’ve looked at the record of most aboriginal 
organizations across Canada and they are amazed that at this 
stage of development in Canada we have talked only about the 
fundamental characteristic of the French and English in Canada. 
Of course, the distinct society of the English could be well 
looked upon and said, that came out in 1763. The distinct 
society clause for the French occurred in 1774 in Quebec and 
really never came in. We reaffirmed it in the Canadian context 
in ’87 through the Langevin accord. 
 
But the fundamental characteristic argument smacks from the 
aboriginal viewpoint, from the people who have spoken against 
it; they say it smacks not only of the whole colonial nature 
against aboriginal people but that it also smacks and promotes 
the racial inequality that has existed against aboriginal people. 
They are saying they were the original . . . aboriginal people are 
the original owners of this land from time immemorial, and that 
recognition of that fact should be known. 
 
My opinion, Mr. Speaker, is this: I agree that the fundamental 
characteristic exists for the French and the English, but I also 
recognize that it also exists for aboriginal people. But I must 
also add that it also exists with other nationalities in Canada. 
That is my own personal position. 
 
But on the very least, in my amendment, because I know that 
ethno-cultural groups across Canada are supporting, you know, 
a multinational type characteristic over in this legislature, I’m 
looking at the fundamental characteristic for aboriginal people, 
you know, and I’ll be supporting that in my amendment. 
 
The other thing is that it’s important to know that the courts . . . 
Premier Devine was very adamant in this so-called 
Saskatchewan context. The law and the court  

should not be brought in when we deal with aboriginal people 
during the process of defining and going with self-government, 
you know, on a contingency basis, were his words. But this 
clause implied, and this direction by the Premier implied, that: 
believe is, aboriginal people, on our political goodwill. 
 
But when it comes down to Meech Lake-Langevin agreement, 
the courts play a role. Premier Devine agrees with the courts 
playing a role in the Quebec agreement, but not when it came to 
aboriginal people. 
 
There are many other problems, Mr. Speaker, and because of 
time I will try and start summarizing some points, some other 
aspects. There is an increase in provincial law and provincial 
power in this new constitution. The history on aboriginal people 
which are originally federal bilateral agreements between 
nations, that more power to the province in historical practice 
has shown that indeed the question of increased provincial 
powers takes away from aboriginal agreements. So that’s 
straightforward. The other point that has been made is that how 
come we can deal with fisheries in our process? How can we 
deal with fisheries? Are fish more important than people? 
 
(1530) 
 
So in summary I present summary questions, and I will say . . . 
I’ll ask the people in Saskatchewan: is it fair . . . Is this 
agreement fair to the people of the territories? Is it fair to leave 
out the Saskatchewan public? Is it fair to demand absolute 
detail on definitions in regards to aboriginal people and not 
require the same of a distinct society clause in relation to 
Quebec? Is it fair to demand that we don’t use a court when we 
come down to aboriginal people, and then we leave it to the 
courts to decide when it comes down to the question of 
Quebec? Is it fair to demand equality for all existing provinces 
and not to demand the equality for future provinces and the 
territories? Is it fair to accept the fundamental characteristic of 
the French and the English and not to accept the fundamental 
characteristic for aboriginal people and other nationalities? Is it 
fair to promote a pure political position for aboriginal people 
and not one when it comes down to the question of Quebec? Is 
it fair to increase provincial powers which may jeopardize 
social, economic, and progress, and programs for people? And 
is it fair to leave out Saskatchewan people? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to make a quick conclusion. I would state 
that as I . . . In the past little while, the Premier and the Prime 
Minister have done two things. One, they’ve slashed funding to 
native people in constitutional matters since March. The other 
thing that they have done is they’ve refused to deal with the 
issue of aboriginal constitution in the Meech Lake accord. 
 
The people are saying: why is it that the Premier of this 
province and the Prime Minister have one law and one process 
for aboriginal people, and another law and another process 
when it comes down to Quebec? And that is the fundamental 
question that people are asking me. 
 
So as I move this amendment, I must state that I hope that  
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2794 
 
 

all members in this House will deal with aboriginal people in 
the same fairness and the same sense of justice that they are 
dealing with the question of Quebec. I firmly hope that the 
positive support of the people of Saskatchewan, and all across 
Canada, for aboriginal rights can finally be taken up by the 
leaders of our country. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move my amendment, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Sutherland. I move: 
 

That section 1 of the schedule be amended by striking out 
“constitutes a fundamental characteristic of Canada” in 
paragraph 2(1)(a) of the Act and substituting: 
 
and Canadians who are aboriginal people constitute a 
fundamental characteristic of Canada.” 

 
And further: 
 

That section 13 of the schedule be amended: 
 
(a) by renumbering paragraph 50(2)(c) of the Act as being 
enacted by section 13 of the schedule, as paragraph 
50(2)(d), and 
 
(b) by adding the following paragraph after 50(2)(b): (c) 
ways whereby the aboriginal people of Canada may 
achieve full participation in the Canadian confederation 
including ways of achieving aboriginal self-government. 

 
So with that, I move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to address this important amendment to this 
important question of constitutional accord. 
 
Without a doubt, the achievement of Meech Lake was the 
inclusion of Quebec in the constitutional family. There’s 
certainly no doubt about that, and no one can argue that the time 
is long overdue for the people of Quebec to be full partners in 
Canada and full partners in Canada’s constitution. 
 
But if Meech Lake redresses this historic, constitutional 
inadequacy, and if Meech Lake is celebrated for the inclusion of 
Quebec, then certainly from all thinking Canadians and from all 
Canadians of goodwill there follows, or ought to follow, a 
concern that when it comes to the aboriginal peoples, Meech 
Lake is not the final word on our constitutional family, and that 
Meech Lake has still not finished the task of bringing all 
Canadians into this constitution; that Meech Lake has failed to 
establish full partnership or participation for aboriginal peoples. 
 
And this is the focal point of the amendment before us whereby 
there would be ways whereby the aboriginal people may 
achieve full participation in Canadian confederacy including 
ways of achieving aboriginal  

self-government. It refers to the failure of Meech Lake to 
include expressed provision for a constitutional conference 
dealing with the concerns of aboriginal peoples; the failure of 
Meech Lake to make a commitment to further first ministers’ 
conferences on aboriginal rights. 
 
And I note, Mr. Speaker, that following the failure of the fourth 
meeting of first ministers on aboriginal rights, it was none other 
than the Prime Minister himself who said, and I quote: 
 

It was with the greatest sadness that this was a moral 
obligation that has been unfilled by Canada, by the federal 
government, and by the provinces. 

 
Here we have the Prime Minister himself saying that there was 
a failure to establish within the constitution the principle of 
aboriginal self-government — a moral obligation, an unfulfilled 
moral obligation. And so the reason why I and my colleague 
from Cumberland, and all the members on this side of the 
House put forth this amendment, is to say that if in Meech Lake 
we are going to acknowledge as we do in section 1, paragraph 
2(1), the recognition, and I quote: 
 

the recognition that the existence of French-speaking 
Canadians, centred in Quebec but also present elsewhere 
in Canada, and English-speaking Canadians concentrated 
outside Quebec but also present in Quebec, constitutes a 
fundamental characteristic . . . 

 
If we’re going to say and to recognize this fundamental 
characteristic of French-speaking and English-speaking Canada, 
then surely we need also to recognize the existence of 
aboriginal peoples as constituting equally a fundamental 
characteristic of Canada. And that, as this amendment points 
out, “ways whereby the aboriginal people may achieve full 
participation in the Canadian confederation,” needs first of all 
to be discussed in future constitutional conferences, and need 
secondly to be put on the agenda of this country. 
 
Presently as the Meech Lake accord stands, without this 
amendment before us, there is expressed provision for 
constitutional conferences on what matters: Senate reform, and 
the roles and responsibilities in relation to fisheries. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, we say on this side of the House, that if this 
Assembly on behalf of Saskatchewan people stands ready to 
approve the Meech Lake accord as it now exists with provision 
to discuss Senate reform and fish in constitutional conferences, 
then surely to goodness we can and we must make provision to 
include aboriginal peoples for ways that they may become 
partners fully in confederation in the constitution, and for ways 
and means of achieving self-government for these aboriginal 
peoples. 
 
Perhaps the best analogy to deal with an understanding of the 
issue at hand in this amendment, to understand the importance 
of inclusion of aboriginal peoples when it comes to their rights 
in the constitution, would be the  
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2795 
 
 

analogy of a circle. That is to say that a circle, the circle of our 
constitution, simply isn’t complete without aboriginal people 
included in it. 
 
The inclusion of Quebec closes the gap, almost completes our 
constitutional circle. But to finalize this circle, we must now 
include aboriginal peoples. We must include all Canadians as 
partners. And I think it is important to note, Mr. Speaker, that 
this past March when we saw the fourth and final attempt by the 
first ministers to deal with aboriginal rights, we saw that their 
meeting ended in failure. The talks broke off precisely because 
the provincial premiers wanted a precise definition of 
self-government before negotiating any agreement that would 
entrench aboriginal rights, including the right to 
self-government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s certainly interesting and important to 
note in this connection, that it was none other than the Premier 
of this province who was one of the most vocal of the first 
ministers in calling for a precise definition of exactly what 
self-government meant. And that is characteristic fashion of 
saying one thing and doing another, it was this same Premier 
who was full of glowing and gushing verbal support for 
aboriginal peoples, but who insisted that every “i” be dotted, 
and “t” be crossed when it came to the matter of 
self-government with respect to aboriginal peoples. 
 
Yet when it came to a definition of distinct society in the Meech 
Lake accord from this same premier, there is no comparable 
insistence upon a definition of precisely what this phrase 
means; nor is there any insistence on, for example, what the 
phrase, Senate reform, means, which is to be subject to 
subsequent constitutional conferences, no parallel concern for 
what in fact it means to talk about the roles and responsibilities 
in relation to fisheries. 
 
As my colleague from Cumberland has already pointed out, it 
was quite easy for the Premier to come to an understanding of 
some 300 definitions with respect to Weyerhaeuser corporation 
and the agreement that was signed to give away the province’s 
resources. But when it comes to a definition of self-government 
for native people, there seems to be quite a stumbling block 
with the Premier. 
 
And so we have a situation, Mr. Speaker, with Meech Lake 
where there is a willingness to accommodate a vague, 
undefined phrase such as distinct society, or Senate reform, 
where there’s a rush to include Quebec in the circle of the 
constitutional family, but also correspondingly and at the same 
time, an unwillingness to accommodate the phrase, 
self-government — a dragging of the heels and a closing of the 
door when it comes to including aboriginal peoples in the circle 
of our constitutional family. 
 
And what we seek then in this amendment is simply to place the 
concerns of aboriginal people on the constitutional table where 
they legitimately belong, and where they presently aren’t being 
placed as the Meech Lake accord stands in this amendment; to 
place on the agenda for future first ministers’ conferences on 
the constitution, questions of aboriginal rights and 
self-government right beside Senate reform, right beside  

questions regarding fisheries — a formal commitment at least to 
discuss ways of achieving full participation for aboriginal 
peoples in Canadian confederation; a formal commitment at 
least to discuss ways of achieving aboriginal self-government. 
And certainly this discussion is needed and is necessary. Surely 
this isn’t too much to ask, that the first ministers subsequently 
will continue to seek resolution of these concerns and attempt to 
close the constitutional circle to include aboriginal people. 
 
The subject of constitutional change and the constitutional 
accord often seems remote, rather academic, far from everyday 
concerns of ordinary people, esoteric, the domain of lawyers 
and constitutional experts, politicians, perhaps. 
 
(1545) 
 
There is however, I would agree, a fundamental sense in which 
the constitution and constitutional change profoundly affects 
and ultimately involves all of us as Canadians. And this is 
because our constitution guides our future as a nation, our 
collective future, and gives articulation to the fundamental 
values which are common to us all, that we draw on, and that 
we live by as a society. 
 
And this is why when it comes to the concerns of Canada’s 
aboriginal peoples to the need for recognition of their rights for 
inclusion in the constitutional process, for recognition of the 
need for self-determination and self-government, for land 
claims issues and associated concerns, that the Meech Lake is 
so important for our present and our future Canadian society. 
We need to express in a formal way our commitment to a fairer, 
more inclusive, and compassionate, just society. 
 
And so the specific concern before us this afternoon with 
respect to this Meech Lake amendment is that there is no 
commitment to further the first ministers’ meetings on 
aboriginal rights as Meech Lake presently stands. There is no 
commitment for further participation by aboriginal peoples on 
important issues of self-government. And this is precisely what 
this amendment attempts to rectify. 
 
As I said earlier, the Prime Minister of Canada himself has 
commented that when it comes to the failure to establish 
aboriginal self-government in the constitutional process, we 
have, he said, and I quote: 
 

. . . a moral obligation that has been unfulfilled by Canada, 
by the federal government, and by the provinces. 

 
And we all know that it was just three days ago, this past 
Sunday, that we heard Pope John Paul urging a settlement to 
this question — a settlement to the question of self-government 
for Canada’s native peoples, calling on Ottawa and the 
provinces to have a new round of talks with native leaders so 
aboriginal rights can be entrenched in our constitutional 
process. 
 
Today, this afternoon in this Assembly, we have just such an 
opportunity to take steps to see that in the new rounds of 
constitutional discussions, our first ministers address these 
aboriginal concerns. We have the opportunity to  
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2796 
 
 

take a simple first step toward fulfilling what the Prime 
Minister has called a moral obligation. We have demonstrated 
for us in Meech Lake the flexibility of our first ministers in the 
responsiveness of our federal system to the reality of Quebec, 
and to the special relationship that Quebecers have with the rest 
of Canada. And this certainly is the strength of the Meech Lake 
accord. 
 
Equally, we have here today an opportunity as Saskatchewan 
legislators to demonstrate our flexibility and our commitment to 
fairness in support of this amendment, to include in the Meech 
Lake accord and the Meech Lake agenda for constitutional 
conferences, ways whereby aboriginal peoples of Canada may 
achieve full participation in Canadian confederation, including 
ways of achieving aboriginal self-government. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to address this 
issue and to support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to be able to participate today in the debate on the accord. And 
I’m pleased in particular to be able to deal in my remarks, and 
they will be brief this afternoon, on this amendment which deals 
with a question fundamental to our country, to its vision, and to 
its reality. And that is the question of course, of the right to 
self-determination for the aboriginal peoples of this country just 
as it is the accord deals with or attempts to deal with the right of 
self-determination for my friends in Quebec. 
 
I want to start today, Mr. Speaker, and talk a little bit and 
define, I believe, in my own mind, and maybe for some of the 
other members here, precisely what this debate is about. A 
constitution and the constitutional debate, as other members of 
this House have noted, is not the most exciting, is not the most 
exciting political event in this province nor in this country at 
this time, and it’s probably not anywhere near the top of the 
citizens of this province and of this country’s own personal and 
political agenda. 
 
Many of the speakers before me have talked about that there are 
other issues which need urgent attention, which need to be 
addressed, and which require action by governments. And I 
tend to agree with that. I tend to agree with that because I 
believe that in our haste to deal with what some people have 
said is an attempt to bring Quebec back into confederation, that 
we have emerged with a document which is flawed and a 
process which is more than flawed. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, fundamentally, a debate over the 
constitution of the country requires two things. First of all, it 
requires a vision of what our country should become. The 
Meech Lake accord, as presented to this House of Assembly in 
Saskatchewan, fails on that test. It fails because it is nothing 
more than a compromise and, like all compromises, there are 
good sides and bad sides, but in this compromise in my mind, 
Mr. Speaker, the bad outweighs the good. The bad outweighs 
the good when we deal with the question of Quebec. 
 
Other speakers before me have dealt with the question of  

distinct society and its imprecision. And I want to bring a little 
personal note into this debate in terms of why, to me, it is 
imprecise and does not belong in a fundamental document of 
our country. 
 
I was born in a town Truro, Nova Scotia, and I grew up there 
for the first 12 years of my life. Truro, Nova Scotia was a 
distinct society in the sense that it contained a great many 
number of black people, people of African and West Indian 
origin, originally brought to Nova Scotia, the descendants of 
people who were brought to Nova Scotia as slaves. 
 
And the mix of people in Truro, Nova Scotia, and the people 
that I knew, and the people I grew up with — some of whom 
have moved on to play in the National Hockey League, some 
who became doctors, some who went to work in the Stanfield 
underwear works in Truro — that mix of people formed a 
distinct society, and it gave me an interest in “blues” music 
based on the kind of rhythms and kind of music that became 
popular among the people I was growing up with in Truro, 
Nova Scotia. 
 
At the age of 12, I moved to a place called Pictou, Nova Scotia, 
an entirely different mix of people in that small town of 5,000 
— 50 per cent of Scots origin and about 50 per cent of French 
origin, via the Magdalen Islands, who moved into that town 
during the Second World War. And that formed a distinct 
society, those people, the kind of Scots/French mix, many who 
we see a reflection of here in Saskatchewan, in some of the 
Metis traditions, and particularly the Metis music, Metis fiddle 
music, and the type of tunings that one finds in the Metis fiddle. 
Anyway that particular mix in Pictou, Nova Scotia formed a 
distinct society. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I grew up and moved to different parts of 
the country before finally settling in Regina, I worked in a place 
called Port Hardy, British Columbia. And Port Hardy, British 
Columbia is at the northern end of Vancouver Island, and it’s a 
logging town. And it’s a mix of the native people from that part 
of British Columbia and immigrant workers who moved into 
Port Hardy and established their lives and their livelihood in 
Port Hardy in the logging industry; and they, too, formed a 
distinct society. 
 
And I can think of the time when I was employed as a bush 
pilot in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and lived in a 
place called Stony Rapids. Stony Rapids is one of the most 
beautiful communities in this province, and for those who 
haven’t been to Stony Rapids, I certainly recommend the trip. 
 
But that too was a distinct society, being one-third people of 
Caucasian origin, one-third Metis, and the other third people of 
the Dene people, of the Chipewyans. And that formed a distinct 
society; each one of them forms a distinct society. But we’re 
not dealing with each of those communities here and the people 
in those communities here in this debate. 
 
We have, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, by inserting the term 
“distinct society” into the Canadian constitution, done a 
disservice to those people — my friends, my relatives, the 
people I’ve worked with, all multicultural  
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2797 
 
 

and ethnocultural groups in this country — because each of 
them has an aspect of a distinct society. 
 
And we’ve also done a disservice, Mr. Speaker, to mes amis du 
Québec, for Quebec is not a distinct society in the classical 
sense. Quebec forms, if one is to look at the classical definitions 
of it, Quebec forms a nation — nothing more and nothing less. 
It has its unique culture, its unique history, its unique language, 
and is bordered by its own geographical regions. 
 
So on the one hand by trying to make a political compromise by 
using the words “distinct society,” we have done a disservice to 
all the people of this Canada, whether francophone or 
anglophone, whatever their national and cultural background. 
And I find that, Mr. Speaker, I find that unacceptable that we 
should have to deal with a term like that in a document as 
fundamental as our constitution. 
 
And it does fundamental disservice, Mr. Speaker, to the other 
nation in our country outside the anglophone nation, and that’s 
the aboriginal nation, made up of people who call themselves 
nations. And we see here in Saskatchewan — and in my own 
constituency I have the president of a people who see 
themselves as a nation — the Prairie Treaties Nation Alliance; 
and the head of another association which lives in the Rosemont 
constituency, Mr. Jim Sinclair, president of AMNSIS 
(Association of Métis and Non-Status Indians of 
Saskatchewan), see themselves in some way as a nation. 
 
And without getting into the academic debates in terms of what 
my colleague from Cumberland said, it is evident that the 
aboriginal peoples of Canada, whether Chipewyan, whether 
Dene, whether Innuit, whether the Cree, or the Micmac, and the 
nation which is no longer with us, the Beothuk from 
Newfoundland, a nation with was eradicated by colonialism, the 
point being is that they see themselves as a nation. And this 
document, the Meech Lake accord, and the Canadian 
constitution, denies them that status. It denies them the status of 
nationhood. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, if someone were today to deny 
the status of nationhood to any one of us who sit here in this 
legislature, the hue and cry throughout this land would be 
deafening. It is unfortunate that when we deny that status to 
others, to others who because of historical circumstances have 
been left out of history and who’ve been ignored to that extent, 
they are denied nationhood. 
 
And when I think of the people I know in Stony Rapids, and the 
people I’ve worked with in La Ronge, and the people I’ve 
worked with in Ile-a-la-Crosse and Buffalo Narrows and Green 
Lake and other northern towns in Saskatchewan, when I see . . . 
when I see an attempt by the federal government to deny them 
of that nationhood, it is taking away from themselves as people. 
And I believe my colleague from Cumberland outlined that 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that we have Senator 
Forsey here today — glad to hear it, and I’m sure all members 
of the Assembly join me in having Senator Forsey here while 
we are taking part in this historic  

debate. 
 
(1600) 
 
Because Senator Forsey who understands, when we strip away 
all the other things, that a constitution is about power — 
nothing more, nothing less. And a constitution is about who 
wields power and who doesn’t wield power — nothing more, 
nothing less. 
 
And I want to refer, Mr. Speaker, to section 41 of the Meech 
Lake accord: 
 

An amendment to the Constitution of Canada in relation to 
the following matters may be made by proclamation 
issued by the Governor Genera (of Canada) under the 
Great Seal of Canada only where authorized by resolutions 
of the Senate and House of Commons and of the 
legislative assembly of each province: 

 
It’s that section that says there must be unanimity. And I deal 
with that section, Mr. Speaker, in particular, because it deals 
with a couple of questions which are close to my heart. 
 
The question of power, that particular amendment, section 41 of 
the accord, when you look at it as a question of power, you have 
to ask yourself: does it empower the ordinary citizen of this 
country? Does it provide a way and a method of increasing the 
participation of citizens in this country over decisions which 
affect their lives? 
 
After studying this document, Mr. Speaker, my answer to that 
question is no. It does the exact opposite. Instead of 
empowering the citizens of Canada to participate in the process 
to make those decisions which affect their own lives, it removes 
that process from them. 
 
Instead of empowering the people of Saskatchewan and the 
people of Canada, it removes power from them because it 
centralizes it in Ottawa, and it makes it much more difficult to 
deal with those institutions which in the past and which in the 
present and which now in the future will block their 
empowerment, will block their ability to make decisions to 
affect their own lives. 
 
The first institution — and the one which our party has had a 
long and, I would say, glorious tradition of opposition to — that 
institution is of course the Senate. Our position in our party has 
been for the abolition of the Senate. This amendment enshrines 
the Senate. 
 
And our position has been, Mr. Speaker — and I want to read 
here, I want to read here a quote from Wayne Easter, the 
president of the National Farmers Union. Wayne Easter, a 
farmer, somebody who represents an organization of ordinary 
working people from Saskatchewan and across Canada- people 
who work on the land. I want to quote him in regards to the 
position of the Senate. Mr. Easter said: 
 

The need for Senate reform has been a matter of 
long-standing discussion. Two major weaknesses in the 
current Senate system are obvious, in our  

  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2798 
 
 

view. The first is the patronage system of appointments of 
senators which has been used over the decades to reward 
persons of long-standing loyalty to the governing party. 
Senators are accountable to no one but the party to whom 
they hold allegiance. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely no surprise to us that the 
reason the members opposite support this particular amendment 
is because it gives them the chance to increase that long list of 
names, the long list of names on the Premier’s patronage list. 
 
And so there’s no wonder that they’re quite eager to jump into 
bed with our Prime Minister on this issue because it provides 
another patronage opportunity for them to put forward names. 
 
The second reason, the second reason, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. 
Easter outlines is the fact that many senators are tied in closely 
to private sector business interests through directorships or as 
corporate shareholders. This essentially places them in a 
privileged position as publicly paid lobbyists for private 
business matters. 
 
And I want to say here, Mr. Speaker, that I personally don’t 
think that applies to each and every senator here, and I would 
exclude Senator Forsey from that list. I would exclude Senator 
Forsey from that list. 
 
But in general, and Mr. Easter is making the general point, Mr. 
Easter goes on to say: 
 

We believe this represents a serious conflict of interest. 
Abolition of the Senate (get this, Mr. Speaker) is an 
obvious solution. 

 
With that I heartily concur, Mr. Speaker. With that I heartily 
concur. And the reason why the call for abolition of the Senate 
has been made in the past by people like Tommy Douglas, and 
is being made now by our party, the reason for it is because it 
destroyed the vested interest that are built up in institutions in 
this country, takes the power away from them, would take the 
power away from them, devolve that power into their hands to 
allow for the kind of participatory democracy that I envision for 
this country and that I and our party envision for this country. 
Despite what the members opposite may think, our party stands 
for power devolved into the hands of Canadian citizens. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is one of my fundamental objections. I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, that as I’ve given a bit of my personal 
background in terms of the people that I know in Canada, and 
the people that I’ve worked with and the people that I’ve lived 
with, that this document fails to provide the kind of vision, the 
kind of forward look, but in fact represents another attempt to 
entrench vested interests, the same vested interests who have 
acted as blocks for progress in this country. 
 
To finish off, Mr. Speaker, I will again quote Mr. Easter, 
because I find his comments before the joint committee on the 
constitution extremely, extremely edifying. What I am saying, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’ll quote Mr. Easter again, is that: 

. . . we have not made a real effort to build Canada as a 
nation, and this Constitutional Accord does not do that, 
either. The Constitution really should be a discussion on 
how we make Canada a nation. What I see happening 
here, and as I see the different participants coming before 
this committee, even ourselves. . . (and I say that in 
regards to all the members here whether) we are all 
coming forward as special-interest groups, whether it is 
labour, whether it is natives, whether it is farmers or 
whomever. We are isolating ourselves, in those special 
interests. Even the accord itself, as I said . . . instead of 
building a nation, what it seems to be to me is an act of 
appeasement for certain provincial complaints. 

 
I would ask all members to listen carefully to that. Do we want 
to lay the future of this country on an act of appeasement? I 
don’t. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I spoke on this 
amendment earlier on in the debate on the main motion. Since 
that time there has been several amendments advanced and I 
would like to speak specifically to the amendment of the 
member from Cumberland and respond to a couple of the 
questions raised by the other members as it relates to the 
amendments. I note the member from Rosemont talked about 
the Senate. I would like to just perhaps touch on that a bit. 
 
Let me say as follows. That in this debate, which I think is 
important that we all have the opportunity to debate on 
something as fundamental as the constitution, a process that 
until now really was not really part of what a legislature often 
dealt with, I think it would be fair to say that the members 
opposite, the official opposition and the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, have made various and raised various 
concerns with regards to Meech Lake. I think one could 
categorize those concerns into two basic areas. They have been 
concerned about some of the substantive questions, substantive 
issues that are contained in Meech Lake accord and they’ve 
raised concerns with regard to the process of Meech Lake 
accord. 
 
I’d like to deal first of all with some of the substantive issues 
that the hon. members have raised. The member from Regina 
North yesterday indicated and raised the concern with regard to 
what I might call the Yukon amendment, or the Yukon concern. 
The member opposite raised the question about the . . . basically 
what it was is the . . . should we change the process, as Meech 
Lake does, for the entry of provinces into confederation. In 
particular, will Meech Lake so hamstring the territories of the 
Yukon and the Northwest Territories in such a way that for 
them to attain a provincehood that would make it far too 
difficult . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, I take the members opposite speaking from their 
chair are requesting that you intervene and indicate that I am 
not able to speak with regard to those particular issues. The 
member from Saskatoon . . . or from Regina Rosemont . . . 
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2799 
 
 

Mr. Koskie: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. The member 
spoke on the general resolution already. In accordance with 
your ruling that he can get it back into the debate what . . . 
strictly speaking to an amendment subsequent. And his 
comments must be directed to the specific amendment that was 
put forward by the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The member from Quill Lakes has raised a 
point of order and the point of order is well taken. The member 
must restrict his remarks to the specific amendment before the 
House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina 
Rosemont just spent some of period time dealing with the 
question of the Senate. Now if it is acceptable for that member 
from Regina Rosemont to deal with the Senate issue on this 
amendment, why is it not equally in order for me to respond to 
what he’s been saying? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
The rules of the House, in fact, indicate that — and I know the 
hon. member understands it very well because he takes an 
interest in the rules — that a member who has spoken to the 
main motion may speak again but he must speak to the 
amendment specifically introduced later. And I acknowledge 
the hon. member that perhaps the member from Regina 
Rosemont did at times wander from the amendment itself. 
However, be that as it may, let us just adhere to the rules not 
and I’m sure the hon. member from Kindersley can do that very 
well. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Yes, what is the point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I find that I accept your ruling, Mr. 
Speaker, as being properly within the rules. I find it strange that 
the members opposite who have sat for some time indicating, 
why aren’t other people from this side of the House dealing 
with the variety of questions, and I find it . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! Order. I don’t think that, 
you know, we should get into a debate. Perhaps there is another 
forum where you may want to do that but I don’t think this is 
the forum, and I just ask you to continue with your remarks, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, what the members 
opposite, with the amendment just presented, and with the other 
amendments that they have presented, without dealing with the 
. . . totally with the substance — and I will deal with the 
substance . . . I also deal with the process which is of the 
amendment, which is legitimate. 
 
So let me deal with the question of process first of all. The 
members opposite do not want to talk totally about substance. 
We talk about substance and process. Let me deal with process 
first. 
 
What the members opposite are saying with the amendment 
before the House now, with the amendment before the House 
now, is to say: let us not accept Meech Lake; let us not accept 
the Meech Lake accord that was  

agreed by all 10 premiers and the Prime Minister; let’s not 
accept that from this legislation; let us not accept the fact that 
the province of Quebec, the province of Quebec have accepted 
the Meech Lake accord as a good faith measure by the rest of 
this country, by the rest of this country as a way by which 
Quebec can feel part of this country again. 
 
(1615) 
 
Let us not accept the condition put forth by, I suggest, the 10 
premiers, and particularly the province of Quebec, and by the 
federal House just having reported back the last day or two with 
regards to Meech Lake, that now they are saying, no, let’s not 
accept that but let’s change it. Let’s change it in the 
Saskatchewan legislature which is tantamount to saying, let us 
give it conditional approval only. And let us accept the risk of 
conditional approval only that the whole question could be 
derailed, put off the rails, and the whole Meech Lake accord 
ultimately dashed. 
 
That is exactly what we are asking for in this amendment, or in 
any of the amendments that they have advanced today. That is 
exactly what they are asking — that is exactly what they’re 
asking with this particular amendment. 
 
Now let’s deal with the substance of this particular amendment. 
The question of native self-government in this province, in this 
country, have been dealt with for an extended period of time in 
recent history. For the last five years, Mr. Speaker, for the last 
five years the first ministers and the Prime Minister and the 
designated ministers from all provinces, have sat down along 
with the various native groups from across this country. The 
various native groups from across this country with one 
exception, Mr. Speaker, and that is the group representing the 
Indian people of this province. They were not at the table. They 
were not at the table not because of something this government 
did, and they were not at the table because of something the 
federal government did, or the Government of Manitoba, or the 
Government of Alberta did. They were not at the table because 
George Erasmus said they should not be at the table. Now we 
are asking, we are asking that the native people, the Indian 
people of the prairie region, should be excluded from the 
process. And that’s also a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let’s go back through the history. In 1985 we were that 
close to a deal with regard to native self-government. That close 
to a deal. It was rejected ultimately, Mr. Speaker, by two native 
groups. And so back we went through the process again, Mr. 
Speaker, leading to another amendment advanced by the Prime 
Minister and by the federal government in 1987. That particular 
amendment was rejected by two basic groups. It was rejected by 
four provinces and it was rejected by George Erasmus and his 
group. That’s the reality of what happened in Ottawa earlier this 
year. 
 
The members opposite are then saying, even though you didn’t 
get a deal on this, let’s write something into it now. When 10 
premier, Mr. Speaker, and the Prime Minister and the various 
native groups with the exception of the native groups 
representing Saskatchewan, sat down for  
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2800 
 
 

five years in constant negotiation to come to an agreement, and 
couldn’t — it terminated earlier this year — are we to somehow 
then say, well this legislature will accept Meech Lake only on 
the condition that we undo what five years was not able to 
accomplish? We will not accept Meech Lake but for making 
those particular changes. 
 
The members opposite, what they are asking us to do, is they’re 
asking the people of the province of Quebec, the people of 
Quebec, who have gone through significant history, Mr. 
Speaker, significant history as to what the meaning of this is, 
they are asking those people of Quebec to wait another round, 
wait for a while longer, wait if that’s what it takes, because we 
need these amendments. That’s what they’re asking. 
 
And I think it’s fitting in that regard, Mr. Speaker, to read from 
today’s editorial of the Toronto Globe and Mail. It’s about a 
woman and a scholar and a federalist from the province of 
Quebec who spent a great deal of her time fighting about the 
referendum in the province of Quebec and now we tend not to 
want to talk about. 
 
But let me read excerpts from this because I think it’s 
important. I think it has some meaning to it. They quote her as 
saying: 
 

I think none outside (of) Quebec knew the reality of the 
referendum (on sovereignty-association in 1980). . . 
English Canada could not care less one month after, and it 
stung me and it stung all of us who fought so hard to 
remain in Canada and to find ourselves outside of Canada. 
You know, it was a very dramatic gesture when (former 
premier Rene) Levesque put the flag of Quebec at half 
mast the day you were all celebrating (the 1982 
constitutional patriation) . . . Because our hearts were at 
half mast too that day, because we were out of a country 
(in which) we had chosen to remain. 

 
Then she talked about receiving a call from Meech Lake the 
night that the deal was struck. 
 

Since the telephone rang at our house and a friend called 
me from Meech Lake to say ‘it is done,’ I have held my 
head high, believing at least that I have not been deceived 
by my compatriots when, the non team (against 
sovereignty-association), we told them ‘that there would 
be a place for Quebec in . . . Canada tomorrow . . .’ 
 
But surely by now, surely, you all know that if Meech 
(Lake) is to fail for whatever reason, there can be no more 
negotiations, nor more justifications. If Quebec is once 
again to realize . . . it is more difficult to opt into Canada 
than to stay out of Canada, then surely you know that the 
roads of tomorrow can only lead to another form of 
independence . . . 

 
And that is what we are talking about in this debate here today. 
And the editorial concludes by saying: 
 

Meech Lake is imperfect, as all . . . predecessors in our 
constitutional history have been imperfect.  

But it is sound and historically essential in the context of 
the 1980 referendum. Quebec has ratified Meech Lake. 
The rest of Canada, having satisfied its reason, must honor 
its word and show its heart by doing the same. 

 
And that is exactly what we are asking with this amendment, 
Mr. Speaker, with the final motion that we would hope will 
come today. Because what we are really talking about, without 
talking about the process of the various issues, what we are 
really talking about today is: are we as a province, and are we as 
legislators of this province, going to accept Meech Lake? And 
everybody can argue as to the imperfection of this or the 
imperfection of that. The question really boils down is: will we 
accept Meech Lake as is, or can we only accept Meech Lake 
with conditions? 
 
Then that begs the second question: what are those conditions 
for our acceptance? And they have been expounded by various 
members. I then ask the members opposite: how strongly do 
you feel about those exceptions and those conditions? Are they 
conditions upon your support of Meech Lake? And that’s what 
we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, because at the end of the day, 
at the end of the day the members opposite are going to have to 
stand in their place and say yes or no to Meech Lake. They’re 
going to have to say yes or no to the people of Quebec. And 
they’re going to have to say yes or no to what the meaning of 
this country is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge the members opposite, and it’s going 
to stand hard on their conscience, Mr. Speaker, when this vote 
comes down — when this vote comes down — we will watch 
to see where they stand. Will they stand yea, or will they stand 
nay? For the good of this province, and the good of this 
country, I hope we stand united and say yea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’d just like to 
acknowledge the members. I noticed members on both sides of 
the House are kind of edgy. They say the speakers are a little off 
the topic. And quite frankly, that’s true. I realize that. That is 
why I allowed the member for Regina Rosemont . . . perhaps it 
wasn’t exactly according to the rules . . . order, please. Perhaps 
it wasn’t exactly according to the rules, but I allowed him to 
mention one or two other points . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Now the hon. member from Regina North East is protesting, 
and let me explain that part of it as well. If we’re going to talk 
about rules, I’m quite pleased to do that. 
 
Now this motion in fact is not a concurrent motion. The reason 
it is not a concurrent motion is this. It does not wholly replace 
the original resolution. It is dealing with a narrow aspect. 
Therefore the member from Regina Rosemont was also 
restricted to the narrow aspect of this resolution. 
 
However, having said that, I realize that the constitution is 
something very, very important to people and to  
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2801 
 
 

members, and I must admit I have been a little lenient allowing 
people to perhaps stray a little bit from the actual resolution 
being discussed. 
 
So if hon. members are wondering why that occurred, I’m just 
trying to explain that while I realized that we weren’t right on 
the resolution, I was giving somewhat of a latitude because I 
feel that it is a very important motion, and Hon. Members 
should get a little opportunity to express what’s on their mind in 
a situation like this. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We know why it occurred, and it wasn’t 
the reasons you gave. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Yes, it was. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, it wasn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’d like to just 
clear this up. I know it’s not in order, and you shouldn’t debate 
with members, I realize that. But the original ruling for the 
member for Regina North East was this: if the amendment is a 
resolution which replaces the original resolution, then it runs 
concurrently; if the amendment does not replace the original 
resolution, it does not run concurrently. That aspect of it wasn’t 
in my ruling, but that is the rule. 
 
(1632) 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 21 
 
Blakeney Prebble 
Brockelbank Shillington 
Koskie Tchorzewski 
Thompson Rolfes 
Mitchell Upshall 
Simard Anguish 
Goulet Hagel 
Lyons Calvert 
Trew Smart 
Van Mulligen Koenker 
Goodale  
 

Nays — 29 
 
Muller Duncan 
McLeod Andrew 
Berntson Lane 
Taylor Smith 
Maxwell Schmidt 
Hodgins Gerich 
Hardy Klein 
Meiklejohn Pickering 
Martin Toth 
Johnson McLaren 
Hopfner Swenson 
Martens Baker 
Gleim Neudorf 
Gardner Kopelchuk 
Britton  
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I count it a real honour and 
privilege to participate in this debate, now on the main motion, 
and given the time of day, I will be amending some of the 
remarks I plan to make. 
 
But I do want to say, as a novice member of this legislature, 
how rare and perhaps unique privilege it is to speak in this kind 
of debate, for here we debate something so very fundamental to 
our nation. And when we are long gone from this place, when 
we’ve all said our little bit, the things that we do today will be 
lasting, and we may, in fact, be debating the shape of our nation 
not only for ourselves but for our children and our 
grandchildren and perhaps even our great grandchildren. So I 
consider it a real honour and privilege to participate in this 
debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one area that I wish to bring to this debate that to 
this point has not been highlighted in the debate or discussed at 
any length in this House, has to do with the reality of our nation 
that many suggest is not adequately represented in the accord 
before us — and I speak of the multicultural reality which is 
Canada. And it is a concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, felt very 
keenly by the multicultural community across our province. 
 
May I say just at the outset that the multicultural community in 
Saskatchewan, like many of us, welcome the fact that by this 
accord the province and the people of Quebec are brought fully 
into confederation. The multicultural community across this 
province welcome — welcome — the province of Quebec fully 
into confederation and, indeed, the accord simply recognizes, in 
my mind, what is reality: that in the province and people of 
Quebec there is a distinct society. The accord also recognizes a 
fundamental characteristic of our nation, and that we are a 
nation of French and English. And again, that truth may be 
self-evident. 
 
But there is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another fundamental reality 
of our nation and that reality is the multicultural characteristic 
of our land. We are not just a nation of French and English; we 
are a nation of many peoples. We are a nation — a living 
diversity of peoples. And it is the concern of the multicultural 
community, and a concern that I share, that this reality, this 
fundamental characteristic of our nation is not adequately 
reflected in the accord which is now before us. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I may say just a word about that, about 
that reality. Take any random group of 64 individuals in this 
country — take the members of this House — and it’s easy to 
illustrate the multicultural reality of our province and our 
nation. In this House alone we sometimes hear the hint of 
Scotland from the member from Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, yourself and the Speaker are in a good 
position; you hear the voices in this House, and you hear 
greetings, sometimes extended to visitors in the German tongue. 
You hear greetings extended in the French tongue. When you 
listen to speeches delivered in this House you hear a hint of the 
Ukraine, and you hear a  
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2802 
 
 

hint of Poland. You hear a hint of Cree. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
you once in a while even hear a hint of the Maritimes in this 
House. We are, in this House, a multicultural reality, and I 
submit you could select any random group of 64 Canadians and 
find that same mix. 
 
In any of the cities or towns that we represent you can again 
find that mix — in the city of Moose Jaw, in one small city on 
the Canadian prairie, you can find peoples who themselves have 
immigrated, or whose ancestors have immigrated from almost 
every corner and culture on this globe. We are not just French, 
and we are not just English; we are a living diversity of peoples 
and we have been forged into a great nation, and that living 
diversity is our strength, and it is the wonder of this country, 
and it is the richness of this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, that multicultural reality has 
been given focus over the past number of years by the growth 
of multicultural groups and ethnocultural groups across our 
nation. And that is particularly true also here in Saskatchewan. 
Here in Saskatchewan there are now over 900 local, regional, 
and provincial multicultural groups. And while they remain 
involved with the process of sponsoring cultural events and 
cultural entertainment, they’ve gone far beyond that. They now 
deal regularly with issues like heritage languages. They deal 
regularly with immigration and citizenship. These are groups 
that struggle with race relations in our society. They are actively 
involved in education. And let me repeat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
these multicultural groups and the council here in Saskatchewan 
more than welcome the province of Quebec as a full partner in 
confederation. But they do have concerns. And those concerns 
ought not to be overlooked by this legislature, by this 
government, and by its federal counterpart. 
 
They are concerned about the kind of immigration policies and 
practices that could evolve under this accord. They are 
concerned about aboriginal rights. They are concerned about the 
future of Canada’s North. They are concerned about the 
equality right provisions from the charter that are not included 
in this accord. And they are, as I am, concerned that the reality, 
the multicultural reality of Canada be fully and adequately 
represented in this accord. And they have proposed federally 
and provincially to provide that recognition, to be sure there is 
no confusion that the section of the accord which now describes 
the French/English characteristic of Canada, should also and 
equally describe the multicultural reality of Canada. They fear 
that a separation of the two in the accord may at some future 
time indicate one having precedence over another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe it is incumbent upon this government to 
carry this concern to its federal counterpart, to carry that 
concern to Ottawa. If one premier in Canada should be raising 
the concerns of multiculturalism, it is the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, for we are the only province in Canada where 
there is neither a French nor an English cultural majority. And 
so I sincerely hope that the Premier will carry these concerns of 
the multicultural community in Saskatchewan to Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my conviction that a constitution must  

not only reflect our past, it must adequately reflect our present, 
and in some ways set a vision and a goal and a dream for the 
future. I believe the accord that is now before us can be a better 
accord, and so I call upon the Premier of this province, and the 
government he leads, to go to Ottawa, reflect the concerns that 
have been raised in this House, and make it a better accord for 
all Canadians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Many 
members have spoken in this debate, and I want to say that 
that’s as it should be, especially when in any Legislative 
Assembly members talk about the future of our country as 
we’re doing when we’re considering the amendments to our 
constitution in the form of this Meech Lake accord. I’m 
therefore pleased to have the opportunity to say a few words in 
this debate and express some of the views that I have as well. It 
is my view that the debate which has taken place in the last 
several days, which started some time in July, has been of, I 
think, a high level. And that is also as it should be on this kind 
of an important subject. 
 
The constitution of any nation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the first 
law. It is the master plan which provides the framework for the 
making of all other laws. The making of or the amending of the 
constitution is not like an amendment to The Vehicles’ Act of 
the times Act. There is no other law that has such a dominant 
impact on every citizen of our country. 
 
The constitution determines how all other laws are made, who 
makes them, how they are administered, and how they are to be 
enforced. Surely the, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the process of 
amending our constitution is as important as the final document 
itself. 
 
Throughout the world and in most democratic nations, the 
constitution is considered to be of such importance that whole 
populations are involved. And in many cases, plebiscites are 
taken on their constitution and changes to it. 
 
(1645) 
 
We in the opposition and on this side of the House have stated 
our belief that our constitution is important, and amending it is 
important. It’s not just something that belongs in the forum of 
the legislators. It’s not just something that the Prime Minister 
and 10 premiers should decide on in the middle of the night or 
like a collective agreement hammered out between management 
and representatives of workers. 
 
We have argued in this debate that there should be public 
debate. We have proposed amendments to that effect. 
 
As I have said, there can be few more important matters 
affecting the future of a country than constitutional change. And 
in order for the public to be informed about those matters there 
should be a conscious and a sustained effort on the part of 
governments to make the public aware of the issues. And yet 
the process of Meech Lake has not allowed this to happen. 
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2803 
 
 

The Premier and this government have refused to allow a public 
debate to take place. There have been federal hearings in 
Ottawa. There have been, or will be, hearings in Ontario and 
Manitoba and New Brunswick as well, I understand. Why then 
couldn’t we here in Saskatchewan have the same opportunity? 
 
The Minister of Justice when he spoke in this debate earlier said 
that public hearings are unnecessary. He said, and I think that 
this was a telling quote, and I quote it: 
 

Government tends to push through passage of the motion. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, has unfortunately become so much the style 
of this government. They act with no consultation and little 
consideration of the implications of their actions, and the 
opinions of people are ignored while the political interests of 
the government are paramount. 
 
The position taken by the Premier and the Minister of Justice to 
push, as they call it, this motion, flies in the face of every 
reasonable argument. If public hearings are not necessary, why 
did hearings take place in Ottawa? Why did other provinces 
believe that process to be important? Why have many 
individuals and organizations in this province urged that 
hearings take place? Surely they should have a right to be 
heard. 
 
Several government members spoke in this debate. I’m glad for 
that. And yet not one of them was able to explain why the 
government opposed the opportunity for Saskatchewan citizens 
to discuss the accord. We heard only from them the script 
written by the Prime Minister of Canada, and I regret that very 
much. 
 
I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people should be accorded the 
opportunity to say what they think, to ask for explanations, and 
to be able to better understand the complexities addressed by 
the Meech Lake accord. And that is why we moved, in this 
Assembly, during this debate, an amendment that would have 
required public hearings so that the people of Saskatchewan 
could ask their questions and make their submissions. The 
government chose to defeat that motion. That is regrettable and 
that is indefensible. 
 
The Premier who was at the table at which the accord was 
struck has never made himself available for questioning on this 
accord. The very process of this motion he put forward in this 
House insulates him from having to answer questions or 
provide information. People in central Canada, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, with easy access to Ottawa, were given the 
opportunity to easily participate in the federal hearings. The 
former Prime Minister, Mr. Trudeau, took part; other so-called 
prominent Canadians took part. But the citizens of 
Saskatchewan were not afforded that opportunity. 
 
This insistence by the Premier and the Minister of Justice that 
there should be no public hearings, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
ignores the geographic and the historical realities of Canada. 
Those near the centre of government in Ottawa have easy 
access to the decision making, but those who live in regions 
such as the western prairies, or  

eastern or the western coats, somehow become second class, 
receiving what central Canada has decided to offer them. 
 
And I say that it’s difficult to understand why a provincial 
government in this province would accept that so readily, and 
say to Saskatchewan people that they have no role even in such 
an important matter as an amendment to the constitution. In the 
amendment of our constitution I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the 
people are locked out then the process is flawed. And in 
Saskatchewan’s case, the people have been locked out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have pointed 
out in this debate that we welcome the recognition in the accord 
of the role of Quebec in Canadian society. The constitution of 
Canada must have full legitimacy in Quebec as well as 
elsewhere in Canada, as has been said by others. And I’m 
confident that across this land there was a sense of joy and 
relief that Quebec by the accord had agreed to formally become 
part of the constitution. I applaud the negotiations for this very 
important achievement. 
 
The resolution before us is a great stride forward in achieving 
the objective of a united Canada in which all regions, including 
Quebec, are a part. This accomplishment is so significant that it 
in itself is reason for us in the end to consider supporting the 
resolution. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we share the concern expressed by the 
Yukon and the Territories that the changes in the rules 
governing entry of the new provinces into confederation are 
unwise and unfair. I am afraid that the stringency of the new 
unanimity rule is unjust and it’s unfair. 
 
We expressed our concern by proposing an amendment to 
improve the Meech Lake provision. Once gain our position is 
on the record, and once again the government in its desire to 
push this resolution through, defeated that amendment. 
 
Saskatchewan, of all provinces, having suffered so often from 
federal government neglect, should have led the way in 
proposing the removal of this unanimity rule on the entry of 
new provinces into the Canadian confederation. Mr. Speaker, 
we have stated that; it is on the record. It’s regrettable that the 
government members opposite would not consider it. 
 
My colleague, the member from Cumberland, who speaks in 
such an articulate way about our native people, he articulated 
our regrets that the accord does not advance the objective of 
dealing with the constitutional aspirations of Canadians of 
native origin. The member from Cumberland represented those 
aspirations with passion and sincerity. I don’t know if any other 
member of this House could have stated it better. Even Pope 
John Paul took the time, travelling thousands of miles, to 
address this issue in his speech at Fort Simpson. 
 
Isn’t it ironical, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Pope, with his 
busy schedule, travelling thousands of miles, would be more 
aware of the concerns of our native people than  
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2804 
 
 

the Prime Minister of Canada and the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The amendment moved by the member 
from Cumberland, which was just defeated by the government 
members opposite, puts on the record our concern about the 
inadequacies of the Meech Lake accord with regard to the 
recognition of the aspirations of native people. The Premier, on 
this issue as on others that we have raised, chose to speak for 
the Prime Minister; only New Democrats chose to speak on 
behalf of native people and their aspirations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another issue that has been addressed and 
discussed in this debate is the question of the Senate. There are 
few people who will defend the Senate in Canada today. In my 
opinion the accord provisions move in the direction completely 
opposite to where we should be going in this obsolete luxury 
retirement home for politicians and political party supporters 
who no longer want to be involved in the day-to-day activities 
of their political party. This low regard which Canadians have 
for the Senate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I note it has even been 
shared by the Prime Minister, but only when the Senate 
knocked his . . . rapped his knuckles because it had some 
concerns about the drug patent legislation. 
 
I think that the Meech Lake accord provision, which now 
requires unanimity in the reform of the Senate, is a bad move. It 
may very well perpetuate for ever the Senate in its form, 
without any opportunity for reasonable and adequate reform of 
that body and that institution. 
 
Many people have different views. Some believe it should be 
abolished; others talk of a Triple E Senate, but the one view 
they all share is that it ought to be reformed. I’m afraid that this 
accord prevents that from happening in the future because of the 
amendment formula which it proposes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there have been others who have raised 
another issue that is of concern to many groups in Canada. This 
deals with the absence of any reference to section 15 and 
section 28 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. These 
sections, as you know, are the equality provision and the 
provisions which basically say that the rights and the freedoms 
in the charter are guaranteed equally to male and female 
persons. 
 
Here again is an issue that deserved public discussion. Here 
again is an issue which people who have those concerns, and 
there are many of them, should have been able to express to 
public hearings which should have been held in Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to the House and to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
decision of the Premier to refuse the opportunity for input by 
people who have these concerns and other concerns such as our 
native people have, such as our territories have, our 
multicultural organizations have, is a disregard for democracy 
itself. It is the act of a premier and a government who have 
taken on the big brother approach in which they think that they 
alone have all the answers; they alone know what’s good for 
everyone; and  

they alone will make all the decisions behind closed doors of 
the cabinet room. 
 
The other significant flaw in the accord, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
the reference to the changing and the formula which will 
determine whether the territories become a province of Canada. 
Other members who have spoken have addressed that issue 
before me, so I shall not spend much time because my time is 
quickly drawing to a close. 
 
We moved an amendment, the New Democratic Party 
opposition moved an amendment to change that formula, 
because we think that the proposals are unfair. 
 
Consider this. To amend the constitution of Canada will take 50 
per cent of the population and a certain number of provinces — 
seven out of 10. But to allow a province . . . a territory to 
become a province not takes unanimity. Somehow that seems to 
me to be unfair. We have put that on the record as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Moose Jaw South addressed an 
issue which I feel very strongly about, and I wish that I had 
more time to deal with it in a more adequate way. And that is 
the question of the real composition of our country, and that is 
our multicultural nature. Mr. Speaker, that is what makes this 
country strong. 
 
We acknowledged at the outset that the major accomplishment 
of the Meech Lake accord is the hope it brings that Quebec may 
become a full participant in Canadian confederation. But having 
said that, we must be careful also to acknowledge the fact that 
Canada is a truly multicultural society. And I hope that all 
members of this House, and the Premier in particular, in the 
follow-up to this accord, will keep that in mind and so that we 
do not lose sight of that fact. 
 
Our history as a nation has placed all of us within a common 
border and under a common law. All of us share one precious 
possession, the name Canadian. And to a large extent, to be a 
Canadian means to have initially been a stranger, to have left 
behind the familiar for something new. And I hope that the 
constitution of Canada does not deny the stranger among us, 
because if it does, it also and thereby continues to deny Canada. 
 
(1700) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are a nation in which there is more 
understanding of people, of each other, than I think anywhere 
else in the word. Why? Because you can go to any community 
in Saskatchewan and hear another language besides English or 
French spoken. You can hear Ukrainian spoken and nobody is 
surprised. You can hear French or Chinese or Hungarian or 
German spoken and nobody is surprised because that’s normal. 
 
And because of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have always 
believed that this country is a model to the rest of the world in 
the understanding that people have of each other’s differences, 
and I hope that we will continue to do that no matter what 
happens to the Meech Lake accord in the end. 
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2805 
 
 

I conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying that we have expressed 
several concerns about the accord. We have proposed some 
solutions that we thought were reasonable and important. We 
asked and we urged the government to improve the accord and 
to be part of that improvement. We regret that they denied the 
opportunity to do that. 
 
But in this accord, finally, there is one major achievement, and 
that is that our country now has all the provinces and the federal 
government in political harmony in the constitution of Canada. 
That’s not a small achievement. We acknowledge that and we 
applaud it. 
 
That is the part of the resolution that is most important in a 
political and public policy sense as the member from 
Elphinstone has said: it is the recognition of the role of Quebec 
in Canadian society. We’re happy to see that happen. 
 
We’re concerned about the process which we think, and I think 
most people in Saskatchewan will think, has been flawed and 
inadequate. We have put that on the record; it is well know, and 
we stand by those resolutions that we moved in the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a 
couple of minutes, and I know that we’re fast approaching 5 
o’clock, but I just want to take a couple of minutes to put a 
couple of comments on the record relative to the resolution 
that’s before us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that we are near the end of the debate on the 
resolution to authorize amendments to the constitution of 
Canada, I think it has become clear that each of us cares very 
deeply for Canada and wants to see the nation’s future be the 
very best that it can be for us and for all Canadians. 
 
The constitution is, of course, not perfect, nor will it be perfect 
when the amendment contained in the resolution before us is 
proclaimed. But Canada itself is a compromise, and so is its 
constitution. I, for one, think the compromise will be far better 
when these amendments have been made. 
 
First, this will complete the unfinished agenda left over from 
the 1981-82 constitutional round. Quebec will be, in all 
respects, both legally and politically in the constitution. 
 
Second, the changes to the constitution themselves: the 
recognition of the fundamental characteristics of Canada and 
the distinct society of Quebec; the provision for special 
agreements on immigration; the role of provinces with respect 
to appointments to the Senate and the Supreme Court of 
Canada; the entrenchment of the Supreme Court of Canada; the 
new provision respecting shared cost programs; the provision 
for annual conferences on the constitution and the economy; 
and finally, the changes to the amending formula itself — all 
represent improvements to the manner in which this country 
works. 

More so than ever, we must work together in Canada to meet 
the challenges which face us now, and which will face us in the 
next century. It is essential that we approach those challenges as 
a united country and as a country where people and government 
are able to communicate, to consult, and to co-operate fully. 
These amendments and the things they will enable us to do 
represent a significant improvement in that regard. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, there are those who worry about certain 
details, and I respect their concern. I respect them for being 
good Canadians who want the best for Canada and its 
constitution, but at the same time I say to them that unanimous 
accord is essential, for this package of the constitutional change 
is a fragile thing. 
 
I believe it is the best that we could obtain, and I also believe 
that unless it is adopted and proclaimed in force soon, the 
circumstances for another unanimous agreement may not come 
again for a very long time. 
 
I believe that is a risk we cannot afford to take, Mr. Speaker. 
We cannot afford to be anything less than united. We cannot 
afford to continue to expend our national energies on this 
agenda. As I said earlier, we have other great challenges which 
face us and which must command our best efforts. 
 
In conclusion then, Mr. Speaker, I commend this resolution to 
each and every member of this Assembly. As I have said, I 
believe it is the best compromise available. I hope that each and 
every member of this Assembly can see his or her way clear 
past any questions on particular issues or particular details so 
that this Assembly may adopt this resolution unanimously. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1710) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 43 
 
Muller Duncan 
McLeod Andrew 
Berntson Lane 
Taylor Smith 
Maxwell Schmidt 
Hodgins Gerich 
Hardy Klein 
Meiklejohn Martin 
Toth Johnson 
McLaren Hopfner 
Swenson Baker 
Gleim Neudorf 
Gardner Kopelchuk 
Britton Blakeney 
Brockelbank Shillington 
Koskie Tchorzewski 
Thompson Rolfes 
Mitchell Upshall 
Simard Hagel 
Calvert Van Mulligen 
Koenker Goodale 
 
  



 
September 23, 1987 

 

2806 
 
 

Martens 
 

Nays — 3 
 
Anguish Goulet 
Lyons  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked with the 
Opposition Whip about this, and so by leave of the Assembly, I 
move, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That the resolution just passed concerning an amendment 
to the constitution of Canada be transmitted by Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of this Assembly, to the Clerk of the 
Privy Council of Canada. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:14 p.m. 
 


