


















































October 29, 1987 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

October 29, 1987 
 

3651 
 

AFTERNOON SITTING 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce two 
guests sitting behind the rail on the government side of the House. 
They are two MLAs from Manitoba who had an interest in what 
was going on at the Saskatchewan Farm Finance Symposium 
that’s going on downtown at this very moment. They are Jim 
Downey, MLA for Arthur constituency in Manitoba, and Clayton 
Mannes, MLA for Morris constituency in Manitoba. They have 
been in town taking part in the discussions that have gone on at the 
symposium this morning, and I expect they will take part in the 
discussions that go on this afternoon and tomorrow as well. The 
only thing more interesting, I suppose, than the farm finance 
symposium is question period here in the House. That’s the only 
thing that would draw them away from that. 
 
I would invite all members, Mr. Speaker, to welcome these two 
members from Manitoba to our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you, and through you to this House, and all members, 75 adult 
students from the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Arts and 
Science, which is located — at least one of the colleges is located 
in my constituency — in the former R.J. Davidson School on 
Franklin. I’d like to welcome all of you here this afternoon. I hope 
you enjoy the question period, and I look forward to meeting with 
you at 3 o’clock. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to join with the 
member from Regina North West in welcoming these students 
from that school. I have a Wascana Institute in my constituency. 
The Saskatchewan Skills Development Program is a program of 
excellence and one that I’m sure they’re going to achieve a lot 
from. I’d like to use a quote, if I may, from Oliver Wendell 
Holmes, that: 
 

. . . the great thing in this world is not so much where we 
stand, (but) as in what direction we are moving. 

 
And by being involved in the Saskatchewan Skills Development 
Program, you’re obviously moving in a very positive direction, 
and we compliment you for that. 
 
I join with other members in welcoming you here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 
join with the other members in welcoming the class here today. I 
have one constituent, Ernestine Janvier from La Loche — and I’m 
not sure if I have any more constituents — but I want to take this 
opportunity to extend to you, Ernestine, and the rest of the class, 
best wishes. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Tax on Propane Gas Supplies 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 
Minister of Finance, I’d like to address my question to the Deputy 
Premier. It deals with the red tape nightmare created by this 32 
cent a gallon gas tax. The latest example of the red tape involved 
in this whole process comes in the bulletin put out by the 
department of revenue, addressed to all propane suppliers and 
dealers. 
 
All propane used in vehicles, as you know, is subject to the gas 
tax, while propane used for heating or cooking or lighting is tax 
exempt. But effective November 1, you will require propane 
wholesalers to collect a 32 cent a gallon tax on all the propane that 
they deliver to the retailers. Then the retailer is required to keep 
track of what was sold for a tax exempt purpose and claim a tax 
credit on future purchases from the wholesaler. 
 
Can the minister explain how this reduces the red tape nightmare 
for small-business people who sell propane? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I suppose, Mr. Speaker, it’s always 
difficult to find a balance between fairness and administrative red 
tape, as he calls it. I suppose the only thing that would be worse, 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP were back in office and they had a 20 per 
cent tax on all fuels. And since I’m . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Thank you, I appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since I’m not familiar in detail as the Minister of 
Finance would be with this particular issue, I’ll take notice of the 
question and have the Minister of Finance respond when he 
returns — I believe tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the Deputy 
Premier. Under this procedure the propane retailers are paying a 
32 cent a gallon tax on a non-taxable time. They then have to 
apply for a rebate of a tax they shouldn’t have paid in the first 
place. 
 
When you’re getting information from the Minister of Finance and 
taking notice, can you also explain the legal foundation for the 
collection of a tax on a non-taxable item? And is this a legal 
principle you plan to apply elsewhere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — To answer the first question, the answer is 
yes. To answer the second question, I’ll leave that to the Minister 
of Finance because the answer to the second question depends on 
the answer to the first question. 
 

Status of Farmland Security Act and Production Loans 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3652 
 

Program 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
directed to the Deputy Premier, and it flows from comments that 
he has made in the media in the last couple of days about the 
quickening pace in the legislature and the fact that the House may 
adjourn in the next short while. And I wonder if the Deputy 
Premier could indicate where this would leave The Farmland 
Security Act which, as the Deputy Premier will know, was 
extended to the end of this calendar year with the provision for it 
to be extended even further by order of the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. 
 
Obviously the agricultural situation has not improved since we last 
amended the legislation, and I wonder if the Deputy Premier could 
indicate the government’s specific intention with respect to The 
Farmland Security Act and whether it will be extended further. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In response to the hon. member’s 
question, Mr. Speaker, as when that Act was first introduced some 
three years ago now, the legislation provided for the Act to be 
continued for a second year based on what conditions might be at 
that time. That same provision is there, and I suspect some time 
later this year cabinet will make a decision so far as whether that’s 
going to be extended again. 
 
I think everyone is aware, as the hon. member has pointed out, that 
there is . . . nothing has improved in the farm sector over the past 
year. And as well, everyone is aware that at this very moment 
there is a conference going on in Regina, convened by our 
Premier, to look at that whole question of farm debt and what 
innovative solutions we might additionally come up with to 
protect our farmers and to keep them on the land, and in fact 
improve their well being, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, farmers will anxiously await the 
word from the government about their intentions with respect to 
The Farmland Security Act. 
 
I would ask the minister to give some indication, at this point in 
time, of the government’s intention with respect to the production 
loans program. As he knows that program will, in the normal 
course, require repayments beginning about the first of 1988 
unless the government further extends or modifies that program. 
And I wonder if the minister could indicate if the government 
intends, indeed, to modify again the repayment terms of the 
production loans program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at this very moment 
no decision has been made on that, and the reason no decision has 
been made is because the government is in fact canvassing the 
views of the farmers and farm groups. It is one of the discussion 
items that has been discussed. In fact at this very moment at the 
conference, as well as recently as last week, myself and other 
members of the cabinet met with the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities; they put forth an option on that. I’m sure 
other groups have come forth with some possible options relative 
to the production 

loan. They’ll all get consideration, and a decision will be made, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Comments on Free Trade Deal by American Official 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Acting Minister of Agriculture, and it deals with comments on the 
Mulroney-Reagan secret trade deal. And these comments were 
made by an American agricultural official, one Jim Nichols, he’s 
the commissioner of agriculture for Minnesota, and he says the 
deal is bad for farmers on both sides of the border. Mr. Nichols 
told Saskatchewan farmers, and I just want to quote: 
 

Mulroney sold you guys out pretty cheap. We have only 50 
stars on the American flag (today, but as soon as this deal is 
ratified we will be able to sew it on, on the 51st.) 

 
When American officials are asking . . . are telling farmers in 
public meetings in Saskatchewan that the Mulroney-Reagan trade 
deal is a sell-out which would end up as Canada being a 51st state, 
how can you stand there and continue to say this is a good deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, since I had a little fun with 
this yesterday, I’d like to have another run at it today. You can 
find people all over the United States — all over United States, but 
not too many, that would say, Mr. Speaker, that the protectionist 
mode that United States is embarked on is the right way to go. 
You can find people in Canada that will say the same thing, that 
we should build these big walls around our respective countries, as 
the member for Riversdale said the other day at the University of 
Saskatoon when he very simplistically tried to explain what this 
free trade deal does. 
 
He said, Mr. Speaker, you put a fence down this line, and you put 
ten cattle on this side, and then you put 100 cattle on this side, and 
then you take the fence up, Mr. Speaker — this is the member for 
Riversdale, the new leader of the NDP in Saskatchewan — and he 
says, what do you think will happen? Those 10 cattle from the 
Canadian side of the fence are likely to mingle with those 100 
cattle on the other side of the fence, and those 100 cattle might 
come up and eat some of our grass or get into some of our 
markets; some of our cattle might get into United States market — 
what a terrible thing! 
 
The United States market, Mr. Speaker, is 10 times as large as 
ours, and why wouldn’t we want to have access to that market? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I’m not concerned 
about anything but making sure that Saskatchewan farmers stay on 
the land in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3653 
 

Mr. Upshall: — And we’re saying that, and the people in the 
United States are saying that. This person, Mr. Nichols, says the 
only people who will benefit are the large private grain companies, 
the food processors, the oil companies and the banks. That’s 
who’s going to benefit — and pitting farmer against farmer on 
either side of the border. 
 
He notes, just as you’ve mentioned about cattle — he notes that 
cattle production will be swamped . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. I’d 
like to remind the member not to quote on supplementary 
questions. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, this person indicates that American 
cheap, corn-fed beef will swamp our markets, and they can range 
them for 12 months. 
 
So I ask you: does the Government of Saskatchewan have any 
studies that it can table in this legislature to point out otherwise, or 
are you going to continue to mouth this deal, jumping into a blind 
leap of faith with this trading arrangement negotiated by a Premier 
and a Prime Minister who were so desperate that they would sign 
anything? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I hesitate to inject a little fairness and 
reason into the discussion, but that member, that member, Mr. 
Speaker, that member was invited, that member was invited to 
participate. He was talking about his interest in keeping 
Saskatchewan farmers on the farm. He was invited to participate 
in the seminar that’s going on downtown at this very day. It’s 
going on this very day. And I don’t care when he was invited. The 
fact is, he was invited. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he showed up for lunch today. He showed up for 
lunch. He wasn’t there to participate this morning. And during 
lunch there was a speaker. That speaker was Keith Kelly — Keith 
Kelly, commissioner of agriculture from Montana — who takes 
the exact opposite view of the commissioner of agriculture from 
Minnesota, and that just tells you something of the debate that 
goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, would you, after this question period is 
over, like to table the invitation that I supposedly received to the 
agriculture symposium? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, if the invitation 
was sent, I don’t have it, you know. Number one; that’s number 
one. Number two . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Number two, Mr. Speaker, I wish I had it 
here. But I saw the member . . . Oh, I do. I saw this

morning, Mr. Speaker, at noon, the member walking around with 
his happy little badge on that shows that he was an invited guest. 
And I’d be glad if I could get it off you this afternoon to table it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Closure of Dentist’s Office in Gravelbourg 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of 
Health and the Premier, I’ll direct my question to the Acting 
Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, it has to do with your 
government’s privatization of the children’s dental care program 
and the resultant reduction in access to dental care for children in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
You will be aware, Mr. Minister, that in Gravelbourg there was — 
there was — a satellite office for a dentist’s office that was 
provided by a dentist from Moose Jaw who, since the privatization 
of the children’s dental care program has said now, he’s decided 
he’s become too busy and has closed down his satellite office in 
Gravelbourg. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister: are you aware of this case, and can 
you tell me how the elimination of this satellite office in the town 
of Gravelbourg has improved the access to dental care for the 
children of that town? Can you tell me that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of all the 
details. I have heard that the dentist did leave Gravelbourg and that 
the town is actively searching and recruiting a new dentist. I would 
think an area the size of Gravelbourg, a town of that stature, will 
have no trouble in getting a dentist, and I wish them well on this. 
 
Dentists move from time to time throughout this province; did 
when we had a school dental plan; have for a number of years. I 
don’t know the reasons why the dentist left Gravelbourg, but I feel 
confident that Gravelbourg will be able to recruit a dentist and will 
provide service to the students of that area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
Gravelbourg does not have a dentist because it is not worth it to a 
dentist to be there. And you know, you know that prior to the 
privatization of your dental care program, your children’s dental 
care program, Gravelbourg had a dental care clinic in its 
elementary school and it had a satellite office for a dentist. 
Gravelbourg now has neither a dental care clinic; it does not have 
dentist service. And can you explain to the families of 
Gravelbourg how that’s an improvement of the dental care service 
to the families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I have trouble following the logic of the 
member opposite. It would seem to me, when there are more 
students available for private dentists, and that is the same in any 
part of Saskatchewan, that certainly a dental practice will be more 
attractive in Gravelbourg, as 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3654 
 

there will be other areas in which there’ll be more students there 
for the dentist to service. So I fail to follow your logic. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, there 
are families across rural Saskatchewan who haven’t noticed the 
advantages of the privatization of the children’s dental care 
program, and you know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — You will know as well, Mr. Minister, that prior to 
September 1 families throughout the constituency of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg could have their children cared for at nine 
school-based clinics in nine communities — nine school-based 
clinics in nine communities. 
 
Today, Mr. Minister, in the constituency of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg they have access to three dentists in one 
community — in Assiniboia only. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, 
will you explain how that is improved access to dental care for 
families in Coronach, in Gravelbourg, in Lafleche, in Limerick 
and Mossbank and Rockglen and Willow Bunch and others? Can 
you answer that one for them, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the hon. 
member for being just a little late for his question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member refers to the Gravelbourg circumstance, 
and the member should very well know, as I’m sure the member 
from Gravelbourg understands, the dentist who is leaving 
Gravelbourg is leaving for this reason, stated by that dentist and by 
the people of Gravelbourg: there’s too much business now. 
There’s too much business now. That’s the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very confident that there 
will be in Gravelbourg, because of the area that is served by that 
area, there will be in Gravelbourg a dentist, and perhaps a couple 
of dentists in that area who will serve that area. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, because the particular individual who was 
there decided now, with the influx of children to his practice, he 
doesn’t want that size of practice, that does not mean that there is 
not the business there for a dentist who does want a practice that 
size or larger. And there will be dentists in Gravelbourg, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you may have some optimism, you 
may have some optimism for the people in the town of 
Gravelbourg that they’ll have a dentist some day. But, Mr. 
Minister, will you stand in this House and communicate your 
optimism to the families in Coronach, in Gravelbourg and 
Lafleche and Limerick and Mossbank and Rockglen and Willow 
Bunch who had access to a children’s dental care clinic, and they 
don’t now? Will 

you communicate that optimism to them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, the member 
refers to the various communities and speaks of the access to 
dental care, the access to dental care that were involved in those 
various communities. And, Mr. Speaker, I repeat once again, those 
children’s dental care programs were there, and the dental 
therapists or the technicians that visited those communities were 
not there, as the member suggests, and as his colleagues have 
suggested, were not there on an ongoing basis. They were not 
there on a weekly basis. They were there for the most . . . they 
were there, Mr. Speaker, and individual children saw those 
dentists once . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — So, Mr. Speaker, just to complete the 
answer to the question. The dental services that are rising up in 
rural Saskatchewan in the various communities that have not had 
dental services until now, for all citizens of the province, be they 
children, adolescents, or the adult community of those various 
communities — the adult population of those communities — is a 
benefit to rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not a decline in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I don’t know how many times we 
have to go through this to get the message to sink in. The fact of 
the matter is — supplementary, Mr. Speaker — the fact of the 
matter is that children in the communities of Coronach and 
Gravelbourg and Lafleche and Limerick and Mossbank and 
Rockglen and Willow Bunch had access to a high-quality 
preventative dental care program, and now they have no dental 
care programs available to them at all. And can you explain how 
that is better to those children and to their families? Can you 
explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said, and as the 
dentist who is leaving Gravelbourg has said, the number of people 
who want to visit the dentist is too great for his practice. So what 
I’m saying to you, Mr. Speaker, is, there will be dentists in 
Gravelbourg because dentists, and young dentists who are trained 
in the college of dentistry in our own University of Saskatchewan, 
are looking for places to practise. 
 
And when enterprising young dentists see a place like 
Gravelbourg where a dentist is leaving because the practice is too 
lucrative, they’ll be there to fill the void. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, this 
dentist may be busier in Moose Jaw, but can you tell me, who is 
the dentist that’s coming to Gravelbourg? Who is the dentist 
coming to Coronach? Who is the dentist coming to Lafleche, to 
Limerick, to Mossbank, to Rockglen, and to Willow Bunch? And 
will you explain to the people in rural Saskatchewan how this loss 
of a very



 
October 29, 1987 

3655 
 

important preventative dental care service is better for them and 
better for their children? You can’t justify that, and you know it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting, the member 
from Moose Jaw speaking about the lack of dental services or lack 
of any type of service in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of rural Saskatchewan, the number one 
concern that they have — or numbers two or three or down to 
number 10 — is not where the child will visit the dentist once a 
year. That’s not the concern that they have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That member, the member that represents Assiniboia and 
Gravelbourg, is in the House today. The member that represents 
Assiniboia and Gravelbourg is here. And I would suggest he, as a 
rural member, as are all of our rural members here, many here, 
who represent rural ridings who those members say have this great 
concern about . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. The member can’t 
answer if he’s constantly interrupted. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate you bringing the House to order. 
 
The members, the rural members that are on this side of the 
House, the rural members for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, frankly, 
other rural members know the concerns of people in rural 
Saskatchewan, and those concerns are not, where shall that visit to 
the dentist, that annual visit to the dentist be. 
 
But to answer the question directly as it relates to Gravelbourg, 
I’m very confident there will be dental service in Gravelbourg 
because of the market that is there in that area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fee Increases for Nursing Home Residents in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I was glad to see the Minister of 
health come into this House this afternoon because I, too, have a 
question for him. 
 
On Sunday, on this upcoming Sunday, November 1, fees for 
residents of nursing homes in this province are again going to 
increase. Mr. Minister, you know that on Sunday the fee will 
increase to $596. That’s an 18 per cent increase in the last year — 
indeed, an 18 per cent since the month of May; that’s seven 
months. 
 
Mr. Minister, on behalf of the many seniors who have contacted 
myself and this caucus, and on behalf of their families, I ask you 
today, will you reconsider this fee increase, and will you stop 
trying to pay for your deficit out of the pension incomes of seniors 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate, 
frankly, the chance to explain this to the member who has had it 
explained to him many times. 
 
It won’t matter so much, but, Mr. Speaker, the seniors of 
Saskatchewan who understand this well, that when the fee was 
first set, the common fee in nursing homes for special care level 3 
and 4 was first set back in about 1981, it was set at 86 per cent. 
You need to have some type of a bench-mark, some type of a focal 
point, some type of a point of reference to do this. It was set at 86 
per cent of the maximum benefits available to the person most in 
need, that person who receives old age security, guaranteed 
income supplement, and the Saskatchewan income plan — those 
three programs. You take 86 per cent, and that’s what was done in 
1981, about 86 per cent of that benefit. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the number that will be charged, 596 on the 1st 
of November, represents that same percentage. In other words, 
Mr. Speaker, that same reference point, that same proportion to the 
benefits that are coming to the people most in need of those 
nursing homes is intact and remains as it was in 1981 when we 
were not the government, Mr. Speaker, when they were the 
government. 
 
It’s a reasonable number to charge, Mr. Speaker, and it stands a 
very important test — the test of fairness. it withstands that test 
very, very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Guaranteed Income Supplement 
 
Mr. Calvert: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister. 
Mr. Minister, you are correct, you have some explaining to do to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, will you then explain this. Since 
your government took office, the guaranteed income supplement 
from the federal government which Ottawa pays to the poorest of 
our senior citizens has been increased 53 per cent. But every time 
Ottawa increased the GIS, your government has stepped in and 
taken it away, penny for penny. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, will you explain how you can justify taking 
every little bit of extra income to Saskatchewan seniors in nursing 
homes while you still have money, as were indicated this week, to 
spend millions on paid television political ads? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I have explained to the 
member, the circumstance surrounding this has not changed, 
whether it was their government or our government. In terms you 
must have a point of reference at which . . . and it’s a fair and 
reasonable point of reference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the disposable income for people, the disposable 
income, minimum disposable income for people in nursing homes, 
level 3 and 4, is in the order of 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3656 
 

$103 per month. Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s remember which citizens 
of this province we’re talking about here. These are people in the 
heaviest of care, level 3 or 4, that care, the cost of which ranges — 
depending on the home that they’re in — but range from 2,000 to 
$3,000 per bed per month — per bed, 2 to $3,000. And the cost, as 
the member has said, will be, on November 1, $596. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan, through this 
department, recognizing the needs of those people, is paying 70 
per cent or thereabouts of the costs of those residents living in 
those nursing homes, and while at the same time leaving them a 
disposal income, a fair and reasonable disposable income of $103. 
I will recall, Mr. Speaker, when they were in power it was $65 
when they set this in place — $65 disposable income for those 
folks. It’s $103 as of November 1. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
The Local Government Board 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 22 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to 
deal with the question of capital debt. One of the consequences of 
the elimination of the provincial capital fund and the holding the 
line, as it were, or even the reduction in the urban assistance and 
other transfer payments to municipalities, is that municipalities 
will have to borrow more to undertake their capital projects. In 
fact, this is a direction that you have advocated. I’m wondering 
whether the minister can advise us as to whether or not there has 
been any discernible trend so far this year in terms of increased 
borrowing by municipalities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, last year the total borrowings 
were in the area of 64 million. To date in 1987, or at least till 
October 1, total borrowings are 39 million. So it appears that the 
municipalities have followed the lead of the government, have 
scrutinized their priorities, have redeveloped or redesigned or had 
a new look at some of their priorities, because if this trend 
continues, it would even be lower than last year. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well it sounds to me then like a number of 
capital projects are being cut back — either that or they’re getting 
some windfall through lotteries or somewhere else, Mr. Minister. 
But I just want to point to the example of the city of Saskatoon, 
where it was reported in the Star-Phoenix on October 6 that the 
city of Saskatoon’s debentures had increased from 1986 . . . an 
estimate of $59.5 million to a 1987 estimate of in excess of $67 
million, which would be the single-largest gross debt on the part of 
the city since 1982, which is the first year for which we have 
figures. I’m wondering, is that then an isolated example of 
increased debenture borrowing? 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that in the case of 
Saskatoon they did have an unusually large, one single debenture 
in the area of $9 million that covered an accumulation of capital 
expenditures — not the least of which was included in the new 
bridge. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Did that debenture program also extend to 
1986, Mr. Minister? I note that the outstanding net debt per capita 
for Saskatoon, which had decreased since the ’70s, early ’70s, 
after the introduction of capital programs and so on, capital funds 
in 1986 saw a sharp increase from the previous year of 1985. And 
as I indicated earlier, they are estimating another sharp increase in 
1987. 
 
Did that particular project then extend over two years, or did they 
have, again, unusual borrowing requirements in ’86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the member is correct. They 
did have unusually large borrowings. They have had three major 
projects there, very well known to all of us — the arena, which 
was a great deal of money; the bridge; and the water treatment 
plan, all done within a reasonably short period of time. As a result, 
it’s understandable that their requirements would be there in one 
big swoop. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Just one further question on this, Mr. 
Minister. Would it be your intention to monitor more closely now 
the per capita municipal debt in the various municipalities 
throughout Saskatchewan in the coming years. 
 
In view of the fact that the capital fund has been discontinued, 
there are further curtailments in revenues to urban municipalities. 
One of the consequences of that is that municipalities will have to 
borrow more to provide for the financing of necessary capital 
projects. But in borrowing more, they will of necessity incur 
higher debts, and they will have higher debts per capita. 
 
Would it be your intention to monitor the total amount of 
borrowing, the debenture program, with a view to making sure 
that we do not get into a situation where there will be excessive 
borrowing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, so far the indications 
aren’t there. They aren’t borrowing more. I just explained the 
numbers, and it appears as though the local governments who 
have been managing their affairs extremely well over the last few 
years are continuing to do so. They all recognize the restraint that 
was upon all of us. This time around, they’ve done a very good job 
with money management. 
 
And I think as far as the Local Government Board is concerned, 
we always do a good thorough job and will continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’m pleased by those assurances, Mr. 
Minister. My concern is not so much this year, because my sense 
is that a number of municipalities will have cut back on capital 
projects and therefore that does not represent additional borrowing 
for them. 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3657 
 

But the problems may well come the next year or two, that if your 
government continues to insist that it will not provide capital 
funding for municipalities, in order for them to undertake 
necessary capital projects they will have to borrow more. And 
there is a sense of concern that this may create a problem for some 
municipalities in the future. 
 
This is the same kind of situation that we had in the 1930s and 
resulted in financial problems for a number of municipalities. You 
will know, Mr. Minister, that there used to be a limit on the 
amount of borrowing that a municipality could undertake. It was 
limited to a percentage of their total assessment. And I stand to be 
corrected on that, but it is my impression that there was that limit. 
That limit no longer exists, and it’s a question now of the Local 
Government Board monitoring the situation in each community. 
 
But I am wondering whether you have given any special direction 
to that board with a view to ensuring that there will not be any 
municipalities getting into trouble as a result of the discontinuation 
of capital funding and as a result of not having a set limit on 
borrowing for municipalities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I really don’t share the 
pessimistic outlook of my colleague opposite. The local 
governments are doing a good job. They obviously have set their 
own priorities. I don’t believe that by the deferrals of some 
projects or re-planning of others they’ve encountered or 
experienced any difficulties. They are looking forward to perhaps 
a new program coming into place from our government. 
 
As always the Local government Board have monitored the 
municipalities, and will continue to monitor the municipalities. 
Hopefully there will be no change from the norm and things will 
progress as normally, with the exception that everybody is just 
have a look — a relook at what they had on their drawing boards. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I have no further questions, but I just want 
to thank the minister for his answers and to thank his officials for 
attending here today and to helping him out with the questions that 
were asked. Thank you. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

The Local Government Board 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 22 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

The Local Government Board 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 22 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions?

Hon. Mr. Klein: — I would just like to thank the two young 
ladies who helped me so admirably during the questions. 
Obviously my colleague across has had a wealth of practical 
experience from his side of the coin in this area. He asked very 
good questions. I think that our professional civil servants again 
displayed their thorough knowledge and working ability of this 
department. And as time goes by, there is no question that things 
will continue to improve, and thank you very much. 
 
(1445) 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Local Government Finance Commission 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 52 

 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I don’t have the supps with me, but I just 
want to ask the minister: with respect to the Local Government 
Finance Commission report, can he advise just the specifics of the 
review process that he has set up? And I would assume this to be 
in conjunction with other ministers because this is something that 
cuts across a number of departments. 
 
Can he advise the House, and can he now advise urban 
municipalities, and other local governments, just which officials 
are involved in the review process — and I assume there to be a 
review committee; and which official heads that up? And is there a 
responsible minister for the ongoing review, then, of the 
recommendations of the Local Government Finance Commission 
report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, as I think I mentioned 
earlier in our remarks, the Local Government Finance 
Commission report is complete. That’s why the budget shows 
what it does of zero, and I think that the member brought this into 
the conversation in the LGB (Local Government Board). But as I 
did mention, the Minister of Finance will be the lead agency on 
the total review of the finance commission report. It was 
authorized through that department, and that’s where the direction 
will come from. But it will be done in consultation with the main 
players that the finance report deals with. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can you advise me, then, Mr. Minister, 
who is heading up the review committee, if you like, on the part of 
the government that will, in fact, be examining all of the 
recommendations of the Local Government Finance Commission 
with a view to implementing those recommendations. Who is the 
lead official in the process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — It’s all under the direction of the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Am I to assume then that the minister 
himself has taken personal responsibility for this review process, 
that there’s no single official that will be assisting him in this 
undertaking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I don’t know what officials he has appointed 
to assist him in his review. I can tell you that my



 
October 29, 1987 

3658 
 

department officials are involved in it whenever they’re called in 
for some discussion or clarification. And the discussions are 
continuing, and it’s just under his direction, I suppose. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Could you advise me, Mr. Minister, of 
what kinds of meetings have been held, what kinds of discussions 
have taken place with respect to implementing the 
recommendations of the LGFC (Local Government Finance 
Commission)? Is this a structured process that you and your 
officials participate in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I know that at the 
ministerial level we have discussed the local government finance 
report on various occasions. We acknowledge the fact that it was a 
very deep and detailed work, the result of which is a thick 
manuscript. We recognize that although there have, in some 
instance, been some definitive recommendations, in others there 
were a lot of grey areas left over. 
 
Some various members of the public and other interest groups 
have expressed disappointment in it. I have not. It simply outlines 
to me and strengthens the fact that what all of these experts that 
came from all over, came up with at the end of a very, very in 
depth study was that the whole issue of municipal finance and 
taxation is extremely complex. And if there was an area that they 
could not agree on or could not come up with a recommendation, 
rather than classify it as a failure, I think that all it is, is a warning 
that it is a severe, complex issue, and it needs more study. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can you advise, Mr. Minister, just how 
local governments in the province, and others who may have an 
interest, may be able to participate in this review that your 
government is now undertaking with respect to the 
recommendations of that report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well there was a lot of reaction originally 
from the interest groups, and I can speak with SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) when the 
results first arrived on the scene, and after which they just seemed 
to lose a little bit of interest. It’s not the topic of discussion, or it’s 
not been the topic of discussion in my realm for a long, long time. 
 
And I can tell you that as we are ready to perhaps implement some 
of the recommendations that may appear in there, as is always the 
practice of our government, we will consult with those interest 
groups. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I want to refer you to a quote 
by the Premier of September 27, 1984, at which time I understand 
that the formation of the Local Government Finance Commission 
was announced. And the Premier said: 
 

When you hand in your report, we won’t just reject them in 
some private room of government (he said). We’ll discuss 
them honestly and openly. What recommendations we can 
implement, we will, and for the ones we can’t, we’ll tell you 
why we can’t. 

 
What prevents you today, Mr. Minister, from telling local

government, and particularly urban government, as to what 
recommendations you will implement, and for the ones that you 
can’t, why you can’t? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well our review is not yet complete, and I 
think that as we proceeded through questions in Local 
Government Board, for example, where you asked me about 
several of the recommendations, I indicated exactly what was 
happening there. 
 
I don’t think it’s a matter of being black and white in a lot of the 
answers. What the Premier said is exactly right. What the Premier 
said is exactly what is happening. What the Premier said is exactly 
what will happen. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Just a very specific question: is there a 
deadline for the completion of this review on the part of your 
government and when we might expect a final response from the 
government as to the recommendations in that report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I suppose that that is the direct question and 
that would really clear up the issue. No, we did not impose a 
deadline on when to deal with that report. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I fear that this report may be 
gathering dust more than it’s gathering learned discussion and 
learned debate within the councils of government. 
 
I have no further comment to make except to say that I strongly 
urge you to become intimately familiar with the recommendations 
of that report, to study those recommendations, and to begin the 
process of implementing those recommendations, many of which 
do make a great deal of sense for urban municipalities in 
Saskatchewan. And I would encourage you to do that. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 52 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 24 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right, 
Dave Innes, the deputy minister; to his right, Keith Schneider, the 
assistant deputy minister; and behind me is Don Harazny, director 
of administrative services; behind my deputy is Rick Kilarski, the 
manager of revenue sharing, municipal finance; and we have two 
other officials in the back chairs, Henry McCutcheon, the 
executive director of community planning, and Gerry Stinson, our 
director of northern municipal services. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I would just want to say 
very briefly that it would be my intention to ask questions on a 
number of topics including the matter of property taxes in 
Saskatchewan; the question of the business tax; issues related to 
revenue sharing and capital funding, as well as some other matters.



 
October 29, 1987 

3659 
 

But before I do that, I have a number of standard questions 
concerning such matters as travel, personal staff, advertising, 
consulting studies, and the like. I have these questions in writing, 
and I wonder: may I send these across to the minister and assume 
that your officials will respond to all these questions in writing in 
the next two to three weeks unless some specific objection can be 
raised before we finish the estimates of your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’d be glad to receive those questions and 
review them and see if we can respond as per your request. Failing 
that, I would respond to them verbally after I have the opportunity 
to look at them. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again I would 
just say that before we finish the estimates, if there are specific 
objections, please raise them, and we can debate them at that time. 
I will assume that if that be the case, and I will assume that you 
will in fact respond in writing, unless you do raise specific 
objections. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to raise the question of whether, in your 
opinion, there is too much reliance on the property tax or whether 
there is potential for the property tax to be used to a greater extent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Your question in my mind is only a half a 
question. And I think that if you were to complete it, then I could 
respond a little bit clearer for you. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well the question again, Mr. Minister, is 
whether, in your opinion, there is either too much reliance on the 
property tax or whether there is potential for the property tax to be 
used to a greater extent as a means of financing urban 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well now that you’ve added that part to it and 
you’re talking about urban government, I suppose the only way 
that I can relate on behalf of urban government is the fact that I am 
a taxpayer in my home and have been for a number of years. And 
if that is their main source of income, then I suppose they would 
operate as efficiently as they can within the parameters of the 
funding that they can raise on property taxes. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you might 
answer that question from the perspective of being the Minister of 
Urban Affairs who obviously has some influence in terms of being 
able to direct revenues towards local government, as opposed to 
the perspective of an individual home owner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think that perhaps what the 
member opposite is leading up to is whether the provincial 
government should be contributing more to the operation of local 
governments. And if that’s what he is getting at, I think that my 
response, fairly, would have to be that being that we really don’t 
have the control over the expenditures of local governments, 
because we believe in autonomy, that therefore if the local 
governments are going to control their expenditures more or less 
on their own, then obviously they have to rely on their own 
resources for a form of revenue to offset those expenditures. I 
don’t believe that they can necessarily lean on the provincial or the 
federal government as a continued or increased source of revenues 
for things that 

they may or may not want to accomplish at their own local levels. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, the Local Government 
Finance Commission final report indicated, and you may wish to 
correct me if I’m wrong in reporting to you what the commission 
says, but they indicate that taking into account the effect of tax 
credits and rebates, Saskatchewan’s net property taxes per capita 
amounted to $598.13 which was 16.3 per cent higher than the 
Canadian average. And they indicate that net property taxes per 
capita in Saskatchewan are the third highest in Canada. Are you 
satisfied with that situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, I think I’d have to go a step beyond 
that. I’ve been a lifelong resident of Regina, having lived here for 
some 48 years. And as I grew up and became a taxpayer . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Gosh, you look older than that Jack. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’m not older than that but I’ve been around 
for a long time in this my home city. 
 
And I’m very proud of my home city save one thing — 
continually Regina has been the highest taxed city almost in 
Canada. And I don’t believe that it’s a fault of the local 
administration. I’m not so sure that you can even pin the 
administration on the era that the member opposite was in it. But 
what I am saying is that over the years, and the years that I have 
been paying taxes in Regina — these high, high rates of taxes — 
unfortunately there has not been one administration that has really 
looked and analysed at the tax structure to the citizens of Regina. 
 
(1500) 
 
And I feel very badly about that, for the reasons that I’ve 
mentioned, along with all of the other people that I grew up with 
in this city that have been paying those high taxes. And I believe 
that in a lot of other municipal communities these very things have 
been done and have been recognized, and each municipality 
having its own problems and each one thereby necessitating 
somehow to increase their sources of revenue. 
 
But you get to the point where a taxpayer can say, I can’t afford 
any more. And I believe that at that time, and I’ll again refer to my 
city, the one that I’m most familiar with, now they have completed 
a study that even indicates within their own administration where 
they are capable of saving money. So perhaps this council in 
Regina is making the first honest attempt at really looking at the 
tax structure of the city of Regina for its citizens. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I think the minister is a bit 
confused. When I read to him the statements from the Local 
Government Finance Commission report, these were figures for 
the province as a whole and not just the city of Regina. And I 
wonder if the minister might have a response on whether he’s 
satisfied with the situation where generally municipalities, or 
property taxpayers in Saskatchewan, are paying the third highest 
property taxes or net property taxes in Canada. It’s not just a 
question of the city of Regina, but for all property taxpayers in 
Saskatchewan. 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3660 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, if you’re suggesting for a moment that 
the provincial government is supposed to do something with all of 
the municipalities to reduce the rates for all of the taxpayers, I 
would suggest then that in the 11 years of the prior administration 
nothing was done for the taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I want to disagree with you. 
I’ve been talking about net property taxation, that is to say 
property taxation from which you might deduct any grants or other 
transfers, such as the property improvement grant which was in 
place, so as to reduce the net burden of the property taxpayer. 
 
Again, in the report it’s indicated that for the 1968 to ‘85 period 
the reliance on the property tax was higher in Saskatchewan 
compared to Canada as a whole, for 1968 to ‘73 inclusive, and in 
1982 and subsequent years. Between 1974 to 1981 inclusive the 
relative reliance was lower in Saskatchewan than in Canada as a 
whole. So we seem to see a bit of a difference here between the 
years 1973 to 1982, and then again from 1982 to the present where 
it seems that the reliance on the property tax was far less than is 
now the case. 
 
Again I want to ask you: are you satisfied with the situation where 
the net property taxation level, on a per capita basis in 
Saskatchewan, is the third highest in Canada? Are you satisfied to 
have it stay that way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I think, Mr. Chairman, that you have to look 
— and if we’re going to get into that debate we’re going to be here 
an awful long time. The obvious admission that you would like me 
to give you, and I will, is that we eliminated the property 
improvement grant. Clearly that, then, affected those figures that 
you’re talking about. And I don’t deny that we did that. 
 
However, you have to consider then: what did we do? Two areas 
that don’t reflect on those figures that would have massive input 
and reduction into those numbers — two only that I will name — 
there would be probably dozens of others, but the main two: the 
senior citizens’ heritage grant, which is not included in those 
figures, which amounts to some $70 million, which would 
certainly affect that significantly; as well as, Mr. Chairman, our 
new home improvement program which we have chosen, rather 
than to include it into a set of property tax figures, which is what 
the hon. member is referring to, but rather transpose that into 
economic development, which is no question what has occurred. 
 
And as a result of the 6 or $700 million of economic activity that 
is being enjoyed by the business community throughout the 
province, a couple of things happened tax-wise that don’t appear 
in those figures as well. There is income tax earned and paid by 
the employees. There’s income tax earned and paid by the small 
business, and there are the spin-off benefits that go around and 
around and around, as you would very well know economically, 
and the spin-off benefits are not included in those. 
 
So if we’re going to get into a rationalization of numbers like that, 
we’ll be here for a long time because for every one that you would 
like to bring up, I would like to bring 

up the other one, the other side of the coin. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, if the 
government-induced economic activity is somehow to be taken as 
a reason or an excuse that property taxes should stay at their high 
level, and that this was not something that was enjoyed in the 
1970s, might I just remind you that the 1970s did see 
unprecedented economic activity in this province. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, do you agree or disagree, or what 
is your viewpoint on the following statements from The Local 
Government Finance Commission report? 
 
One: 
 

The property tax is insensitive to changes in the capacity of 
the property owner to pay those taxes at a particular point in 
time. 

 
Secondly: 
 

At the lower end of the income scale, the property tax tends 
to be regressive because a higher proportion of the incomes 
of low-income earners usually go towards the payment of 
property taxes than for higher-income earners. 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, two or three or four 
things. Neither was the home program enjoyed by the people of 
this province in the 70s. By the member’s own admittance they 
enjoyed a buoyant economy in the 70’s. I would ask then why the 
government of the day chose to cut off capital funding in the 70’s, 
when by his own admittance times were good? 
 
And as it relates to the comments in the finance report. All I can 
say is that it makes eminent sense, I suppose, that the low income 
earner pays a higher percentage of his income towards taxes 
because his home would be a modest home. 
 
When you consider, however, the value of the modest home 
versus the value of somebody with a larger home, and you add the 
cost of money, whether mortgaged or whether not mortgaged — 
I’ve answered this to you before — and when you add that in, then 
the balance tips the other way. I mean, it can’t work any other 
way. And if you’re suggesting then for a moment that the property 
tax should be based on some form of income, then I would suspect 
that we should really be talking to the municipalities and not 
talking to the government. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I wasn’t suggesting that, Mr. Minister. I 
was simply asking for your opinions on a couple of statements in 
that report. You still haven’t offered that, and you seem to be 
hedging. 
 
I want to just throw out a brief example, and I’ve used this one 
before. Mr. Minister, you live in a fairly substantial house as befits 
a person in your position. Your property taxes this year are 
$2,320.16. Your income from government this year is 
approximately $68,000. You may have additional income, I’m not 
aware of that. Your property taxes represent 3.4 per cent of the 
known income 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3661 
 

I have an elderly widow who lives in my constituency; she lives in 
a very modest home in one of the poorer areas in the city. Her 
property taxes this year for this modest home, on a minimum lot, 
are $712.81. Her income, including pensions and the senior 
citizens’ heritage grant — all the income that she has — is 
$12,000 this year. Her property taxes represent 5.9 per cent of her 
income. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you not agree that the property tax is in effect a 
regressive tax because a higher proportion of the incomes of low 
income earners usually go towards the payment of property taxes 
than is the case for higher earners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well as I said, Mr. Chairman, I’m prepared to 
debate this all day. 
 
First of all, you could take the senior citizens’ heritage grant and 
offset it against her taxes, and her taxes would be zero. If you 
wanted to do that, then she’d have no property tax. 
 
But let’s compare the same elderly lady that you’re talking to with 
my home, which you have used in public several times before, and 
I have no quarrel with that. I only wish that you wouldn’t have put 
in the address because we’ve got enough problems . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . Well it was in Hansard. But in any event, that 
doesn’t matter. 
 
But just using that example is precisely what I’m talking about. I 
would have to assume, because a member of my family is in 
exactly the same position, and with her home just recently being 
sold valued at $30,000, and mine — probably a difference of 
about $120,000 in value. The property tax structure or the 
percentages that you want to refer to, I don’t have any problem 
with. Let’s do that. We’ll use your figures as being exact. 
 
But now mine . . . the difference in value of my home and hers 
even at 8 per cent financing, if that were available, Mr. Chairman, 
would amount to an additional 13 per cent of my income to offset 
my property and taxes. And they go hand in glove whether you 
like to admit it, because all mortgages for instance, most sales in 
the real estate industry, all payments are based always on 
principal, interest and taxes. So therefore the cost of money 
becomes included in those figures, and if you can’t afford a big 
house, you’re not going to have big taxes. You’re going to buy a 
smaller house; you’re going to have smaller taxes — all still 
related to your income. So that if you add the 13 per cent to mine, 
to my taxes which might only be the three or four, whatever 
you’re talking about, all of a sudden I have the cost of money and 
taxes and I’m looking at 17 per cent while this lady is looking at 
five. I think that’s more than fair. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I thank the minister for his own 
particular unique analysis of property taxation and the regressive 
nature of the tax. He is one of the few to hold the opinion that he 
has just offered. It’s generally conceded that the property tax is a 
regressive tax. And where the minister talks about spending 13 or 
14 per cent of his income for principal, interest and taxes, the 
norm for most people with lower incomes would be in the area of 
25 to 30 per cent, so I’m not sure what the minister is driving at. 
But I want to ask him whether or not, sir, you 

agree or whether you disagree with the major thrust of the Local 
Government Finance Commission which was to reduce the net 
level of property taxation in Saskatchewan below the Canadian 
average. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well first of all, to clear up one thing, Mr. 
Chairman, I didn’t include the principal in the cost of my home. I 
think I was very explicit in talking about the cost of money and the 
taxes — that 13 per cent. 
 
I recognize that when somebody buys a house, it’s 26 per cent to 
30 per cent of their income for PIT, but I was just talking about 
interest and taxes. The same comparison that he used exactly. It’s 
plain, simple logic that all people can understand — cost of taxes, 
cost of money, very simple. But I can tell you this, Mr. Chairman, 
if you want to reduce the figures and the numbers that the member 
is referring to, there are lots of seniors, even in . . . and particularly 
perhaps in that member’s seat of Regina Victoria, that appreciate 
the senior citizens’ heritage grant, that could effectively take that 
money, the same as the property improvement grant — what’s in a 
name? I suppose you could call it the seniors’ heritage property 
grant, if you liked — what’s in a name — and apply it directly to 
their property tax payments. Apply that same $70 million that we 
have given to only our seniors, against their taxes, and the figures 
that you’re talking about would become totally redundant. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, no matter which shell you 
put the pea under, it all turns out the same. As I indicated to you 
earlier, this particular widow does receive the maximum grant. 
And you compute that as her income and you look at her taxes, 
and it still works out to a much greater percentage of her income 
going towards paying for her property taxes than is the case with 
you and your income and your particular dwelling. 
 
Mr. Minister, we do have this situation in that we do have the third 
highest level of net property taxation in Canada, or do you dispute 
that? Do you disagree with the Local Government Finance 
Commission on that finding? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, as I have tried to outline for 
the past 15 or 20 minutes, I don’t dispute the figures the way 
they’re set out in the book. I dispute the overall impact as a result 
of the various programs that we have in other areas that are not 
chalked off to the property tax scenario. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Would you venture an opinion, Mr. 
Minister, as to why we have this situation of a relatively high level 
of property taxation in Saskatchewan now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I believe, Mr. Chairman, that I’ve covered 
that off as well. I could repeat it all, but if you took all of these 
senior citizens’ heritage grants, if you took all the moneys into the 
home program, and rolled them into the property tax dollars, as 
you could very well do, then your figures would become 
redundant. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I’m now beginning to wonder, Mr. 
Minister, why you would have spent hundreds of thousands of 
dollars on a Local Government Finance



 
October 29, 1987 

3662 
 

Commission report if everything that they’ve done is in fact 
redundant. It seems somewhat of a sham for them to go through 
this exhaustive analysis and then for you to say, well, none of that 
matters and none of their conclusions matter. 
 
Mr. Minister, you indicated earlier that it was in your opinion — 
and I paraphrase you — that when I asked you about the general 
tax load in Saskatchewan, you talked about the city of Regina, and 
the tax load was high and it was incumbent on the local council 
and local administration to do something about that. Is this an 
opinion that you hold generally of municipalities in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think, by and large, the 
rapport that I have established over the last year with SUMA and 
its representatives, working perhaps more closely than ever with 
local government than I have in the past, has clearly indicated to 
me in a lot of areas throughout the province — because I do hold 
the ministerial portfolio for the province, not just simply alone for 
the city of Regina — earlier in my remarks I was referring to my 
only experiences paying taxes, which is in the city of Regina 
because I’ve been a lifelong resident here. 
 
But I can tell you that the local government administrations over 
the past four years have done very, very well in scrutinizing their 
budgets, spending their money efficiently, spending their money 
effectively, and still looking at ways to continue to improve that. 
They recognize that it’s going to be an ongoing battle. They 
recognize that our province, when it comes to having money, 
doesn’t have any. They understand the reason why we don’t have 
any. 
 
So that they recognize that they’re going to have to do as best as 
they can do within the confines of their own government to 
establish those taxes, and establish them fairly, and spend the 
money wisely. And I believe that they’re doing that very, very 
well. 
 
Getting back for a moment, Mr. Chairman, and I don’t want the 
member to put remarks in my mouth, I spoke very, very highly of 
the Local Government Finance report and I always did, and I have 
never held it in disregard. And I have indicated on many, many 
occasions, publicly and in this House, that that report was very 
exhaustive, indeed very complicated, and I am not at all 
disappointed in the results and findings. 
 
But having said that, because of the depth of that study, to believe 
that you can just arbitrarily go through it and accept it verbatim 
and implement the massive decisions that those findings are, is 
just totally absurd. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t think that I 
could ever be accused of putting words in your mouth. You seem 
to concur with the finance commission report on at least one thing, 
and that is that municipalities are doing a good job of holding the 
line. 
 
If that is the case and it’s your opinion — and I share your opinion 
— that municipalities, by and large, generally speaking, are doing 
an excellent job in terms of providing

good services on the one hand, and keeping property tax increases 
down to a reasonable level on the other hand, they’re doing a good 
job of that particular juggling act, again I want to ask you: how is 
it then that we have the third-highest level of property . . . net 
property taxation in Canada? If in fact municipalities are doing the 
job, and I think that they are, what is the answer here? Why do we 
have that situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Again, Mr. Chairman, I have to unfortunately 
repeat myself, and that is simply because the figures that the 
member chooses to use included dollars that are expended by this 
government in different ways. And rather than in relating them to 
tax reductions, they’re now related to economic activity. 
 
And I suppose that one could argue this all day: which is the best? 
If you want to clear up those figures and reduce the total tax 
burden expenditures or improve it in relationship to the rest of 
Canada somehow, then maybe you get that body to arbitrarily 
accept the fact that these dollars are, in fact, a reflection of tax 
reduction, and then that would clear up your situation for you. I 
can’t explain it any simpler, I can’t explain it any clearer. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I don’t think that people take economic 
activity in which not everyone participates to an equal extent as 
somehow a raison d’être or some reason for them to believe it’s, in 
fact, a property tax reduction, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to ask you how, in your opinion, cutting back on revenue 
transfers to urban municipalities helps the situation we find 
ourselves in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I think that clearly when we were able 
to hold the line on our revenue-sharing situation to a minus one, 
overall, when SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) knows full well that we were looking necessarily at 
an amount quite higher than that, that they were indeed satisfied 
that it was only a 1 per cent reduction to the total pool. 
 
As a matter of fact, in private discussions with a lot of mayors and 
aldermen throughout the province, they have told me that it has 
really caused them to sit up and take notice, and that perhaps their 
local municipalities shouldn’t be quite so dependent on revenue 
sharing as they have in the past. Because when our revenues are 
decreased as dramatically as they have through forces well beyond 
the control of us as a provincial government, then they recognize 
that as a result of that, when we limited our reductions to minus 
one, they appreciated that. 
 
And they’ve gone back. Some communities this year, for instance, 
were even able to reduce their mill rates. And to those officials, I 
have to send out hearty bouquets, that they were in fact able to 
reduce their mill rates in this last year. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — What you’re saying then, notwithstanding 
what you said earlier, the problem then lies with the individual 
municipalities, and it’s up to them to cut expenditures and to keep 
the property taxes down. It’s not a responsibility of yours.



 
October 29, 1987 

3663 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — It’s not a direct responsibility of ours, no. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — That’s a very bold admission, and I thank 
you for that, Mr. Minister, because it illustrates a very fundamental 
difference, and a very basic disagreement that you and I will have. 
It’s our feeling that the property tax is not a fair tax. It is a 
regressive tax. 
 
That is an opinion that not just members of this side of the House 
hold, but is an opinion held by many that are active in the field of 
taxation and taxation policy. It’s our opinion that the property tax 
burden in Saskatchewan should be reduced. We feel that net 
property tax levels should move below the Canadian average as 
opposed to the situation we have now where it’s well above the 
Canadian average and where we are now the third highest in 
Canada. We think that that is a backwards way to go because of 
their regressive nature. 
 
it’s not often, Mr. Minister, that I agree with . . . it’s not often that I 
agree with things that the Saskatchewan chamber of commerce 
has to say, but I look at their legislative report of March 3, 1987, 
and in commenting on the fact that municipalities have been 
warned not to expect any increase in their operating grants — in 
fact now we know there was something less than that — they say: 
 

It simply means the province is transferring some of the 
deficit from the provincial coffers to those of the municipal 
governments. However, municipal governments have fewer 
resources from which to obtain funds. It has meant that many 
of them will have to cut some services and still go to the 
people with a tax increase. 

 
Now there may be the odd situation where municipalities have 
been able to reduce mill rates because of uniquely local situations, 
but, Mr. Minister, there’s just no doubt in my mind that your 
reduction in revenue-sharing, in addition to other cuts which are 
farm more massive, in revenue transfers to local municipalities, 
has meant that you’re transferring the tax burden from the 
provincial government to local property taxpayers. And again, I 
want to ask you: is that a desirable direction, from your point of 
view? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, if we have a philosophical 
difference in this area and in this arena regarding urban 
municipalities, I believe that it just surfaced. 
 
We believe totally in autonomy at the local board and the local 
municipality. If . . . are you suggesting for a moment that the 
provincial government become involved in all of the expenditures 
of all of the municipalities in this province? I mean, that’s 
incredible to even give that any iota of thought. And the only way 
that we could become involved in that is to take away their 
autonomy and to place them within the provincial controls, totally 
and absolutely, with all their expenditures. And I doubt that there 
is one single member of SUMA that would want that.

The taxpayers of this province have every way that they want of 
dealing with their representatives, whether they’re at the local 
level or whether they’re at the provincial level. Certainly you and 
I, and all the other mayors that are elected by the taxpayer, are 
here to do the jobs. And if you would suggest for a moment that 
that is the way that your part would handle taxes, is by running 
every single urban municipality in this province, I don’t know 
what would happen. 
 
What we are saying, and those cuts were not massive and SUMA 
recognizes that, understandably they’re disappointed that we 
couldn’t maintain a zero level or give them some increase. Why 
wouldn’t they be disappointed? It’s only human nature to keep 
asking for more. 
 
But having recognized the situation that we in the provincial 
government are in, they again went back to their communities and 
had a look and did a very, very good job at what they were able to 
do. They asked us on the revenue sharing to go back to formula, 
recognizing how it would impact on various communities with the 
population changes. And we did that, and they appreciated it. 
 
And through consultation we came up with a safety net that 
everybody, at least under the circumstances, was happy with. yet 
recognizing those communities that were entitled to increases 
because of population changes, they received those increases. And 
I think that it was a fair and equitable distribution system, and it 
was done in consultation with these communities who have the 
total autonomy that they want. They don’t want more government 
control; they want less government control. And we happen to 
believe in that. 
 
They have gone back — and it’s not a matter of cutting services, 
as you say, but a matter of more effective delivery of their 
services. And that’s what they’re now starting to look at. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, you’re dragging out so many 
red herrings it’s beginning to stink up the place. 
 
People who are watching this can draw their own conclusions. 
And the people that are reading the record will draw their own 
conclusions about what it is that I said. I want to make it clear for 
you, Mr. Minister, that to have an objective of reducing the net 
property tax burden in Saskatchewan to one that is below the 
Canadian average does not necessarily translate into any loss of 
autonomy for local governments. I do not believe that there was 
any less autonomy for local government in 1986 than there was in 
1987 by virtue of the fact of your cutting back on provincial 
government revenue transfers to municipalities. 
 
(1530) 
 
If you somehow perversely conclude that to increase revenue 
transfers to urban municipalities necessarily results in a loss of 
autonomy, then I think that you should go back to gain some 
further insights and understanding of local government and how it 
works in this province. 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3664 
 

My feeling is that to ensure that local councils have adequate 
revenues with which to provide their services will enhance their 
autonomy, not lessen their autonomy. It’s a very difficult situation 
for many urban municipalities to be faced with the cuts that they 
have been faced with and to continue to provide effective services 
for their property taxpayers and for their citizens. 
 
For you to somehow suggest that this is a welcome thing, that this 
is a step in the right direction, I would have to say that I disagree, 
Mr. Minister — disagree totally. 
 
At this point I believe my colleague, the member for Moose Jaw 
North, has some questions. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, actually I 
don’t have questions: I just have a single question that I wanted to 
present to you. It’s really a follow-up from a request that I made to 
the Minister of Social Services in those estimates and for which he 
expressed support and also referred me to your department and to 
you, I would presume. 
 
The issue was simply this, Mr. Minister. The home improvement 
program has not been extended to make group homes for the 
mentally handicapped eligible to take advantage of the $1,500 
matching grant for home improvements. And without getting into 
a long explanation, that would be a privilege that would be 
especially meaningful to those who operate group homes for 
mentally handicapped, all of the homes of which, by the way, have 
permanent residents in them. And the Minister of Social Services 
had expressed support for that concept and said that he would 
follow that up. 
 
And I’m simply asking if he has communicated that to you, and if 
you’ve had an opportunity to consider it, or perhaps if you have 
made a decision in that regard, Mr. minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, although that home improvement 
program should have been brought up when Sask Housing was 
here, I will acknowledge your question. 
 
Yes, the minister has brought it to my attention. And I can’t recall 
yet if we have made a definitive decision on it yet. It was a good 
concept, and the minister is talking to us and our officials are 
examining it right now. It’s fraught with danger, and I can’t recall 
the specific problems that my officials at Sask Housing presented 
me with on it now. 
 
But I don’t have any problem with you and I having a discussion 
in private about it, and I could provide you with that information 
on it. And certainly, if you disagree with us, you would have every 
opportunity during question period for further elaboration on it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, perhaps that would be true. 
And I simply would ask for your information that it’s my 
estimation that there are about 80 such homes in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and would encourage you to approve that and 
would welcome an opportunity to discuss this privately, if you feel 
that that would be advantage in support of those people in those 
homes. Thank you. 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, I thank you for the question, and we’ll 
get together on it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
wanted to raise with you, Mr. Minister, the issue of the health 
department in the city of Regina. And I refer to an article of 
August 21, ‘87, in which, due to cuts in funding, Dr. Pat 
Hutchison, medical health officer, said there’s no money to fill 
three vacant positions — a native community health worker, a 
mosquito monitoring officer, and a district public health nurse. 
 
I’m not quite so familiar with the mosquito monitoring officer; 
those other two health officers are badly needed, and the public 
health in this city will degenerate if those positions aren’t filled. 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you or your officials have had any 
discussion with the city health department in an effort to remedy 
what I think is a serious problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, once again we’re kind of off 
in the wrong department here. That is a health estimate question, 
but I will provide you with the information that I know on it. 
 
And this matter was brought to our attention through the office of 
the mayor of the city of Regina. At that time, we initiated 
discussions between our department and the Department of 
Health, along with myself and the Minister of Health. And I don’t 
know what the final outcome is or where it sits, and we 
acknowledge the situation that exists. 
 
And I think that that’s the only explanation that I can offer you, 
because it is a levy, and as a result it doesn’t get involved in our 
department estimates. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay. I take it, though, discussions are 
ongoing between your department, health, and the city health 
department. Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — We have completed our discussions with the 
Department of Health, and it’s my understanding now that the 
Department of Health . . . I don’t know whether they’ve concluded 
their discussions with the department of health of the city of 
Regina, or whether they’re still in discussion, because we lost 
track of it after it went to where it rightfully belongs. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I would hope you would use any influence 
you have, Mr. Minister, to . . . And I don’t quantify that influence. 
But I’d hope, Mr. Minister, that you’d use any influence you have 
to remedy this problem. 
 
The public health nurses employed by the municipalities are 
becoming a serious problem. 
 
The other day I was driving from somewhere to somewhere — I 
don’t remember where — and I heard a bit on the radio. The 
situation in Estevan with the public health nurses, the last one’s 
leaving in a week or so. There has not been pre-natal classes for 
some time. The last one who was there was trying to keep up with 
inoculations, and that won’t be done. The deterioration in the 
public health offices in municipalities is a serious problem. 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3665 
 

Those services that are provided are essential. 
 
And I would hope, Mr. Minister, you’d do whatever you can to 
see that the municipalities are given enough money to run their 
public health departments because they’re an essential element in 
good public health in this province. And I just . . . you’ve had 
some comments from the Minister of Health, and perhaps you 
have some light to shed on it, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, my colleague, the Minister of Health, 
has indicated to me that discussions are ongoing in this particular 
situation. They are trying to address the situation. They are in 
contact with Regina and with Estevan, and hopefully they will 
come to some conclusion. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’ll leave it at this point, Minister, by saying 
it’s a sorry day when, whatever our politics, we can’t afford to put 
on pre-natal classes in this province. That’s a sorry day, Mr. 
Minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not the case, by the way. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well Minister of Health is lending us every 
assistance in wrapping this up. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, and through you to the very useful 
Minister of Health, that it was reported on a national radio network 
that there are now no pre-natal classes, and have not been for some 
time, in Estevan. I don’t know what particular services have been 
cut in the city of Regina. I do know some of the officials in that 
department; they work darn hard. And if there’s two positions that 
are . . . three positions that are vacant, then there are public health 
services not being provided, and that’s a darn poor expenditure of 
money. I’ve always felt that $1 spent in public health will save 
you $10 under the medicare system. So I just make that comment. 
 
Mr. Minister, the city of Regina had a proposal for levying a gas 
tax. And in this day and age, Mr. Minister, when so-called supply 
side economics have brought — and deficit budgeting, in massive 
ways by major countries, and by countries large and small — have 
brought serious problems to our attention, I wonder why you 
would have discouraged the city of Regina from proceeding with 
that kind of a tax if, in the view of the city fathers, and mothers, I 
guess, and the city aldermen, the . . . Some of this language that 
we once used, one has to be careful of these days, the city 
councillors. If, in the view of the city councillors, that’s an 
appropriate way to raise revenue, I don’t see why, Mr. Minister, 
you felt it necessary to take such a paternalistic attitude. Why not 
let them tax the gas? If that’s not what the public and the city 
want, they can vote the councillors out of office. 
 
I was a little surprised, Mr. Minister, when you or your 
predecessor in office — I’m not sure which — reacted so strongly 
to that proposal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, to finish off my 
Health debate. Lots of things are reported by the media that 
sometimes are not quite accurate. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I believe everything I read. I believe

everything I read in the media, Jack. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well don’t believe everything you read. 
 
I can only repeat that the Minister of Health is convinced, and he 
is aware and is working on any difficulties that may exist. So 
suffice to say that. 
 
With the area of providing municipalities the opportunity of 
assessing more or different or additional taxes, I think that’s an 
area that you’d have to proceed with in real caution. Where it 
might apply in one municipality may not very well apply in 511 
other urbans, and the like. You could very well have one 
community pitted against the other. 
 
I know that it’s the same in Economic Development, where you’re 
trying to gain economic activity. And if you allow just a 
wide-open situation to occur, the next thing that would happen or 
could happen . . . and, you know, this is all hypothetical, and I 
don’t really enjoy speaking in hypotheticals. But . I am now, and I 
don’t enjoy it. But I can tell you this, that as you allow them all of 
these various privileges that at any given time they start competing 
one against the other, and you could have a disaster out there. And 
I believe that we are best protecting the municipalities by being 
extremely cautious in allowing them the taxation privileges in 
other areas. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I raise this subject, not out of 
any particular love for higher gas taxes, but the streets in the city 
of Regina and elsewhere in the province, but particularly in this 
city with its shifting soil, that heavy clay, are really becoming a 
very serious problem. I don’t know of any statistics on it, but I’d 
venture to say that automotive bodies and automotive suspension 
systems give a lot more problem in Regina than they do in most 
Canadian cities. The streets in this city are getting to be a serious 
problem. 
 
I applaud the city council for tackling the problem. For once they 
didn’t come to you people with their hands out; they had their own 
solution. You did speak in hypothetical terms, and that was going 
to be my precise criticism of your comment, is that I recognize 
there are some taxes you might not want a municipal government 
levy; we could all name them, but I don’t understand why that 
applies to a gas tax — a very simple thing to administer, relatively 
simple to check up and collect, and it strikes me that if that’s what 
the municipality wants to do . . . and why you people get involved. 
 
Let me suggest a reason, at the risk of being a little uncharitable, if 
I may . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — If you’re not going to get out of your hole, 
I’d better write the answer down. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’ll give you lots of opportunity to answer. 
Let me be a little uncharitable. You don’t want . . . you didn’t 
want, at that point in time, which was before October of ‘86, you 
didn’t want anybody levying a gas tax because it would be a 
reminder to the public of how ill-considered and irresponsible 
your whole approach to the fiscal affairs of this province are.



 
October 29, 1987 

3666 
 

You cut some major taxes with no replacement in mind, and we’re 
now beginning to see the deterioration in public services. You 
didn’t — you, Mr. Minister, didn’t want the city of Regina levying 
a gas tax because it would have been a reminder to the public your 
initial campaign was very irresponsible, and your approach to 
fiscal affairs has been very irresponsible. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, that I would hope that in the future you 
wouldn’t let petty partisan concerns stand in the way of what I 
think was a responsible action by the municipal officials in 
Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, now I can speak in factual 
terms . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, that very resolution was 
brought forward at the SUMA convention and turned down. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I’d like to turn to the question of the business tax. I’d like to ask 
the minister: do you generally support the retention of the business 
tax as a means of financing local government, or do you favour an 
elimination of the business tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The business tax, Mr. Chairman, is by its 
very nature a problem that is very near and dear to my heart, that I 
have lived with for an awful long, long time. And once I entered 
the political arena, and in my past portfolio in small business, it 
was a tax that I hoped that I could address in that portfolio and 
come to some solution with. 
 
It is a very complicated issue. I am now looking at it from a 
different set of glasses, I suppose is the best way to describe it. 
And the problem is very simple, or the solution is very simple, but 
not very practical. The municipalities, could indeed, if they chose, 
eliminate the business tax. But it has become an everyday fact of 
life with the municipalities, and it has become an integral part of 
their financing, an integral part of their income. So for them to 
dispense with this is a very costly item. 
 
I suppose that they, in their wisdom, the mayor and aldermen 
could vote it out. And they’d have to transfer one of two things. 
They would have to look for an additional source of revenue. That 
additional source of revenue would imply be to come to the senior 
government and say, give us the money, please, to replace this so 
we can eliminate it. But it’s not the provincial government’s tax, 
but rather it’s a tax that exists there at the local level. And the only 
other way that they could do it would be to eliminate it from the 
business tax portion and put it out on a property tax to the local 
home owner. 
 
So recognizing the difficulties, because neither is acceptable, 
hopefully we are now looking at it again, even the local finance 
report — hopefully, I felt that they might be able to come up with 
some concrete solution, but even they couldn’t — but now, in 
co-operation with SUMA, yet another committee has been 
designed to study that very problem. 

And I sincerely and honestly hope that our government soon will 
one day be able to help the municipalities in their problems and in 
their difficulties in establishing some form of answer to the 
nagging problem of business tax. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I thank the minister for that. I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, do you foresee an opportunity for the 
provincial government to deal with the question of lost revenues 
as a result of the reduction or the elimination of the business tax? 
 
I sense from your answer, sir, that you agree entirely with the 
Minister of Finance who, on an earlier occasion, stated that if 
municipalities wanted to do away with the business tax, that was 
their problem, and their problem entirely, and it had nothing to do 
with the provincial government. It was his opinion that if 
municipalities were to eliminate the business tax, there would be 
such an increase in business investment and business development 
that the increased property taxation that would result form this 
increased business investment would more than make up for any 
lost revenues resulting from the elimination of the business tax. 
 
Do you concur with the Minister of Finance’s statement on that, 
that municipalities will in fact be ahead of the game should they 
eliminate the business tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I suppose that there are all kinds of 
solutions that could be put forward and different items to consider. 
 
I think that, with all due respect, you’re over-simplifying just a 
little bit what the Minister of Finance had to say. He is cognizant 
of the situation that exists, and he too is very aware of the 
problem. And I can tell you this: that although it is not really 
directly the provincial government’s problem, we will not abdicate 
the position that we must, as senior government, working in 
co-operation with the local governments to address what has 
become a very, very serious situation. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, recognizing that the 
property tax level is already very high, and recognizing that local 
governments are already doing an excellent job in holding the line 
on local expenditures, would you not agree that it’s high time that 
you begin to look for an alternative source of revenue to the 
business tax? That is to say, the provincial government should 
begin to look for an alternative source of revenue, as opposed to 
siding with the Minister of Finance, who seems to take the 
position it’s a strictly local problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I think again, rather than making an 
arbitrary decision, now that SUMA is becoming involved in the 
situation, hopefully they’re going to be able to supply us with 
some information and some answers. 
 
I think even the business community recognizes that in an awful 
lot of municipalities they do provide additional services to the 
business community. And although the business community 
would like to see it take off totally . . . Why wouldn’t they? Why 
wouldn’t you ask for 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3667 
 

everything? They might be willing to mediate to some different 
stance and recognize that some facilities may or may not be 
provided at the local level by the local government. 
 
But, you know, day after day in here I keep hearing, Mr. 
Chairman, well, you know, replace this $35 million. Where do we 
get the revenues from? Let the municipalities continue their 
spending totally unchecked, which we . . . We don’t want to 
impede their spending. We don’t want to get involved in their 
expenditures. They are autonomous; let them be responsible for 
their expenditures. So the only way you can is harnessing your 
revenue-sharing, and yet he’s suggesting that we should keep 
increasing it. And if you keep increasing here and increasing there 
and all the rest of it, where do we as provincial government get the 
dollars from? 
 
On another hand, you say you’re cutting this, you’re cutting this, 
you’re cutting this, and you use the same old rhetoric as a solution. 
You believe that all of the money — or you’re trying to convince 
the people of Saskatchewan — that all of this money that we’re 
short here and short there, and all the rest of it, goes to banks and 
oil companies. Well that’s garbage. It doesn’t got here. And even 
if you were partly right, even if you were partly right and we 
accepted part of that argument — which we can’t accept — where 
do you get the additional funds? 
 
I mean, let’s be factual about it. We would like to do as much as 
we can in all of the areas that you have any opposition to. But how 
do you do it? And where do you magically . . . we don’t have a 
money tree. So you’ve got to get your revenues from somewhere. 
And when our resource sector that this province is so highly 
connected to fall from a revenue of 32 per cent to 12 — those 
revenues gone through no fault of our own. We don’t control the 
world price of potash or the world price of grain or the world price 
of oil, no. and yet we’re dependant on all that. So what does it tell 
us? 
 
It tells us very, very clearly that we must diversify the economy of 
the province of Saskatchewan. And that’s what we are attempting 
to do because if we have any degree of success — and we will 
because we are builders — then as those revenues from those 
diversified situations occur, hopefully it will replace the resource 
sector dollars that are not there now. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, I thank the minister for all his 
questions. I’d rather think though that the people of Saskatchewan 
are looking for some answers, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m pleased to see that SUMA is providing some 
leadership in the question of the business tax, although I sincerely 
question how effective SUMA can be on that particular question, 
given the fact that we’re talking about, I would estimate, $40 
million in revenue, totally, throughout the province. SUMA itself 
does not have any access to revenues. Municipalities have no 
increased access to revenues or access to alternate revenue 
sources. And the predicament that you outlined earlier, and I agree 
with, as to where the alternative revenues are to come from, if it’s 
strictly left up to 

municipalities, it still stands. 
 
The question I want to ask you, sir, is: what leadership are you 
personally providing in this matter? What representations are you 
making to try and reduce or eliminate this business tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well as a result of my travels around this 
province over the last five years, I believe that, at least in my small 
way, I have shown the business community of this province that I 
am concerned with their problem. And I think that they believe me 
in that regard, and I think that they accept my sincerity. And I 
believe now that in my consultation with SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) and as we ask them how we 
tackle this very serious problem, they have responded by 
participating with a committee, formation of a committee, to look 
into this very problem. 
 
I believe that I have indicated to them some form of leadership. 
Now you may not choose to accept that, but I’d be prepared to put 
it to the test and discuss with the interest groups whether we’re 
doing that or not. The people of Saskatchewan are intelligent 
people, and they will judge the discussions that go on in this 
Assembly and elsewhere, as you mentioned in earlier remarks. 
 
People of Saskatchewan are also very frugal. We know this, 
they’re savers — highest per capita savings in the country, of any 
province. And we also know one other thing, and why they’re on 
our side — because the people of this province are builders. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I’m pleased to see that you’ve been 
going around the province and oozing concern these last five 
years, Mr. Minister. I guess it really hasn’t done anything because 
we’ve still got the problem before us, and you haven’t done 
anything about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to assume now, and as all municipalities 
will, that the business tax is going to remain with us. You’ve had 
your opportunity to display some leadership. You haven’t done 
anything, and it looks like it’s here to stay, at least with your 
government. 
 
I want to ask you then: in light of the fact that it will stay, and in 
light of the fact that there have been many questions about the 
various types of assessments that might be employed as a basis for 
exacting the business tax, do you agree with the Local 
Government Finance Commission in their recommendation that 
Saskatchewan implement the percentage of real property 
assessment method for business assessments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — A couple or three areas of concern before we 
leave the topic of business tax and my leadership and sincerity 
about the problem. The same way that the member from Regina 
Victoria chose to check out my tax structure and my resident. I 
chose to look at his record while he served on the Regina city 
council, particularly as it related to the business tax. 
 
Mr. Chairman, let me tell you this: in 1981 there was over a 20 per 
cent increase in the business tax while he sat on council. In 1982, 
over 15 per cent increase in the business tax while you, sir, were 
on the city council. In 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3668 
 

1983, an increase of almost 10 per cent, again while you were 
serving on that council. By the time you were done in your term 
— five years, or six — the business tax in Regina doubled. I ask 
you about your sincerity now about addressing a very serious 
problem of business tax. 
 
So getting back to your question now, we have done a couple of 
things. First of all you’ve failed to recognize one serious thing: I 
hold in very high regard the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association and the advice that this association gives me because, 
Mr. Chairman, they in fact represent municipalities around the 
province. 
 
As the member knows, or maybe he’s not aware of, SUMA 
withdrew from the Local Government Finance Commission 
report. As a result they are studying that on their own. So as a 
result, Mr. Chairman, I now have two areas that I have to watch, 
listen to, study, analyse, and determine what’s best. On one hand 
we have the Local Government Finance Commission report, and 
on the other hand we have SUMA. 
 
(1600) 
 
The matter of assessment, we have dealt with. We have 
established an independent party, Mr. Chairman — Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency — that is totally removed from 
government, that now sits recognizing the role of reassessment 
and the future of the assessment roles, guided in total by a board of 
directors. 
 
That board of directors is comprised of appointees from SUMA 
and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities). 
This time, Mr. Chairman, I would even like to recognize in the 
gallery a member of the board of directors of Saskatchewan 
assessment municipality, Alderman Joe McKeown from Regina, 
who sits on that very assessment role. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — A very serious problem that that board and 
that group will have to determine; hopefully they’ll be able to 
address the situation of assessments. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I just want to ask you: do you agree that 
we should go to the percentage of real property assessment 
method of business assessments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, with a member of the 
board here. I hope that he considers your opinion, as I will. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to put on the 
record a few comments with respect to the business tax. 
 
I think that it’s clear to all concerned that there is little justification 
for the business tax as it’s now structured in the province of 
Saskatchewan. There is little or no relationship between taxes that 
are paid and to services that are provided to business. It’s not a fair 
tax. It’s generally conceded that the business tax bears little or no 
relationship to a business’s cash flow or their profits for the year.

It’s our position that that business tax should be phased out or the 
impact mitigated. And when we say that it’s our position, we 
believe that the provincial government must take a direct hand in 
that. One cannot say, we believe the business tax should be done 
away with, and then point to local governments and say, well it’s 
your responsibility and your problem. 
 
That’s not the kind of leadership that we would advocate in this 
matter, as you and your Finance minister seem to be advocating. 
 
We do not favour a general transfer of revenue burden to property 
taxpayers to make up for the shortfall of revenues that might be 
sure to come as a result of reducing or eliminating that business 
tax. It’s our feeling that the provincial government has access to 
far more sources of revenue on this matter, provincial government 
leadership is required — no less than that. 
 
Provincial government leadership is required in this matter, and it 
means that the provincial government must begin to make some 
tough choices about where its priorities lie. For the ministers to 
say that, well, where are the revenues going to come from? — that 
is the question, Mr. Minister. You spend your money in many and 
wondrous ways, and any one of those many and wondrous ways 
might be examined with a view to providing, then, the revenue so 
as to ensure that this unfair regressive tax can in fact be eliminated 
or phased out. 
 
I want to turn, Mr. Chairman, to the question of revenue sharing. 
Urban revenue-sharing payments are, to a very great extent, 
comprised of unconditional per capita grant and a foundation or 
equalization grant. The Local Government Finance Commission 
states that the purpose of the foundation grant is to provide a 
greater degree of equality among the more wealthy and less 
wealthy municipalities of comparable population in terms of their 
ability to provide a reasonable level of municipal services at 
reasonable local tax rates. 
 
Does the minister agree with this objective? Does he agree there 
are wide variations in the local fiscal capabilities of urban 
municipalities, and that revenue sharing must have the effect of 
equalizing the overall fiscal capability of municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, before he asked that question 
he issued quite a statement relative to business tax that I believe I 
would like to clear up. 
 
If that member thinks for one moment that anyone will believe 
that rhetoric that he said on business tax, he’s sadly mistaken. His 
personal record on business tax is very, very clear — very clear. 
The past government’s record is doubly clear. In this very 
Assembly, Mr. Chairman, sat the mayor of the city of Regina, all 
the while the business tax was on, and they did nothing — 
absolutely nothing — to improve or to disregard or to cancel or 
anything . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or eliminate. 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3669 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Or eliminate. Thank you, the member from 
Rosemont. Your ex-government of the day did nothing to 
eliminate the business tax. And now for them to stand in this 
Assembly and say that we should magically come up with 
something, when my critic opposite and one of his former 
colleagues, the mayor of the city of Regina, who sat in this 
Assembly with the government of the day, refused — refused — 
to do that issue, and the business taxes doubled in their city, I find 
it unbelievable. 
 
To answer your question simply, yes, basically I support it, and it 
does exist in our programs. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — If I just might turn back to the business tax 
as well, Mr. Minister, I just want to say that all the rhetoric that 
you’re throwing out about my record on Regina city council reads 
like the campaign statements of the Tory candidate that I ran 
against in the last election, Metro Rybchuk, and who was soundly 
defeated — soundly defeated — because those arguments didn’t 
get very far with the people of Regina Victoria. 
 
I agree with you, Mr. Minister, that this was not addressed by the 
government in the 1970s, but neither was it very much an issue of 
concern in the 1970s. But let’s recognize now that we’re in 1987 
and rapidly approaching 1988. If you’re taking the position that 
because the government in the 1970s did nothing to eliminate the 
business tax, and therefore that provides you with the rationale for 
not now doing anything about it, even though businesses are 
saying that we want the business tax reduced or eliminated, then I 
would submit that you are taking a position that two wrongs make 
a right. 
 
And I do not subscribe to that simplistic logic, Mr. Minister. I 
believe that there is a problem with the business tax. I believe that 
it must be addressed, and it must be addressed by the provincial 
government, and particularly it must be addressed by you as the 
minister responsible. 
 
Mr. Minister, since you agree that revenue sharing should have the 
purpose of reducing the wide variations in the local fiscal 
capabilities of municipalities, can you explain how a 2 per cent cut 
in urban revenue sharing promotes equalization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t help get off that 
business tax. Why didn’t you, sir, and the NDP government of the 
day, address the business tax? And you simply allowed that 
monster to grow and grow and grow, and tax increase after 
business tax increase after business tax increase — and I know, 
because I paid them, as did other members of the business 
community. And you did nothing about them. Zero. And now 
magically you want us to undo and come up with 40 millions of 
dollars that the municipalities became dependent on. 
 
We’re trying to address the situation; we’re not burying our heads 
in the sand. And hopefully, with the help of SUMA, we will 
address it and undo the decades of damage that were done prior. 
 
The formula — with the advice of SUMA, we retained the

formula intact because that’s what they wanted to see. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Let me get this straight now. SUMA asked 
you for a 1 per cent reduction in revenue sharing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — SUMA asked us to put the formula back into 
place. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I asked you how a 2 per cent cut in 
revenue sharing promotes equalization. I would refer you to the 
comment of the Local Government Finance Commission where 
they say: 
 

In short, the commission has concluded that there are 
insufficient moneys in the urban revenue-sharing pool in 
order to bring about full equalization in a practical way. 

 
Since they took the position that there were not enough funds at 
that time to achieve full equalization, how does a 1 per cent cut in 
revenue sharing help you to meet your objective of promoting 
equalization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I repeat a couple of things 
again. SUMA was not a part of that Local Government Finance 
report. That’s number one. But SUMA did want to retain the 
equalization formula, and they asked us to go back to it, which we 
did. That has nothing to do with the size of the pool. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — SUMA went through an elaborate 
analysis, Mr. Minister. Am I to assume then that you agree or 
disagree with their analysis? 
 
They indicated very clearly that in order for there to be full 
equalization there had to be increases in the urban revenue-sharing 
pool and that the situation, as it stood at that time, did not provide 
for full equalization. yet you say that you agree with equalization. 
Now how do you coincide those two widely divergent positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I repeat, Mr. Chairman, I said that I basically 
agree with the principle of equalization. And the word “basically” 
was used. And when SUMA, who is my major player, asked us to 
return to the equalization formula, we did. 
 
But we pointed out that under the restraint that we had of the day, 
that we would have to do that with a 1 per cent reduction of the 
revenue-sharing pool. And I pointed it out at that time that it could 
have been even more dramatic than that. But fortunately we were 
able to keep it only to minus one. 
 
And with their help, that equalization formula was even expanded 
on by bringing in the safety net to ensure that municipalities would 
not lose more than 6 per cent in the revenue-sharing pool because 
even SUMA recognized that it had a dramatic impact. 
 
So with their help and through consultation, we came up with a 
revenue-sharing formula based on equalization that was acceptable 
to the players. Now the size of the pool, being 1 per cent smaller, 
certainly, no, they weren’t pleased and happy and got out and 
carried banners. And as I mentioned earlier, why should they. But 
I can tell you 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3670 
 

this, that in private, several did come up and say that, well 1 per 
cent. Even in my own city council I had members say that they 
could trim their budget like that if they had to. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Is the relative percentage of the foundation 
grant, as compared to the per capita grant, greater or smaller this 
year as compared to last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — It was retained intact at SUMA’s request and 
the ratio did not change. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I want to ask you how that promotes 
equalization. In light of the comments of the Local Government 
Finance Commission I haven’t heard you disagree with their 
analysis. 
 
They’ve indicated that one way to achieve equalization would be 
to reduce the per capita grants and to increase the foundation grant 
even if the total amount of money stays the same. They’ve 
advocated a different course, and that is an increase to the 
revenue-sharing pool and primarily an increase to the foundation 
grant, and that is how you achieve equalization. They’ve indicated 
that if the matter stays as it is — and now you’re confirming that 
— that it stayed the same as it is, that the relative percentages are 
the same, yet you’ve cut the total amount across the board. I want 
to ask you how that promotes equalization. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I know that the member from 
Regina Victoria was invited to attend the SUMA regional 
conferences, and it’s interesting to see and hear now . . . And I 
wonder if you explained to SUMA that you disagree with their 
position and that you rather lean on that report — the Local 
Government Finance Commission report which you asked us 
questions earlier on — and said why aren’t we implementing all 
those changes, and why aren’t we going along with it, knowing 
full well while you attended those SUMA conferences that SUMA 
was not a participant in that report. I want to listen to SUMA, and 
I will take the time to study the report. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I know that SUMA supports equalization, 
Mr. Minister. They’ve indicated in their brief to cabinet that there 
had to be a recognition that revenue sharing was not only a 
provincial to municipal sharing, but also a municipal to municipal 
sharing. Yet I see you dodging, ducking, shifting, but refusing to 
address the basic inconsistency in the statements that you make. 
 
It is generally conceded that if the revenue-sharing pool stays the 
same or is reduced, and the relative percentages of the grants, per 
capita and foundation stay the same — and you’ve indicated 
they’ve stayed the same — that we have, in effect, a situation 
where full equalization does not exist. There are ways to deal with 
that — there are ways to deal with that. You’ve chosen to do none 
of those things. 
 
I want to ask you again: how are you promoting full equalization 
to respect the fact that there are very different fiscal capabilities 
between municipalities in this 

province? That we have poor municipalities and that we have 
richer municipalities and that one of the intentions of this 
revenue-sharing pool and the foundation grant was to ensure that 
those kinds of disparities were ended, and ended once and for all. 
What are you doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Just so that I can get this straight, Mr. 
Chairman, I want to ask the member to clarify a point here for me. 
Are you suggesting that we move money from per capita to 
equalization? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’m not, Mr. Minister, because I don’t 
believe that that’s in keeping with the broad philosophy of revenue 
sharing. What I’m asking you is: what are you doing to promote 
equalization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well again, Mr. Chairman, I suppose this — 
and this would be the easiest way for the member to understand it 
— the report indicates to maintain the per capita grant and 
increase the equalization component of the formula. 
 
I suppose that if you were to increase the size of the 
revenue-sharing pool, that would work. However when we had to 
have a decrease, and this was necessary, if we went to that 
situation it would produce utter chaos in the equalization formula 
that exists and our support by maintenance equalization, by 
maintaining equalization, is in the existing formula, which we had 
to do because we had to reduce the overall size of the pool. And 
what was suggested there would not work in any way, shape or 
form. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — What you’re saying then is that in fact 
you’re maintaining the status quo, that nothing you have done has 
been to promote further equalization; that you’re satisfied with the 
status quo, that you concur that there are wide differences between 
municipalities in this province and you’re satisfied to see them 
remain that way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, again, in consultation with 
SUMA 40 per cent of the funds was paid out under equalization. 
And that’s what SUMA wants us to maintain. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to turn to the 
distribution formula. I’m pleased to see that you have reintroduced 
the distribution formula for the revenue-sharing payments this 
year. For a number of years, I believe starting in 1982 or ‘83, it 
was your government, the PC government, that ignored both 
changes in population and in local tax bases and preferred to make 
across-the-board adjustments to revenue-sharing payments based 
on 1981 census figures. These across-the-board adjustments, 
ultimately create major distortions, as we saw so graphically 
illustrated this year. 
 
Can the minister advise what steps he is taking to prevent these 
types of problems in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, the member is right. But now we’re 
back to the formula, that’s what we’ve done at SUMA’s request. 
And it’s based on population and equalization. The other years — 
it’s true what you say — 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3671 
 

the formula was disregarded and the same amount of moneys were 
just paid out year after year as what they had received in prior 
years. It seemed for a while the municipalities were pleased with 
that because they knew what they were receiving and it was the 
same funding that they had received in the year prior. Now they 
wanted to go back to the formula. We succumbed to their request 
and did that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I thank you for reiterating what I’ve just 
said, but I now ask you to answer my question. What steps are you 
taking to avoid this kind of problem in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I did answer, Mr. Chairman. We’re going 
back to the formula. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well how do you propose to deal with the 
question of population counts then? Do you take the position that 
you’ll continue to rely on the latest census figures, the 1986 census 
figures, as a means of determining the per capita grants that should 
be paid out? Or do you have some other method in mind for 
providing for more frequent, if not annual, population counts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, historically, the prior 
government included, uses the Canada Census figures which come 
out every five years, so that the equalization or distribution 
formula is subject to that situation and scenario. SUMA have now 
asked us if there would be some method that we could put in that 
would be an alternate to the census change. And again, we are 
exploring those avenues, because if we can improve the existing 
formula, certainly we’d like to do that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The city of Saskatoon, Mr. Minister, 
advocates the use of SHSP (Saskatchewan hospital services plan) 
population counts as a means of updating urban population counts 
on an annual basis. At least that was the recommendation in a 
report that was considered by their council. Do you agree with 
their suggestion, and would you implement such a system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I think that just to use that system is unfair for 
a couple of reasons. And we know factually now, I believe, that by 
using the SHSP numbers, there’s a lot of people — if the word to 
use might be considered transient or as a result of their postal 
address, it tends to discolour disproportionately the population of 
the smaller centres versus the larger centres because the people 
might have two homes or might very well be in one place and 
have their mail at another, or whatever. And it doesn’t reflect a 
true, actual population count as a census does. 
 
So having said, that, it doesn’t rule out the possibility that that in 
combination with some other situation may work, and we’re 
exploring all avenues. 
 
Because if SUMA would like renew the population base more 
than every five years, which right now exists and has existed, as I 
mentioned, historically, surely we would like to improve that 
formula. But it’s not an easy solution to come up with without an 
actual census taking. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I appreciate what you’re saying,

Mr. Minister, and I agree with you. And in fact I believe the SHSP 
figures are different than the Census Canada figures, but there is a 
consistent difference that runs throughout them. It’s estimated by 
Census Canada that the SHSP figures are in fact consistently 
lower by a margin of 1 per cent. 
 
Have your officials considered the possibility that we take Census 
Canada figures, the latest, as a base and then use SHSP projections 
as a means of tracking and estimating local populations? 
Recognizing that there is a consistent difference it should to a very 
large extent, I think, deal with the kinds of objections that are 
raised to using SHSP census figures per se, and without regard to 
any other population counts. Is this an avenue that your officials 
have explored, and is it something that you would entertain? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — It’s not only an avenue that we have 
explored, but are still exploring. And the key perhaps does lie in 
that and the SHSP figures might be the closest that we could get, 
having regard to how they might even change annually. But even 
if a mid-course correction were acceptable, or whatever, it might 
be better than waiting for the five-year term to expire. And you’re 
right. But it is under active consideration now. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I want to briefly state that it is a significant 
problem. Across-the-board increases are one thing. Using census 
figures that are outdated tends to result in the same kind of 
problem because we’re seeing some relatively massive shifts in 
population occur within Saskatchewan. And that has the very real 
effect of distorting revenue-sharing payments, and what should be 
received, and what should be going to urban municipalities. 
 
The latest figures by SHSP indicate that only half of 
Saskatchewan cities expanded in their population, with the other 
half contracting. The population living in towns fell by 0.4 per 
cent following two years of expansion. Of the towns in the 
province, 76 got smaller, 68 got bigger. The population of villages 
dipped for the third consecutive year, so I would suggest to you, 
Mr. Minister, that one way to avoid the kind of distortion that we 
saw this year when we brought the distribution formula back 
would be to make sure that we have accurate population counts 
and that those population counts be conducted, if not annually, 
then at least on a frequent basis so that those kinds of distortions 
do not present themselves again. 
 
Might I ask you, Mr. Minister, what is your time line on this? 
When might we expect some report from you as to when a 
formula will be in place to determine population counts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I believe that we would implement any 
improvement just as quickly as possible and just as soon as 
SUMA would agree to it. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Would that then be a number of weeks, 
months or years, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I thank the minister for his 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3672 
 

specificity of his response. I can see that precision is his stock and 
trade, for the minister. 
 
I want to turn to the question of the escalator. There seems to be, 
as you know, Mr. Minister, some considerable support for the 
reintroduction of an escalator index for the urban revenue-sharing 
pool. Can you advise if and when an escalator will be 
reintroduced? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I apologize to the member. I didn’t mean to 
be that way with your first response. It’s very difficult to 
determine whether it will be a week or months or years. You know 
very well that the formula is dealt with annually, and certainly if 
we can come to some conclusion prior to the next budget with 
SUMA — and we’re opening up discussions with them now on 
the new budget — if we can come up with something, we will. If 
failing that, and can’t reach agreement, then it will have to wait 
until the next year. So I didn’t mean to cut you off the way I did. 
 
With regard to the escalator clause, those are things that we’re 
discussing. I suppose that if the government were in a position to 
guarantee everybody incomes or revenues at all times, it would be 
nice to just simply say that. I cite, for example, the same escalator 
clause that existed in The Legislative Assembly Act for the 
members here, and 1982 we had to remove that. And the members 
that have sat here have been frozen at their salaries for the last five 
years. And then you start asking yourself, well how long can they 
be frozen? 
 
And I suppose to some degree it’s the same issue with the 
municipalities, so that you can put it in, and you don’t put it in, 
and all the rest of it, and it’s a very . . . it would be nice to provide 
that guarantee, but then if you put that guarantee in and at any 
given time something happens or two things happen: one, you find 
yourself in the position that we’re in, and you can’t give them that 
guarantee, then you change it; conversely, if the good times came 
and we’re in a position to share more, then why would you want to 
limit it because the escalator clause said you would? 
 
So I think it’s a very difficult thing. I think that if we can negotiate 
honestly and sincerely with SUMA, come to some agreement as 
we have in the past, and work in co-operation with each other as 
we are doing, and everybody and each one doing their very best 
under difficult times, then we’ll all get along. 
 
You know, I’m not about to become argumentative with SUMA, 
I’m not about to become argumentative with the members 
opposite, and I believe that we’re just facing, presently, a very 
difficult situation. it would be nice if we didn’t have to face these, 
I suppose. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, if the escalator were in 
effect, say, for next year or even this year, that there would be 
additional revenue-sharing funds available or additional funds in 
the pool, than is now the case where you’ve cut it 1 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that we’re . . .

if we were in a position to help our municipalities more than we 
are able to help them at this point in time, we would love to be 
able to do that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I just want to conclude that 
portion on the discussion of the escalator by emphasizing the fact 
that local governments, municipalities, are prepared to ride with 
the economy of this province when it comes to fluctuations in the 
urban revenue-sharing pool, and that if economic conditions mean 
that that pool will be decreased, they’re prepared to live with that. 
 
They would prefer to see that, they would prefer to see that than to 
have a situation, as we’ve seen in the last number of years, again 
with your government, where the escalator was just simply thrown 
out and there was a case of arbitrary decisions by the cabinet to 
increase, and in this case decrease, the size of the pool. 
Municipalities were saying: give us the independence, take us 
away from closed cabinet doors, let the escalator, let the economic 
indices indicate what the pool should be. We’re prepared to live 
with that because we appreciate that kind of independence. 
 
They also take the position that that would mean then, for a more 
complete partnership between the province and municipalities, to 
have a pool that’s reflective of the economic conditions rather than 
the whims of cabinet. 
 
I want to turn briefly to the question of the kinds of notice that is 
given to municipalities of changes in the grants that affect them. In 
a March 25, ‘87 release this year, in which you announced funding 
levels for municipalities, you state: 
 

Our government has decided to provide early notification of 
these changes to urban governments to aid in finalization of 
their budgets. 

 
That was a nice public relations gesture, Mr. Minister, even if it 
didn’t have much practical meaning for municipalities. A 1 per 
cent cut across the board, but it wasn’t until a month later that 
specific figures were released to each municipality. A number of 
other cuts and tax increases weren’t announced until urban 
municipalities, to a very great extent, had finalized their budgets. 
 
And I want to ask you why you delayed these specific 
announcements, these later announcements. Why did you not 
provide some indication in March as to what the real cuts were 
going to be to municipalities so that they could get on sensibly 
with their budget planning process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for that 
question, and I would like to, I suppose, give him an honest and 
sincere answer, and I hope he expects it, or accepts it as that. 
 
About at that time, if you recall, the budget exercise was an 
extremely difficult one for this government to undertake. We had 
scrutinized every area of government, as was reported in the 
media. Department after department after department was told to 
go and reduce their expenditures by minus 25 per cent. 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3673 
 

So I suppose that if SUMA wanted a response in March and 
insisted on that response in March, they would have had to have a 
minus 25 per cent in their revenue sharing. But I honestly felt as 
we went through budget discussions that we would be able to 
divert some of our scarce revenue funds into the municipal areas. 
And through negotiation and deliberations in cabinet, my 
colleagues saw fit that we could at the end of the day, at the time 
that the budget was completed, maintain the revenue sharing at 
only minus one. SUMA is aware of that. And although we 
recognize that it was very, very inconvenient to have those final 
figures for them at such a late date, I think that all in all, when they 
got the pleasant surprise that they did after how drastic it could 
have been, they were appreciative of the government’s effort. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I don’t know if pleasant is the right 
adjective in this context, Mr. Minister. An elimination of the 
provincial capital fund of $16 million a year can hardly be called a 
pleasant surprise. 
 
I want to ask you if you provided early notification this year, can 
you do it again? Recognizing that municipalities deal in a calendar 
year, given sort of normal circumstances of a provincial budget in 
late March, they will have already gone through three months of 
their fiscal year, spent money on that basis before they receive any 
news about a major revenue source — and roughly 18 to 20 per 
cent, I understand. This is a sore point for many. I want to turn to 
some brief comments. The finance director for the city of 
Saskatoon told council: 
 

A late budget creates headaches for municipalities and 
school boards dependent on provincial funding (he says) 
because they don’t know how much provincial money to 
expect. 

 
The president of SUMA, Don Abel: 
 

It’s most difficult for us to prepare budget papers without 
knowing what revenue we’re getting from the government. 

 
Regina Leader-Post, in an editorial: 
 

Planning for the long-range target and for current municipal 
operations isn’t helped by a tardy, still unknown provincial 
budget. 

 
I want to ask you, assuming that we’re going to be going back to a 
regular budget cycle next year — and I assume that, I don’t know 
that for sure — but assuming that we go back to a regular budget 
cycle of roughly late March, would it be your intention next year, 
as this year, to at least provide some early notification — that is to 
say, in January or February — of what kinds of revenues 
municipalities might reasonably expect from the provincial 
government in that fiscal year to help them with their financial 
planning process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, we have undertaken to deliver 
a commitment as early as possible. As a matter of fact, the 
minister and I — the Finance minister and I — are awaiting to 
meet with SUMA now and have been prepared to do that for some 
time, but SUMA have had 

their agenda to take care of recently. But the Minister of Finance 
and myself are prepared to meet with SUMA. 
 
As a matter of fact, my officials have already concluded a trip to 
the northern municipalities and have discussed the revenue sharing 
and capital requirements of our northern communities. So 
discussions are well under way and we hope to deliver a 
commitment as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can I assume then that you are of the 
position that you will, early in the next fiscal year — that is, the 
municipal fiscal year — give some clear indication to 
municipalities as to the types of and amount of grants that they can 
receive from your government in the upcoming budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated, we hope to be 
in a position to do that just as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I have a 
couple of brief questions to the minister. 
 
The first one deals with a request I made some time ago for 
information with regard to the space that the department gets from 
the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, and the 
minister, minister’s assistant, indicated the information would be 
ready. The other had to do with consultants by the department, and 
I wonder if the minister has that information available. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll ask the page to deliver 
these to the member. We have the ‘87-88 consultants as was 
requested by the member from Saskatoon Rosemont. And in 
regard with payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, in keeping with the information that has been 
supplied by prior departments, I have the same information 
available for you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I’ll thank the minister in advance for that 
information. And it is Saskatoon Westmount, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I have requested some further information with regard to 
consultants, and it’s in the letter that I sent you; it would be in 
July. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — My officials advise me that what they 
supplied you with includes all of it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, just o refresh your 
memory, later I’ll send across the request again, and you can have 
your officials look at it. But the information is not all here, and I’d 
appreciate receiving it in due course. 
 
The second question I had, Mr. Chairman, has to do with the funds 
owing the municipality, the corporation of Saskatoon. And I’m 
relating right now, Mr. Minister, to an article that appeared in the 
Star-Phoenix October 27, ‘87, and it reads as follows: 
 

City council no sooner complained Monday about $3.4 
million the province owes Saskatoon than it learned $1.4 of 
it was already accounted for. The money was sent late last 
week, the city comptroller said. 

  



 
October 29, 1987 

3674 
 

(1645) 
 
What I would like to request from you, Mr. Minister, for my 
enlightenment, is a schedule of the payments due to the city of 
Saskatoon that the comptroller would be referring to here: the 
interval when they’re advanced; the date of the interval when 
they’re usually advanced and how much is advanced in each 
instance; and the actual amount that was advanced in each case 
and the date in which it was advanced, so that I have a picture of 
the advancing of the financing to the city of Saskatoon that is due 
them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, if the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount likes, I’ll send you that information. I have no 
problem with that. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well if the minister wishes to put it on the 
record: the amounts due, the date due, and when it was advanced, 
and the amounts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — There is no need, Mr. Chairman, to read it 
into the record. I have no problem with sending you that 
information. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I thank the minister for that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’d like to turn to the question of capital 
funding. Saskatchewan municipalities have a lower capital debt, 
on a per capita basis, than municipalities in all other provinces 
with the exception of Prince Edward Island. Do you view this as 
desirable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I believe that it’s great 
that our municipalities have a lower per capita debt than they do 
elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can I ask you sir, why you cut the 
provincial capital fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well as I explained publicly many times, Mr. 
Chairman, it was a matter of budget restraints. And I’ll bet in the 
1970s when times were good, as the member from Regina 
Victoria indicated, the most surprised people on earth would have 
been the municipalities when the prior government chose to 
eliminate the capital fund in those good years. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, you’re not one for holding 
back on information. I don’t know why. I guess you must have 
some political mischief in mind when you talk about the one year 
that the capital fund was not in effect, in 1979-80, but choose to 
ignore a number of other substantial increases which had a very 
desirable effect, not only for municipalities but for property 
taxpayers. 
 
Yes, it’s true, Mr. Minister, that the community capital fund, as it 
was then known, was cut and that — or was not reintroduced for 
the year ‘79-80 — represented approximately $10 million. But by 
the same token the government of the day increased urban revenue 
sharing from 35.4 million to 45.4 million, for an increase of $11 
million. That’s not something that you did this year, in fact, you 
cut the urban revenue sharing. 
 
That was also the year that urban capital funding was

increased from $10 million to in excess of $11 million. That was 
also the year that there was a very substantial increase in the 
property improvement grant from $49 million to $63 million, for 
an increase of $13 million. The overall net effect, Mr. Minister, 
was an increase transfer from the provincial government to 
municipalities, and of property taxpayers in that year of $15 
million. 
 
How you can take the position . . . how you can take the position 
and attempt to mislead the people of Saskatchewan that there is 
any similarity with the discontinuation of the provincial capital 
fund this year, and an absolute decrease in revenues to 
municipalities, and an absolute decrease in the kind of assistance 
for property taxpayers this year as compared to the year 1979 and 
1980, simply eludes me. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to get back to the question. All municipal 
capital debt must ultimately be repaid by property taxpayers. 
There is a day of reckoning. You can’t borrow and not pay it back. 
How do you justify increasing capital debt and the increase 
charged to property taxpayers when net property taxes are already 
the third highest in Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Again, Mr. Chairman, I guess all I can say is 
that we wholeheartedly support local autonomy, and if the 
municipalities choose to go into debt, so be it. We discussed that 
in our LGB (Local Government Board) estimates. 
 
And what you’re just saying now is not the case. The 
municipalities aren’t going into more debt, at least not so far. And 
I can’t predict the future, nor can you. So I suppose all we can do 
is just watch and keep an eye on it. As I said in LGB we would, 
we’d monitor the situation and see what occurs. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I didn’t ask you, Mr. Minister, if we accept 
that municipalities are not taking on greater debt at this point. We 
know that the provincial capital fund has been eliminated so that 
there are fewer dollars out there for municipalities which do 
finance capital projects. And if that does not result in increased 
debt, it seems to me that that results in decreased capital projects. 
Do you agree then that there are fewer capital projects taking place 
in Saskatchewan this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — That’s very difficult for us to assess. You 
know, I suppose some municipalities are deferring, some may be 
cancelling, some may be going into debt. And again, local 
autonomy will dictate what their requirements for capital are, 
whether they have to defer or whether they have to cancel or, 
indeed, whether they even put new items of capital spending on 
their array. We believe in local autonomy; they can manage their 
own affairs. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I agree with you, Mr. Minister; they can 
do that, except that they’re just a little bit less able now because 
they have fewer funds available to them to do the kinds of 
necessary projects that they must undertake in order to maintain 
municipal infrastructure. Do you not agree that there is a problem 
here that if municipalities cut back on necessary capital projects, 
that may have an undesirable effect for municipalities 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3675 
 

and their property taxpayers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, again I’ll just repeat, I 
don’t take the pessimistic attitude that the member from Regina 
Victoria does. I don’t believe that the delay or deferral or whatever 
happened so far to the capital expenditures have caused anybody 
any great deal of anxiety. Certainly the municipalities aren’t in an 
uproar over it. They all recognize what they had to do, and with 
their co-operation they’ve done a very, very good job. So we’ll 
just have to determine in the future what happens. 
 
Before I sit down, Mr. Chairman, the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount indicated that he hadn’t received all the information he 
was looking for. He sent me a note. And I have now responded on 
your note, and I think this will complete with satisfaction what you 
were looking for. If not, I’d be glad to look into it further. But my 
officials have put the responses down for you, and I’d ask the page 
to deliver it to him, please. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, there is a very direct 
relationship between provincial capital funds, or provincial 
funding for capital projects, and the total magnitude of capital 
projects undertaken by urban municipalities. There’s a very direct 
relationship — as provincial funding goes up, municipalities 
invest more in capital projects. 
 
I am concerned, many municipalities are concerned, that because 
you have chosen to eliminate the capital fund, they are in a 
position of having to delay or otherwise do away with or even 
cancel necessary capital projects. Does this not evince some 
concern for you, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well you must be talking to different people 
than I do. Some have even told me that they appreciate the relief 
for one year, simply because when you have the capital funding 
there, and it’s 50-cent dollars or whatever they might be looking 
at, it induces them to perhaps proceed with some capital 
expenditure that they may not really want or really need or 
something. But by the same token they don’t want to turn down 
the bargain. 
 
So as a result they don’t have the inducement to go ahead and 
proceed with some unnecessary funding, and they appreciated the 
little bit of relief — not all, because some projects still had to 
proceed. I’m not stupid. 
 
But by the same token, there were a lot of areas where they said, 
well now we can go back and analyse these capital requirements 
and have a look at them and really priorize them in the same way 
that you did at the provincial level, and proceeding with it along in 
that fashion. And hopefully, if our revenues increase again . . . you 
mentioned earlier that, you know, it was a one-year abstinence in 
the ‘70s, this could very well be a one-year abstinence in the ‘80s. 
And as I said, I’m always optimistic. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I just want to get it clear now. Your 
position is then that municipalities were relieved that the capital 
fund was eliminated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, again he’s trying to put

words in my mouth, and he said he wouldn’t do that. So I wish he 
wouldn’t do that. 
 
Clearly I indicated that there were more than several 
municipalities that indicated to me that they were pleased with the 
relief of not having an inducement to take care of. And as I 
admitted, I said that unquestionably there were others that saw the 
light differently. Understandably they would. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I just want to follow up on that. You 
indicated that these municipalities were relieved because then they 
didn’t have to proceed with unwanted or unneeded projects. About 
36 per cent of all capital projects are spent on transportation 
capital improvements, 32 per cent on utilities, 14 per cent on 
recreation and culture, and lesser amounts on other aspects of local 
government. 
 
And I ask you, sir, in terms of provincial priorities, because let’s 
accept for a fact that the elimination of the capital fund, or 
reducing capital funds for municipalities, will have an effect on the 
types of projects they undertake. Taking into account your 
elimination of that capital fund, why would you feel that that’s 
appropriate? And given the necessary kinds of capital projects 
they do, why would you do that, and why would you then have 
money for a home program so that people could put in jacuzzis or 
pools? What’s more important here? Is it roads or is it sidewalks, 
or is it jacuzzis and swimming pools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I suppose if you want to get back into 
jacuzzis and pools and argue frivolously, I could tell you that that 
increases the tax base and they’re going to get an additional source 
of revenue. So there’s an indirect benefit to the municipality that I 
can think of just offhand, but I won’t get into an argument on that 
basis. 
 
What I am saying, however, is this: some of the capital that has 
not been expended by the municipalities because of the loss of this 
program, has been such things as new typewriters, as new little 
grey trucks which run all over the place, and as automobiles, and 
other things that they were able to defer very simply, that they 
appreciated the opportunity of missing out on the 50-cent dollars 
because they didn’t have the other 50 cents. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, you know that cutting 
the capital project, or the program, is having more of a result than 
municipalities cutting back on the number of typewriters they 
purchase. It’s also beginning to have some dire consequences for 
the kinds of money that they can put aside for necessary capital 
projects, whether it’s roads in Saskatoon or some other aspect of 
infrastructure elsewhere. For you to take the position that 
somehow municipalities are relieved by the elimination of the 
program is simply too much. 
 
I think that municipal leaders and property taxpayers for 
themselves can judge as to the priorities of this government, 
whether it’s more important that the provincial government spend 
money so that people can have swimming pools and jacuzzis, or 
whether it’s more important for the provincial government to 
ensure that municipalities have the money so that they can provide 
for the necessary streets, roads, bridges, underground 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

3676 
 

services and the like, so that they can have that sound 
infrastructure which is important to a municipality, and I might 
also say very important to the business of a municipality. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Local Government Finance Commission 
recommended a new property capital fund with an initial level of 
$30 per capita — that’s of course not something we saw this year. 
They also recommended that the new capital . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, I wonder if you might call the 
member from Weyburn to order. I find it’s very difficult to make 
points when this person incessantly chatters. He seems to have no 
respect for the rules of the House. If that’s the kind of behaviour 
that he thinks is acceptable for the school children of this province, 
Mr. Chairman, I shudder to think that education is coming to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would just ask . . . Order, order. Order. I 
would just like to ask all members to show some respect to those 
who are on their feet. But being near 5 o’clock, this committee 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


