













































October 7, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 7, 1987 

 

 

3171 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Tusa: — Today fellow colleagues I would like to 

introduce to you 96 members of the Canadian Club of Canada 

— Regina, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw branches — who are 

seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

The Canadian Club is an association of men and women who 

strongly believe in Canada and who organize theme speakers to 

talk on topics of interest to Canadians. The men’s Canadian 

Club, Regina branch, was formed in 1909, and the women’s 

Canadian Club was formed in 1921. These two clubs 

amalgamated in May of this year and together will promote 

their goals with greater strength. 

 

Would you please join me in welcoming the Canadian Club 

members to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tusa: — It is also my distinct pleasure today to 

introduce to you, in the Speaker’s gallery, six legislative interns 

from the Legislative Assembly of Alberta. 

 

These interns will be with us for several days for meetings with 

members and officers of the Legislative Assembly. 

Accompanying the interns is Mr. Michael Ritter from the 

Alberta office of the Legislative Council and Law Clerk. 

 

Please help me welcome our visitors from Alberta. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Ratification of Free Trade Agreement 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Premier, and it has to do with the question of 

free trade and in specifics the question of ratification, or namely 

how it is that Canadians can either approve or reject the 

agreement which has been negotiated between Mr. Mulroney 

and President Reagan’s administration. 

 

And I refer you, sir, to a statement on September 28 in this 

legislature, made by your Minister of Economic Development 

and Trade on this issue, where he said as follows: 

 

. . . any agreement that was struck . . . would have to be 

acceptable to all regions of the country — the western 

region, Ontario, Quebec, and the Maritime region — and 

through consensus. And without consensus from each of 

the regions, the deal would not be acceptable. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Premier, is this: in light of the fact that 

the province of Ontario has rejected the deal,  

according to the press reports, and similarly the province of 

Manitoba, in view of the fact that the provinces of Nova Scotia 

and Newfoundland and Prince Edward Island have serious 

reservations if not rejecting the deal, is this ratification formula 

enunciated by your Minister of Economic Development and 

Trade still applicable, in which case there would be no deal, or 

is the deal going to be imposed upon us by the Prime Minister 

of Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. 

member for his question. The opportunity before Canada with 

the trade deal that has been initialled by both the President of 

the United States and the Prime Minister of Canada is one of 

the greatest and historic opportunities for Canadians that we’ve 

seen since we built the railroad over 100 years ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I was asked this morning if 

indeed the Prime Minister would call an election on this issue 

so that the people of Canada can express their opposition to, or 

express their support for, this new and exciting opportunity not 

only for Saskatchewan but indeed all of the country. 

 

And I would say yes, the Prime Minister will call an election on 

this issue. And, Mr. Speaker, he will call the election obviously 

within the next six months or 18 months with respect to his time 

frame because, Mr. Speaker, this is an historic opportunity. And 

those that oppose this . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Those that will campaign against it, Mr. 

Speaker, will have to face the facts that they will deny 

Canadians an opportunity to receive tremendous benefit in 

terms of new job opportunities, consumers’ significant benefits, 

and deny Canadians a very effective leadership role in the world 

today in setting an example for trade and for commerce and for 

peace, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, for generations to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 

I must say to the Premier that you must feel good in getting a 

standing ovation inside this legislature because I can assure 

you, given your popularity of the government standing, you 

won’t get it outside this legislature, that’s for sure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the Hon. Premier, I 

would appreciate very much if you would answer the question 

which I shall repeat to you again, sir. The question is, what 

effective means do we have, do you have, as the guardian of 

Saskatchewan interests in farming, in energy, in investment — 

what mechanisms do we have for the acceptance or the rejection 

of this deal and the debate about the deal? 

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3172 

 

Because your answer to my last question implies that the 

ratification process might be a general election. And if that's the 

way the Prime Minister is going to seek ratification of this free 

trade deal, what chance does a small province, rurally based like 

Saskatchewan, have against the interests of Ontario and Quebec 

who might in fact vote for this sell-out of Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting to 

watch the new future leader of the opposition first of all say that 

Ontario is against it, therefore we shouldn’t do it, and then says 

Ontario might go for it and maybe we shouldn’t. I mean, it’s 

clear, Mr. Speaker, that he doesn’t know what side of the fence 

he’s on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I will say very clearly, very clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, that the safeguards and the benefits of a trade pact with 

the United States, if there was any province in any region or any 

group of people that would benefit, it would be the farmers and 

the ranchers and the oilmen and the pulp and paper people and 

the steel people and the potash people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to have access to the U.S. markets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, all provinces have met, and 

I believe I’ve been in nine meetings with the Prime Minister 

and with the first ministers — something like from 70 to 100 

hours of negotiations and talking and briefing and examining 

the entire issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say to the hon. member there is absolutely, without 

any doubt, absolutely never been an opportunity for Canadians 

and Saskatchewan people like this for the last 100 years in this 

country — absolutely, Mr. Speaker, the best opportunity. And 

the final decision, the final decision does rest with the Prime 

Minister, Mr. Speaker. The Prime Minister of the country has 

the final decision, and he will speak for the country, and I will 

speak for Saskatchewan, and people in western Canada will 

know when the final analysis is over that, finally, we will be on 

an equal footing with Ontario — and we haven’t been for the 

last 100 years, and it’s about time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 

Obviously, Mr. Premier, and Mr. Speaker, there is no 

ratification process in place which would permit the people of 

Saskatchewan to protect their interests. And surely we can’t 

rely on you, sir, because you have sold out the interests of the 

province of Saskatchewan on this free trade deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And I want to preface this question, Mr. 

Speaker, very simply and very quickly getting to the point. The 

Premier himself talks about the greatest thing  

that this free trade deal means in, among other things, we’ll talk 

about agriculture in a moment. He mentions steel. If that’s the 

case, I want to ask the Premier of this province how in the 

world does he explain the important criticism of Mr. Roger 

Phillips, the chief executive officer of Ipsco, of probably one of 

the most important industries in Saskatchewan if not Canada — 

steel — who once was a booster of a proposed free trade deal 

and now says that you and your Prime Minister friend, Mr. 

Mulroney, have betrayed the interests of the steel workers and 

the people of Saskatchewan. How is that in the best interests of 

our province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we can go through this 

commodity by commodity, and I’ll start with steel. And we can 

go into agriculture and we can go into oil and we can go into 

pulp and paper and all the things that we want to be able to do. 

 

There are three opportunities, Mr. Speaker, three choices before 

Canadians — three choices before Canadians, and I’ll start with 

steel and we can through the rest of them. 

 

The first is, Mr. Speaker, is that we live under the existing laws 

which are designed and interpreted by Americans and say, no 

deal, you just keep telling us what to do. That’s the first choice, 

that we just leave it; say we’ll back away; you can keep 

imposing your laws because you set them and you interpret 

them. That’s the first. 

 

The second choice, Mr. Speaker, is to ask Americans and 

Canadians to change all their laws immediately, just like that. 

Well I’m sure the hon. member knows, not only in Canada but 

in the Congress of United States, it is not possible to change all 

the laws immediately. 

 

So the third choice, Mr. Speaker, if you don’t want to leave it 

the way it is, and you know you can’t change all them 

immediately — I mean we couldn’t even solve the beer 

business because Ontario wouldn’t let us do it — is to design a 

mechanism that allows you to change the laws. And that’s 

exactly what this is, it’s a bilateral binding dispute-settlement 

mechanism, binding — and United States has never had that 

happen to them before — and an agreement, Mr. Speaker, to 

change the laws and harmonize them over the next five to 10 

years. Tariffs will come to zero and Canadians and Americans 

can build the strongest free trade agreement in the history of the 

world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 

With the greatest of respect, he’s long on rhetoric and short on 

facts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — He says . . . Clearly, Mr. Speaker, there is a 

dispute between the Premier’s interpretation of this so-called 

binding dispute-settlement mechanism which would guarantee 

access of Canadian and Saskatchewan product to the United 

States, his interpretation and that of Mr. Roger Phillips. I’ll tell 

you, Mr. Premier, we’ll take the  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3173 

 

word of Mr. Phillips on this one before we take your word. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I want to say this. My question to you, Mr. 

Premier, is this: part of your rationale for this free trade deal has 

been that in order to stop the United States omnibus trade Bill 

which has been represented by the Minister of Economic Trade 

and Development as blocking the borders to the United States 

of Canadian products, part of the explanation and rationale for 

the free trade deal has been to stop that initiative by Congress. 

 

Will you please tell this House how in the world this free trade 

deal will achieve that objective, since the removal of tariffs 

won’t take place until January 1, 1989, and the U.S. omnibus 

trade Bill is likely to be law before that time. How are we going 

to guarantee access under those circumstances? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member just falls 

into the trap. He says that he doesn’t like the trade Bill before 

the United States and he’s got a resolution before this House — 

the member from Riversdale who said, let’s not cut a deal with 

the United States on trade. That’s what the resolution says. So 

you are saying, let’s live with U.S. law and let them interpret it. 

Don’t deal with them. Hide. Go back to Riversdale and stay 

there. Hide. Because you are not prepared to go and fight for 

Canadians; you’ll just hide from them because you introduced 

in this House a resolution that said, don’t deal with United 

States. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is we have the courage to do an 

historic deal with United States which says we’ll play, not by 

their rules but by a new, binding dispute-settlement mechanism 

which is not their country and not ours but a third party judging 

those rules, Mr. Speaker. That’s never, ever been done before. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if I could say, the hon. member has his claim 

to fame, his negotiations on the constitution. I think we should 

remind this House and remind the rest of the country that he 

carved out the province of Quebec, Mr. Speaker. He carved it 

out and the people of Quebec regret the very fact that he 

wouldn’t have the courage to include us all in one nation, let 

alone negotiate with another one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 

Fighting to get Quebec into Canada is one thing. Fighting with 

respect to the trade markets of the United States is another 

thing. We’re for fighting for improving the trade opportunities 

of this great province and this great country. What we’re not for 

is a sell-out of Saskatchewan. That’s what we’re not for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — A sell-out. And I ask this question, Mr. 

Speaker: how in the world is it that you can go through 20 

minutes of question period — will you please tell us — and not 

answer one specific with respect to the dispute  

mechanism, with respect to the question of how steel is going to 

be protected, not one question? Will you, Mr. Premier, table 

after question period all of the documents, including the legal 

texts and the fine print pertaining to this free trade deal, because 

if you won’t answer it, maybe those documents will? Will you 

do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will certainly be prepared 

to table the document that outlines the agreement in 

considerable detail. If the hon. member will let me . . . Let me 

remind the hon. member a couple of things with respect to this 

pact. 

 

Why is it that the province of Quebec in central Canada, and the 

Premier, who’s had years and years of experience, stands up 

and supports this wholeheartedly for the opportunities it will 

present, not only to the province of Quebec, but indeed all of 

Canada? And I can take you through all the provinces and, yes, 

we have the classic position of Ontario. They want cheap fuel 

from us. They want to be able to manufacture cares, Mr. 

Speaker, and charge us a great deal more because it’s behind a 

tariff wall. They want to be able to manufacture clothes, 

refrigerators, stoves, microwaves, all those things, and charge 

the West a great deal. 

 

And the NDP defend them, Mr. Speaker. We know that the 

province of Quebec, the Maritimes, Mr. Speaker, western 

Canada — not Mr. Pawley, and I’ll give him credit; he’s the 

only NDP premier in the country and he has to take that line 

because philosophically he’s boxed in — but Canadians, Mr. 

Speaker, Canadians from Quebec to Albert to B.C., right across 

the piece, know the benefits to consumers, know the benefits to 

the commodities, and the benefits to all Canadians for years and 

years and years, if you have the courage, Mr. Speaker, to go out 

and fix it and not hide or not just nationalize it because you 

don’t happen to agree. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 

new question to the Premier. The Premier, in his answer to me 

in the last question, asked the rhetorical question, presumably in 

defence of this deal: why was it that Quebec has accepted the 

deal? 

 

Well I want to tell you something, Mr. Premier, Robert 

Bourassa is more than capable of looking after the interests of 

Quebec. I don’t want that explanation. I want you to tell us 

who’s been minding the Saskatchewan interests in the story, not 

Quebec’s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Bourassa, Bourassa and Quebec . . . or can 

look after Quebec’s interests well enough, thank you, without 

taking you and your government to the cleaners. 

 

And my question to you therefore, Mr. Speaker, is this . . . and 

Mr. Premier: why is it that people talk about those who are 

hidebound or stuck by political ideology? Why is it that Mr. 

Peckford, a Conservative, Mr. Buchanan, a Conservative in 

Nova Scotia, together with Mr. Peterson  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3174 

 

— why is it that they too know that this deal is fraught with so 

many short-term and long-term dangers to Canada that they’re 

going to oppose it, but you have been asleep at the switch and 

not looking after Saskatchewan interests? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, two observations. You look 

at seven out of the 10 provinces, Mr. Speaker, and their 

premiers, and you will find that they will endorse that, and over 

the next little period of time you may even find more premiers 

endorsing it, and I’ll say that quite clearly. So let there be no 

mistake that all the provinces are against this or all the 

Maritimes are against this. 

 

I will say . . . I’ll give him that Premier Peterson has his 

concerns because he’s worried about Ontario, who happen to 

have the biggest trade deal in the history of United States and 

Canada in automobiles. We just want the same opportunity. 

He’s a little afraid to give us the opportunity. We want the same 

thing here. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I will point out to the hon. member; 

you go to anybody that’s producing red meat, beef and hogs in 

this province and ask them if they want access to the U.S. 

market, and they will say, yes, absolutely yes . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And, Mr. Speaker, he stands up and he says, 

well what about poultry? When I mention red meat, he changes 

the subject. Poultry and eggs, Mr. Speaker; there is no change, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s as solid as you can be; marketing boards are 

protected. 

 

If you look at the oil and the gas business, you go across this 

province and you ask them if they want access to the United 

States. You go to the pulp and paper business and you ask them 

the same thing. Mr. Speaker, we’ll take commodity by 

commodity by commodity, and you will know that 

Saskatchewan is the biggest benefactor in the entire country, 

having an agreement with the United States, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s why the position we’ve taken is a valid position. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now one final point. In the event, Mr. 

Speaker . . . I will just say this to the hon. member: if he wants 

to put on his cowboy hat when he’s elected leader and he wants 

to go around in the next election on the trade issue, I look 

forward to meeting him on the campaign trail . . .  

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to see the Hon. 

Premier in a cowboy hat. He might even get it on the right way. 

But my final supplementary question to the Premier is this: 

maybe he should . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. The hon. 

member is having difficulty making his question. I’m afraid 

he’s being interrupted. 

 

Order. Order, please. I’m afraid he’s being interrupted by  

both sides of the House, so I’d like to ask for your co-operation. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I was going to say 

that . . . I repeat again, I’d be pleased to see the Premier in a 

cowboy hat, but I think he should start trying another kind of a 

hat, Mr. Speaker, especially in the light of how unpopular his 

government is and this deal is. And I think he’s practising it 

very much. He is selling off everything in Saskatchewan and 

now, it seems, Canada. I think he’s trying out to become the 

new host for the Canadian home shopping network television 

network. That’s how badly he’s selling it off. Try that hat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, you can quickly . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I think the public should recognize how quickly the 

new leader of the opposition gets off the whole question of 

trade, and he starts talking about television and everything else. 

He was . . . no substance. Let me . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Let me add, Mr. Speaker, just for the hon. 

member’s information — more and more good thinking, 

intelligent news media and Canadians, Mr. Speaker, are 

endorsing a full fledged trade treaty with the United States and 

Canada. And if he would allow me, I’ll just read the last 

sentence in today’s Globe and Mail: 

 

We believe in liberalized trade . . . 

 

This is an Ontario paper, Mr. Speaker, Ontario paper, The 

Globe and Mail: 

 

We believe in liberalized trade, consistent with national 

sovereignty. This deal appears to have achieved it. 

 

Endorsed by The Globe and Mail, Mr. Speaker. And let me just 

say this. More and more people across the country are 

recognizing that it takes some courage to go out into the 

international world and face the global village. Those that have 

the courage and the vision to do it and capture the opportunity 

are going to go down in history as those that are leaders. Those 

that are afraid of it, Mr. Speaker, will be doomed to the 

opposition for some time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 

please. 

 

Dispute-Settlement Mechanism 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. 

I preface it by commenting on one of his earlier remarks about 

the absence of a deal with Quebec when my colleague from 

Riversdale and I were negotiating. And I think it’s interesting to 

know that the Premier believes that we should have made a deal 

with René Levesque, and endorses René Levesque’s vision of 

Canada. I want to tell him, and to the Canadian public, that 

while he may adopt René Levesque’s view of Canada, I do not, 

and I’m proud to say I do not. 

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3175 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. I’d 

like to ask the hon. members to give the Leader of the 

Opposition a chance to put his question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, my question deals with 

the dispute resolution mechanism which you say offers some 

impartial adjudication. Do you not agree, Mr. Premier, that the 

adjudication is entirely with respect to process and not at all 

with respect to content; that Roger Phillips is right when he 

ways that this does not give us any access to U.S. markets? 

 

And do you not agree with this statement of what the deal 

entails, the U.S. anti-dumping law, detailed as U.S. statutes, 

legislative history, regulations, administered or practice, and 

court decisions will remain intact and unchanged — intact and 

unchanged. Now this is the statement, the summary of the text 

put out by the U.S. government. I do not have the one from the 

Canadian government. If you have it, I wish you’d make it 

available. 

 

And I ask you, Mr. Premier, do you not agree that that fairly 

states what the free trade agreement, which you endorse, 

enacts? Do you not agree that while it creates an impartial 

referee, it let's one side make all the rules and change them if 

they don’t like the referee’s decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I think, Mr. Speaker, I can only say 

to the hon. member that I hope he takes the time to read the 

agreement in some detail because it addresses the very points 

that he raises. And I would hope after he does read it that he 

will at least be consistent with what’s on the table so that we all 

know that we’re speaking about the same thing. Let me just 

walk through it, and then I’ll just touch at the end of Meech 

Lake because he brought it up — pardon me, on the whole 

question of Quebec in the constitution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have today that we didn’t have before, 

what we have today with respect to a trade mechanism is the 

following: we have, first of all, a bilateral binding 

dispute-settlement mechanism on old laws and new laws that 

we didn’t have before. Now that’s something United States has 

never done before. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Minister, we have a fast-track mechanism that 

will not allow the United States to take it into their court, 

judged by their people, and then if we didn’t like it, we’d have 

to take it to GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) 

for the next five years, but a new, binding, bilateral mechanism 

with a fast-track that says that they have to play by, not their 

rules, not our rules, but a new international set of binding rules, 

and that'’ to our advantage, Mr. Minister. 

 

Third, Mr. Speaker, we have the reduced temptation of political 

interference in the U.S. laws because they don’t get to judge the 

laws. And you know as well as I do, when you look at the 

potash case — and I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the political 

change in the United States over potash is tremendous — that 

temptation will be largely reduced because we’re looking at a 

brand new mechanism. 

Fourth, Mr. Speaker, we have agreed to sit down and harmonize 

and change our rules over the next three years to five years. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s terribly significant. Americans and 

Canadians are saying, we can’t change the rules instantly, but 

let’s get it bound right now — bind it so that we know that 

we’re in control jointly, and then go ahead and change the rules 

over time so we can be an example for the rest of the world, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Sixth point, Mr. Speaker. We have tariffs 

going to zero — tariffs going to zero. We don'’ have that now. 

Tariffs going to zero means that every consumer in this country 

will benefit in the neighbourhood of $300 a year in benefits, 

year after year after year. For a family of five that’s $1,500 in 

benefit because tariffs go to zero, and that is in the agreement. 

 

Seven, Mr. Speaker, we have a brand-new example, a 

brand-new example to take to the multilateral trade negotiations 

and to GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) and 

say to the world — because this is perfectly consistent with  

GATT — this is how you should be trading; take it to the 

Japanese, take to the Europeans, and take it to others. 

 

Eighth, Mr. Speaker, we now have a new, binding mechanism 

that is as strong as the mechanism that binds the European 

Economic Community, in the final analysis. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker — and finally — you will see that we 

have absolutely protected language, culture, marketing boards, 

sovereignty, regional development, and social programs in this 

country, and that’s what we said we were going to do with it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Benefits of Free Trade Agreement 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, because we really didn’t get 

a good opportunity in question period, I would like to make a 

statement with respect to the trade negotiations between the 

United States and Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I want to make six brief points, and I’ve 

extended my speaking notes to the Leader of the Opposition 

and to the Liberal leader. 

 

Let me say, Mr. Speaker, we have before us an historic 

opportunity for Saskatchewan and all Canada to grow and to 

build and create new jobs for decades to come as a result of the 

trade pact that’s been initialled between the United States and 

Canada. It’s the most exciting opportunity for Canada since in 

fact we built the railroad over a hundred years ago. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, this historic opportunity for Canada to 

play a leadership role in world events is truly exciting. It 

provides a liberal trading example for the  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3176 

 

multilateral trade negotiations and for GATT (General 

Agreement on Tariffs and Trade). And we can say, Mr. 

Speaker, don’t just do as we say, but do as we do. And 

Saskatchewan people and Canadians will take a world position, 

a leadership position in multilateral trade negotiations for 

generations to come. 

 

Third, Mr. Speaker, significant benefits for Canadian 

consumers for years to come will be readily apparent — an 

average of $300 per man, woman, and child year after year. It’ll 

be like, Mr. Speaker, a duty-free shop for North Americans so 

that we can go into the United States and buy cars, for example, 

in Minneapolis that would be worth $9,000; we can buy them 

for four and a half. We’ve made the comparisons today, Mr. 

Speaker. Tremendous savings for Canadians, and they know 

what the prices are in the United States. 

 

Fourth, Mr. Speaker, an establishment of a final — and I say 

this — a final, binding, bilateral dispute-settlement mechanism 

that has never in the history of the United States been imposed 

on that country. U.S. will not be setting and not be judging the 

rules applied to us, but a third party, Mr. Speaker. And we agree 

to the process of modifying and changing those rules, new rules 

and existing rules, over time to bring them in line with our 

trading objectives. 

 

Five, Mr. Speaker, complete safeguards, complete safeguards 

on language, culture, sovereignty, regional development, social 

programs, and marketing boards as we set out to do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And six, this historic opportunity for Saskatchewan and western 

Canada to finally compete with Ontario and Quebec on equal 

footing. And if there ever was a reason to allow us to have 

access to opportunity, to a large market, and not be confined by 

tariffs that Ontario and central Canada has lived under for years, 

this is that opportunity. When it comes to automobiles, when it 

comes to commodities, when it comes to the things we purchase 

and produce, Mr. Speaker, we will now be on equal footing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to stand here today and say that this 

country has initialled one of the most historic opportunities that 

we’ve ever seen in the last hundred years. And it deserves the 

support of every single solitary Canadian. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On behalf of the Leader of the Opposition and members of the 

official opposition, Mr. Speaker, I welcome this opportunity to 

briefly respond to the Premier’s comments on the free trade 

treaty proposed by Prime Minister Mulroney, and now 

enthusiastically endorsed by the Government of Saskatchewan 

and our Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this side of the House supports new trade 

opportunities for Saskatchewan and Canada. We want to see 

new jobs and new sectors of our economy created to provide the 

next generation of goods and services for a growing world. Let 

there be no doubt about that. But this  

free trade treaty fails to provide those new opportunities for 

Saskatchewan and Canada, and worse yet, Mr. Speaker, it 

comes at great expense to our nation, to our province and its 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — The free trade treaty proposed by Brian 

Mulroney and supported basically sight unseen, Mr. Speaker, 

because no documents of any consequence have been tabled by 

the Premier, supported by his chief cheer-leader, the Premier of 

Saskatchewan, is tantamount to the biggest sell-out of Canada 

and its interests probably in our history. 

 

It surrenders to the Americans on every major bargaining point, 

Mr. Speaker, and gives us nothing in return. And I say, shame 

on the Premier of our province for cheer-leading rather than 

leading on this vital interest of concern to Saskatchewan and to 

Canada’s people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Instead of going to Ottawa to protect 

Saskatchewan interests, our Premier went to Ottawa to blindly 

endorse this proposed treaty negotiated in secret and many of 

the details of which are still unknown to this very day. The 

Premier knows that his political cousins in Ottawa saved his 

bacon last fall with a deficiency payment, and he knows that 

Brian Mulroney, in this regard and in regard to free trade, is 

calling all of the shots and now cashing in his chips. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is going to pay the 

price for a long, long time unless our people join forces to stop 

this plan as negotiated by the Premier of our province and Mr. 

Mulroney. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I say this proposed treaty is bad news for 

Saskatchewan on a number of counts, Mr. Speaker, very 

briefly,. First, with respect to our number one industry, 

agriculture, this treaty threatens the future of the Canadian 

Wheat Board and our entire orderly marketing structure in 

Canadian agriculture. It allows the Americans, Mr. Speaker, to 

begin to sell their wheat in the Canadian market, which 

weakens the control of the Canadian Wheat Board, and I say is 

the first step in its eventual elimination. 

 

This treaty will wipe out the two-price system for wheat in 

Canada, and the Premier has virtually admitted that today, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s a loss of hundreds of millions of dollars in 

revenue for already hard pressed Saskatchewan and Canadian 

farmers. And this Premier, who says that he defends the farmers 

of Saskatchewan, has allowed . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. The hon. 

member for Riversdale is making his response to a ministerial 

statement. I think he deserves the opportunity to do so without 

interruption. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3177 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, 

this represents an attack on the family farm and the question of 

orderly marketing at a time when farmers are under sufficient 

and serious enough attack on the economic circumstances that 

they face. There are other concerns for Saskatchewan farm 

families, especially those in the egg and poultry industry, but 

we’ll have more to say about that in the future as this debate 

progresses. 

 

Secondly, this treaty fails to guarantee Saskatchewan exporters, 

like our potash producers, access to the American market — 

one of the basic reasons for negotiating the deal. This 

apparently was fundamental to these negotiations. It was 

supposed to be a way to exempt Canadian producers from 

American protectionist laws like the anti-dumping and 

countervailing duties. It was supposed to be the protection to 

the ominous Bill in the United States which was going to be a 

protectionist matter to all of Canada. And yet it won’t come into 

effect, the new tariffs, until January 1 of 1989, long after the 

new anti-protectionist laws in the United States become 

effective and law and, therefore, will not achieve that objective. 

 

And the new dispute-settlement mechanism, Mr. Speaker, was 

supposed to be a way for Canadian producers to be treated just 

as American producers are within their own country. And what 

do we get? Nothing. A toothless tiger of a tribunal which can 

only rule on whether or not American laws were applied fairly, 

not whether those laws were unfair in the first place. And that’s 

the key, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That is why people like Mr. Phillips, of Ipsco steel, a basic 

industry, and other free trade supporters are saying when they 

withdraw their support for this particular deal — they say, and 

our side agrees, that Canada and Saskatchewan has given up 

virtually everything and gotten nothing in return for Canadians 

and for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, what good is a free trade 

treaty which doesn’t guarantee Canadian producers access to 

the American market. This treat does not guarantee access to 

the American market. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Finally, with respect to energy, agriculture 

energy, another essential element, Mr. Speaker, of our resources 

in this province. This deal is an incredible sell-out of Canadian 

interests and an incredible surrender of sovereignty by Canada 

and provincial rights. If this treaty is approved, Canada will no 

longer be able to charge Americans more for our oil, gas, coal 

or hydro power than we charge ourselves. 

 

What good is ownership of a resource, something that we 

always fought for, successive governments in Saskatchewan, if 

we’re not free to charge full value for that resource when we 

export it to the rest of the world and get the profits from that 

resource for our hospitals and our schools and our highways, 

and now this Premier has denied us this right. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, we lose any competitive edge 

our industries and our farmers and our small businesses might 

have had on their American counterparts with such a deal on 

energy. And under the terms of this treaty, Mr. Speaker, Canada 

would even be forced to maintain exports of oil and gas to the 

Americans in times of energy shortages, something which is 

also an attack on not only sovereignty but the economic good 

sense of our farmers and our motorists who depend upon secure 

energy supplies to keep our economy moving in this country 

and in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, this side 

stands opposed to this trade treaty as it currently stands, because 

it represents a sell-out of Canada. It is taking us back to a dark 

age. This Premier, by endorsing it sight unseen, Mr. Speaker, 

has sold out the future of our young men and women, those who 

want jobs and opportunities at home — sold them out to the 

United States and other parts of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — We say, Mr. Speaker, we say, let the people 

speak on this issue. The Premier and the government opposite 

does not accept. We say let the people speak on this issue. Let 

the Prime Minister call a federal election on this free trade 

treaty now, and let the people from one end of this country to 

the other end speak on his negotiating skills, on the process, and 

what it means for Ontario or Saskatchewan. 

 

(1445) 

 

And if the Premier is so confident, let the people speak. Let the 

Premier of the province of Saskatchewan call a by-election in 

Eastview, and let them speak at that by-election and tell us what 

they think about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t mean several 

months down the road, I mean now when the debate is current. 

Let the Saskatchewan people speak on how badly, in our 

judgement, our government has let down the trust, how badly 

the Premier and our government has failed to stand up to protect 

Saskatchewan’s interests. We know that Quebec’s interests may 

be protected. We want somebody to have protected 

Saskatchewan and Canadian interests, and from what we know, 

Mr. Speaker, on the limited information, this blank cheque that 

the Premier is prepared to sign and apparently has signed to the 

deal, this arrangement is bad for the future growth of this 

province and this country. Shame on the government opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before we move to the next item on orders of 

the day, under routine proceedings, yesterday I brought 

attention to a long ministerial statement. Today I would like to 

bring attention to a long response to a  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3178 

 

ministerial statement. I would like in the future, or like 

members in the future — ministers and opposition critics — to 

please keep in mind that ministerial statements and replies 

should be brief and factual. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to Provide for the Imposition of Taxes 

on and the Collection of Taxes from Certain Purchasers of 

Certain Fuels and to Provide for Rebates of Taxes to 

Certain Purchasers 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move first 

reading of a Bill to Provide for the Imposition of Taxes on and 

the Collection of Taxes from Certain Purchasers of Certain 

Fuels and to Provide for Rebates of Taxes to Certain 

Purchasers. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

RESOLUTION 

 

Free Trade Agreement 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before 

the orders of the day I would like to move the following 

resolution so that the members of the House will know why I 

seek leave. It obviously deals with what has been the subject 

matter of question period today and our debate on statements 

with respect to free trade. And given the urgency of this, I think 

it should be ventilated now, Mr. Speaker, at least begun to be 

ventilated, the debate, and it's urgent because ratification hangs 

in the balance. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move, 

seconded by my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, the 

member from Regina Elphinstone, by leave, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 

Saskatchewan for having failed to protect the interests of 

Saskatchewan and Canada in the proposed free trade 

agreement with the United States; for having failed to 

protect Canada’s future as a strong and independent 

nation; and in particular, for having failed to protect 

Saskatchewan’s agricultural interests; for having failed to 

ensure Canada’s ability to pursue an independent energy 

policy for our future; and for having failed to achieve an 

effective and binding dispute-settlement mechanism, and 

thereby jeopardizing Saskatchewan family farms and 

Saskatchewan jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly to introduce and to 

debate this resolution today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I have mentioned to the hon. members 

different times that when the Chair has risen I would ask for 

their co-operation in being silent. I do that again. Hopefully I 

won’t have to in the future. 

 

Leave not granted. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, I have a number of 

questions to the minister regarding a document that we obtained 

this spring about the possibility of limiting the number of visits 

that one could have in terms of seeing a chiropractor, and the 

possibility of doing away altogether any kind of insured 

services for certain physiotherapists — private physiotherapists. 

And I would ask the Minister of Health today to advise the 

legislature whether he has any plans to limit the number of 

visits to a chiropractor, or whether he has any plans to de-insure 

visits to private physiotherapists. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, as it relates to 

physiotherapists, first of all, as the member knows, I’ve been 

. . . The question was as it relates to private contracts that are 

now available in the province and the potential for those to 

remain. 

 

We have nine private contracts in the province that are not very 

widely distributed around the province. We are in negotiations, 

or discussions I guess would be a better term, with the 

physiotherapists in the province now. And we would look at . . . 

I don’t see private contracts being eliminated, which is what . . . 

You know, there was some consternation about that at one 

point. I don’t see that happening. 

 

I would say that there may be a move, although it’s subject to 

significant more discussion. There may be a move to moving 

some of these contracts or moving to having some private 

contracts in some other regional centres, centres that have 

regional hospitals where there could be some service provided 

in other than the two largest cities. 

 

So we would look to a better distribution, I guess you could say, 

of that. But that’s . . . And there are a lot of elements to that that 

we could talk about, probably will. But certainly there are many 

elements to it that we talked with the physiotherapy profession 

on. 

 

As it relates to chiropractors, as the member will know, and as a 

good number of people in the province will know, there is no 

question that there is a continuing discussion there as well with 

the chiropractors about some changes. And I can'’ say to the 

House, and the reason I can’t say is because I don’t know what 

form they would take. 

 

We had said at one stage that there was a potential for limiting 

the number of visits because that’s a direction that has been 

taken in virtually every other province in the country in terms of 

limiting the numbers. And we are in fact, I believe, the only 

province in the country that does  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3179 

 

not have a limit on the number of visits. The problem with that, 

frankly, is that the people who have the most chronic problem, 

of course, are those that will have the most visits in a year, and 

so that’s the case, and we recognize that very clearly. 

 

We’re in ongoing discussions with the chiropractic profession 

as well, as how we might deal with the payment schedule to 

chiropractors and the way in which we can deal with that. But I 

don’t have anything more I can say. I certainly won’t be able to 

make an announcement about it or to give you any kind of an 

assurance beyond that, but I would say that those discussions go 

on with the two professions that you refer to. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I am pleased to see that 

you’re backing down on limitations to visits to chiropractors. I 

can understand why you are backing down. I’m sure that you 

have literally received hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of 

letters from patients of chiropractors telling you that they have 

no limits placed on the number of visits they can make to a 

chiropractor each year. You’ve also received in this legislature 

thousands and thousands of names of people who’ve advised 

you that they do not want to see any limits placed on the 

number of visits to a chiropractor. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Minister, that you acknowledge that to limit 

the number of visits has the most impact on those people who 

have chronic back and muscle problems, that they’re the people 

that are going to be paying more. Now, Mr. Minister, if you 

admit that, if you admit that this isn’t the way to go in terms of 

chiropractors, limiting the number of visits, will you now admit, 

Mr. Minister, that the way you’ve changed your prescription 

drug plan has the most effect on chronic users of prescription 

drugs, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As it relates to any correspondence we 

may have had from patients of chiropractors, I’ll just say that 

the correspondence would basically say, don’t make any 

changes at all. Make sure that it’s all . . . that you can visit as 

many times as you like, and whatever. And that’s basically 

what the correspondence would say. But I will say to that, that 

there will probably need to be some changes. 

 

But what I have said to you earlier as it relates to the 

chiropractors now, that the changes may have to be in some 

other ways. And I don’t know what those are, and those 

discussions go on and on. In fact, you know, there’s not even a 

. . . I would say there’s not even a consensus within the 

chiropractic profession, certainly, on how would be the best 

way to deal with this. And of course we recognize that some of 

the practitioners deal with more chronic cases, some don’t and 

so on, so they have their internal sort of discussions about that, 

and we’re involved with the profession in that area. 

 

As it relates to your suggestion about the drug plan, I have said 

on so many occasions in the past, and I will continue to say here 

again today, provisions for the people most in need are covered 

in the drug plan. The drug plan changes — I mean what more 

can we say than what we’ve already said on that. You and I will 

agree to disagree certainly, at  

best, and the plan that’s in place and has been in place since 

July is becoming better and better understood by the people of 

the province, and the adjustments to the new plan are going 

very well. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m going to pursue the 

drug plan at some length later on in these estimates, but I just 

want to advise you of this, that we are getting more and more 

phone calls from people as people understand the program — 

understand your changes to the prescription drug plan. And if 

you will admit that any kind of limitations on visits to 

chiropractors will negatively impact upon chronic users of 

chiropractic services, then surely, Mr. Minister, logic follows 

that your drug plan — your new and improved drug plan will 

have negative effects on chronic users of prescription drugs 

because they’ll have to pay a lot, lot more than they did in the 

past. 

 

Now you’ve talked about these continuing discussions with 

chiropractors. I’m wondering if you can tell me whether these 

continuing discussions with chiropractors have involved the 

possibility of lowering the amount of money that’s available to 

chiropractors through the Medical Care Insurance Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I would say to the . . . I won’t confirm 

or deny that. All I want to say to the . . . because all of the 

things that are in that discussion with chiropractors frankly need 

to be just where they are within their own profession and the 

way in which their profession will approach the government, 

and in this case the Department of Health, obviously. 

 

And so I would just leave it at that and say that we have those 

discussions going on, and to being as forthright as I can be with 

you, I will say that, as I have said, that I don’t rule out the 

possibility that there may be some changes in the way in which 

chiropractic services deliver. But that’s really all I can say and 

that’s an ongoing discussion without going into the details of 

how that . . . you know, what is being discussed at this point. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, will these changes have any 

effect on a patient’s access to chiropractic services in this 

province. Have you anticipated these potential changes, these 

changes that you’re discussing? Will they have an impact? Will 

they negatively effect access to chiropractic service? 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Access to Saskatchewan citizens to 

services is a fundamental principle that becomes a part of only 

these kinds of discussions, so that we have to ensure that there 

is access for those who need services in various health care 

branches. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you didn’t answer the question. 

I’m asking you whether or not your discussions with the 

chiropractors, if those discussions follow through and if there’s 

any kind of limitation on the fund available to the chiropractors, 

will that have a negative effect on patients who require 

chiropractic services for chronic back and muscle problems? 

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3180 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I think I did answer the question; you 

may not have understood the answer, but anyway, the answer 

was that the access was there. I’ll just say it clearly, whatever 

system is in place, and what we would always strive to do 

would be to put a system in place which would have no 

detrimental effect on patients who need the services of 

chiropractic practitioners. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well I guess, Mr. Minister, we’ll have to 

wait to see whether your word is as good as your word. We’ll 

have to wait and see because there are a number of people, 

including chiropractors, who are concerned about the possible 

or potential changes that you’ve been discussing with them. 

There are patients who are concerned that their access to 

chiropractic care is going to be limited, or the number of visits 

are going to be capped, and after that they’re going to have to 

start spending money in order to get to see a chiropractor. 

They’re concerned that their access will be limited because they 

can’t afford those up-front charges. But you assure us that there 

will be no limitations on the number of visits of people who 

have back problems and muscle problems. 

 

I want to talk about the physiotherapists. You tell me that there 

are nine physiotherapy contracts, private physiotherapy 

contracts, in this province and that they're not widely 

distributed. Can you advise me in what centres those 

physiotherapy contracts are in? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — They’re in the following centres: 

Regina has four; Moose Jaw, one; Saskatoon, two; Watrous, 

one; and Rosetown, one. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So when you say you’re thinking of 

distributing these physiotherapy contracts around, are we 

talking about providing more contracts, or are we talking about 

cutting back on contracts, for instance, in Regina and Saskatoon 

and distributing those contracts in other parts of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Let’s just go through the circumstances 

surrounding the whole physiotherapy thing — well maybe not 

the whole thing as it’s obviously complex, and I know you 

know it, but I just want to explain it to the House. 

 

The contracts that are in these centres, these five centres, are . . . 

Obviously that does not constitute a well-distributed system 

around our province. We have, you know, places like Yorkton 

and Swift Current and Prince Albert with regional hospitals — 

excellent regional hospitals — North Battleford, examples 

where, in a move, any move that would be made, or any kind of 

encouragement that would be out to the regional hospital 

centres and the regional hospitals themselves for enhancement 

of the kinds of services that come from regional hospitals. 

 

One of the things that we hear often, and I’m sure you hear as 

well, is that we need increasing physiotherapy services in those 

areas so that much of that service can be done there rather than 

going to the big cities or the other places where these are. 

Obviously the largest of these contracts are, I believe, in 

Saskatoon and Regina in terms of the number of visitors. And 

in many of those, the  

visitors are coming from wherever else across the province. 

 

So what we will contemplate doing . . . and like I said before, 

we’re in the discussion stages with the physiotherapists, and it’s 

oh, I don’t know, I won’t say they’re preliminary because 

we’ve been at it for some time and there’s some disagreement. 

And obviously there are many physiotherapists who would like 

to be private practitioners and haven’t been allowed to with the 

closed shop system that’s been there for a good number of 

years. Like this system we’re talking about is one that’s been 

there a long time. 

 

So we have two things which we will want to address. One is 

distribution of these contracts, and that won’t preclude, you 

know, additional contracts being given out, but the giving out of 

additional contracts won’t necessarily mean that there will be 

that much more money spent on physiotherapy private services. 

It may be a distribution of those services. Now obviously that 

will have implications for some of the very largest of these 

contractors. But that wouldn't preclude some of these same 

people who have some excellent staff and so on from locating 

in other places where their services are needed. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So I guess what we have here, Mr. Minister, 

is a potential warning from you that Regina, which has four 

private contracts, may or can or should expect perhaps that they 

may only have two or three down the road, and that that 

contract will be given to some other centre. A private 

physiotherapist in Regina will have his contract or her contract 

cancelled, and a contract will be given out in some other 

location. Is that what you’re saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — To some extent it is, but I want to just 

clarify one point. It doesn’t necessarily mean that there are . . . 

the example that you use is Regina, and I’ll use that as well. We 

have four contracts now. It doesn’t necessarily that that could 

become two contracts or three contracts. It may mean, and 

that’s not for sure either because we have to look at distribution 

of where the patients that are being served and where they’re 

from and so on — and if there’s a percentage, a significant 

percentage that come from, say, Yorkton area and the whole, 

you know, the north-east or something like, those are the kinds 

of things. 

 

So what we’re talking about is taking the services closer to the 

people, and it may well mean that the contract, an individual 

contract in Regina for example, may have a smaller volume in 

its Regina location, and if that same person could continue with 

that same volume if the had a satellite office in Yorkton or in 

Swift Current or whatever . . . I mean those are all possibilities 

that could be there, and that’s really what I’m saying. 

 

But I can’t go much further than that because we obviously are 

into those discussions and will continue with them until we can 

have some reasonable consensus between ourselves and the 

profession, always remembering the one guide-line which we 

will want to adhere to, and that is distribution of the services 

closer to the people rather than concentrated in the areas that 

they  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3181 

 

now are. 

 

And the way in which they’ve grown up is just more of a . . . it 

just sort of happened in a haphazard way, and they’ve just been 

allowed to continue. We believe that services should be 

provided in the regional areas, as I’ve outlined earlier. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, coming from a rural 

background myself, I can understand the need and the request 

on behalf of rural people, or people living in rural 

Saskatchewan, to have health services available to them in 

centres that are fairly close. 

 

But I want to caution you, Mr. Minister, we have a shortage of 

physiotherapists in this province, as you well know. We had a 

situation last winter where the School of Physical Therapy was 

requesting additional spaces in order to train physiotherapists to 

meet the needs of Saskatchewan people. Our population is 

ageing; our population has more requirements for 

physiotherapists and occupational therapy professionals. It took 

your government some time to get around to getting those 10 

additional spaces into the School of Physical Therapy. 

 

There is a report that was put out by Flora MacDonald a year 

and a half ago that indicates that by the year 1995 we will 

require 5,500 physiotherapists in this country to meet the 

growing need. And it seems to me, in an age when we have 

students being turned away from the University of 

Saskatchewan because of enrolments, and it seems to me when 

we have the minister of advanced education talking about 

meeting the year 2000, Mr. Minister, that your department and 

the advanced education department, or the Education 

department, should be talking about more than 10 spaces at the 

School of Physical Therapy. We should be talking about 20 or 

30 or 40 spaces, Mr. Minister, because it doesn’t matter where I 

go in this province, there are citizens after citizens talking about 

problems in attracting physiotherapist. They can’t get them. 

 

They also have a problem, Mr. Minister, in terms of your 

funding cut-backs. Now, Mr. Minister, you have received, I 

know, a number of letters from parents of children who have 

disabilities, and they are concerned about the Children’s 

Rehabilitation Centre in Saskatoon and the cut-backs in services 

to their children. I’m wondering if you could advise me whether 

or not children in this province who go to the Children’s 

Rehabilitation Centre in Saskatoon are getting the same level of 

service that they got last year in terms of the number of visits 

that they can make to a physiotherapist or an occupational 

therapist at that centre. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of points to the hon. member. 

In your preamble to this specific question — I’ll come to this 

specific question in a minute — you talked about the need for 

physiotherapy services, that need. I want to remind you or 

inform you, whichever is the case, about the circumstance that 

surrounded physiotherapy. And I remember it being a very 

significant political issue when I first ran for office in 1978. 

And in 1982 it was a political issue as well, and I heard about it 

in my constituency of Meadow Lake, about physiotherapy. 

Physiotherapy was a significant issue, and I have some personal 

experience in the physiotherapy thing in the 1979-1980 area — 

spent about eight months in Saskatoon, with a home in Meadow 

Lake, taking therapy and so on because it was not available and 

was nowhere near the area that I’m from. It had been a chronic 

issue for a long time. You will remember who the government 

was and what the response was. We all remember what the 

response was — zero, nothing. Okay. 

 

In 1982 when we came to power we initiated the needs study on 

that directed by Mr. Earl Dick of Saskatoon, and the most 

significant recommendation that came out of that was for the 

implementation of what is now called the community therapy 

program, and that is in place. That’s a significant move. I will 

. . . you know, it’s . . . I admit to you that because of the 

shortage of therapists that you’ve outlined, and that shortage of 

therapists is certainly not something that’s unique to this 

province, it’s . . . as is the case with audiologists, who we talked 

about last night, and several others of these professions, they’re 

just not available. 

 

(1515) 

 

But anyway, the community therapy program is there, and it’s 

working rather well, and it could use, you know, some more 

resources, certainly. And I understand that. 

 

The second thing that you mentioned is with regard to the 

training of these because that’s . . . obviously my first point 

leads to the second. We need more people, so let’s train more. 

That was a question back as far as 1978, and in ’82 and in the 

years in between. That was a major issue and the answer was 

always no, there will be no positions. 

 

The fact is in 1987 we have included in these very difficult 

times — remember the context that I’m talking about in terms 

of the ability of this society to pay — we have implemented 

through the department of advanced education and manpower at 

the University of Saskatchewan 10 extra spaces, which has been 

extremely well received by both the university and the 

physiotherapist profession. Ten extra spaces. You said it took us 

some time to do that, but the fact is it was done in time for those 

spaces to be up and on stream during this academic year. 

 

So I just want to make those points because it’s important that 

we do. In 19 . . . 

 

You asked about the services at the Children’s Rehab Centre, I 

believe. The Children’s Rehab Centre is paid for from the 

University Hospital budget who in turn receives funding from 

the government. And in 1986-87, there were five positions 

added to the Children’s Rehab Centre to increase, increase the 

services available to young people who need that service. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, there may have been five 

positions added, but we have received a number of letters, and 

I’m sure you have received the same letters from parents who 

advise us that they used to have their children seen by a 

physiotherapist and an occupational therapist one or two times a 

week, and that they’ve now been informed that their 

physiotherapy will be reduced to  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3182 

 

two times a year. 

 

Mr. Minister, when you have a child who is severely disabled, 

may have cerebral palsy, may have blindness, and a number of 

other disabilities, it’s important that they have this kind of 

therapy in order to avoid some chronic problems as they get 

older, in order to avoid orthopedic surgery which, I’m sure 

you’re familiar, is very, very expensive and costs the taxpayers 

a great deal of money. And it seems to me that it’s important 

that we have physiotherapy services and occupational therapy 

services available to disabled children so that they can keep 

learning, Mr. Minister. 

 

We call it rehabilitation, but they’ve never had the opportunity 

to be habilitated. They are learning new things. Rehabilitation 

implies that they are re-learning. Well, Mr. Minister, that’s not 

the case. They are learning new things, and they require 

physiotherapy services and occupational therapy services. 

 

And you may have created five positions last year, and you may 

have those five positions filled this year for those kids, but the 

point is that parents are telling us — and I know they’ve told 

you; I know that John Dolan School, the parents’ group there, 

has told you that there have been cut-backs in services to 

disabled children. 

 

And my question to you is this: what are you doing about that? 

What are you doing to ensure that the disabled children in this 

province have access, and have weekly access if that’s the need, 

to physiotherapy and occupational therapy services? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, just the . . . You know, the 

member makes a point about the . . . You know, the member 

makes a point about the . . . And I understand as well what it 

means when you need the services, you know, and when a 

member of the family, a young person is in this need, you have 

a, you know, considerable concern, obviously, and the letters 

will be written, and so on. 

 

But I want you to know and I, you know, I don’t want to get 

into this comparative thing in a major way, but I do want you to 

recognize, and everyone in the committee should recognize 

today, that we are, and have been, responding to those very 

needs of which you speak. We’ve been responding to those 

needs, and I went through the things. 

 

The community therapy program has, in fact, you know, I will 

admit, to a limited degree, but the community therapy program 

has, for some people who don’t live near Saskatoon, has in fact 

responded to some of the need and for some of the young 

people and for some of the children to have services at home or 

very close to home. So that has happened, and that’s taken some 

of the pressure off. 

 

That’s not to say there isn’t continuing pressure for these kinds 

of services, because there is. We know that. But what I want to 

point out is that, you know, there’s no sort of . . . every year is 

not a new starting point in terms of being able to allocate the 

funds or the necessary funds for these. You have to go with 

what has historically been neglected or whatever, whether it’s 

been by you or by us in earlier years or whatever. 

But the fact is, community therapy has done some good things. 

Ten extra spaces at the university is significant, there’s no 

question. The five new positions are significant, and what I’m 

concerned about frankly is . . . And I understand what the 

parents would write to you, and whether they used the word 

cut-backs or whether that’s your word, because I believe it may 

be, but they are not cut-backs. Okay? They are not cut-backs, 

just to the hon. member. 

 

Let me just add another point that goes into this whole area in 

the broadest sense. Because of that need that you’ve outlined, 

which still exists but which was more intense a few years ago, 

the Wascana Rehab Centre which is being built for the citizens 

of the province, very close to the building where we now debate 

this issue here in Regina, is a response to just that, in terms of 

children’s rehabilitation for all of southern Saskatchewan, and 

compensation and workers’ rehabilitation and from accident 

victims and so on. 

 

So the area that you’ve touched on here and the area which we 

now talk about is extremely important. It’s an area that we have 

been very sensitive to. It’s an area that I, frankly, wish I had 

more money to allocate to. I wish there was more money to 

allocate to this. We will strive to do that on a continuing basis 

in terms of recognizing those needs. 

 

And you know, I’ll give you that commitment, that it’s be an 

ongoing thing, and I’ll continue to do that because I believe in it 

as my predecessor believed in it. I only wish the member from 

Saskatoon South, who was the minister of Health just prior to 

that, believed in it as we do and we would have not had such a 

backlog. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you know, you talk about 

money and the future, and you don’t have the money today. 

And all I can tell you is that yes, it costs money today to 

habilitate children with disabilities, but it is going to cost this 

province a lot more money in the future when the state has to 

look after them, Mr. Minister, when the state has to pay for 

orthopedic surgeries, Mr. Minister, and when the state has to 

pay for all kinds of other operations because they haven’t had 

access to the needed physiotherapy and occupational therapy 

services today, now. 

 

And you talk about money, Mr. Minister. You talk about how 

you don’t have any money. But, Mr. Minister, I think you do. 

You have money for George Hill and his $200,000-a-year 

salary; and you have money for Paul Schoenhals, the defeated 

Conservative candidate and his $100,000-a-year salary, plus 

perks; you have money for Peter Pocklington — 10 million 

bucks for him; you’ve got money for your political appointees 

and your political aids, some $20 million; you’ve got money for 

political advertising; you’ve got money for the kinds of things 

that are the priorities of your government. 

 

And when you decide not to fund physiotherapy and 

occupational therapy services for disabled children in this 

province, you’re making a choice. So don’t tell me, Mr. 

Minister, you don’t have money. 

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3183 

 

Why don’t you put $20 million into physiotherapy, Mr. 

Minister, instead of your political advertisements that do 

nothing else than bolster up your sagging image, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I notice the hon. member . . . some of 

her colleagues respond to that sort of political rhetoric that 

comes. I’m going to resist; you, know I’ve been here for a few 

years now and I, you know, I could, I suppose, determine that 

well, that merits the same kind of response. But I’m going to 

resist opening this book and reading to you all of the member 

from Quill Lakes, all of his relatives that work for the 

government, and all of the stuff that went on, and all of that sort 

of thing, so we can compare patronage notes and all of that kind 

of political stuff that has gone on here so often and will again. 

Not that I say it shouldn’t. I don’t mind that, in fact I very 

much, on some occasions and in some circumstances, I rather 

enjoy that type of debate, and the member will know that. 

 

So I’m going to resist that and put this book down for now and 

ask the member if you will just come back to talking about . . . 

if the member will come back and talk about the . . . because 

it’s a serious subject we’re talking about — physiotherapy, 

occupational therapy, the needs that have been there for a good 

long time and the needs which continue. There’s no question. 

 

Your points about the costs in the future, when this sort of 

preventative medicine is not provided, are valid points. If you 

had just stopped there we could have continued with that sort of 

. . . so I’ll say let’s carry on in that vein because it’s far more 

reasonable for the health of our citizens. So we’ll go on to that, 

but I would just say once again we have Wascana Rehab 

Centre, the community therapy program, implemented by this 

government, not by your troops over there when they were here, 

10 extra spaces at the physiotherapy college implemented by 

this government, not by your troops when you had power. 

 

All of those things are extremely important. Five new positions 

in the Children’s Rehab Centre, even though you will stand here 

and say that there are cut-backs at the Children’s Rehab Centre. 

There are not cut-backs at the rehab centre. Here she says from 

her seat, there are cut-backs. I’ve said there were five positions 

put in last year, and there are not cut-backs at the rehab centre. 

Now you will stand and say, oh yes there are cuts at the rehab 

centre; well I’m telling you that there are not. Even in some 

very difficult times we recognize that this is an area that 

deserves attention. This area has received attention from this 

government, and this area will continue to receive attention 

from our government. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, when parents write you and 

when parents write me and say that their kids used to get two 

visits to the physiotherapist each week, or occupational 

therapist each week, at the Children’s Rehabilitation Centre, 

and they no longer get those visits — they might get the visits 

twice a year, Mr. Minister — and when they say to me in 

letters, Mr. Minister, that the service has been cut back because 

their kids don’t get the  

same kind of service they used to get, Mr. Minister, I don’t care 

how you slice it; you can say there hasn’t been a cut-back, Mr. 

Minister, but these parents’ letters bear out the fact that there 

has, because their kids aren’t getting the same kind of service 

that they used to get, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As I said before, when a family has a 

child in that circumstance, I understand how they can be 

concerned if there’s a change, you know, if there is a change of 

any kind. 

 

What I say to you is that there has not been a reduction in the 

number of people providing that service; in fact there was an 

increase. I know of a couple of cases where people have talked 

to me about this, and I’ll just give you . . . There are some folks 

who once visited the rehab centre and who are now being asked 

to take physiotherapy service from the physiotherapists who are 

available in the community physiotherapy program, who 

believe that that is not as good a service, even though they’re 

just as professional and so on, but it isn’t the Children’s Rehab 

Centre. You will know that. 

 

Well I don’t know if . . . you know, I see the member shaking 

her head. But the fact is that I’ve had a couple, and upon 

investigation this is the kind of thing I found out. I don’t say 

that that’s the case with everyone who has expressed a concern 

either to you or to me, but that is the case in a couple of cases 

that I know of, that I have looked into. 

 

You know, while everyone would like to have, because the 

Children’s Rehab Centre has an excellent reputation — 

everybody knows that — and it’s tied to the University Hospital 

which gives it that aura of perfection, or whatever, that 

surrounds the University Hospital in the minds of many people 

in all of northern Saskatchewan; so some would say, well I 

don’t really want to visit the physiotherapist in North 

Battleford. I’m sorry, but I want to be into Saskatoon at the 

Children’s Rehab Centre. And I’m saying, if the professional 

service is there and I can be told by people who know and who 

I must rely on as professionals that it is an equal service, then I 

have to encourage people to take the service at the location 

closest to them. 

 

Now I don’t want to dwell on that point too long, but there’s no 

question that your work “cut-back” is an inappropriate word 

when you look at the . . . it may be for you because it serves 

your political ends, but it is not an appropriate word when you 

deal with this. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, just a couple of questions in 

regards to the Children’s Rehab Centre. It was some time ago 

that I drew to your attention of a particular family in rural 

Saskatchewan who had been very accustomed to getting 

services at the Children’s Rehab Centre on a very frequent 

basis. When my colleague is talking about . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, I talked to you about that one. It’s from 

Lake Lenore. I think you probably know the family. I don’t 

want this specific family, Mr. Minister. 

 

(1530) 

 

When my colleague says that there has been a cut-back, what 

we’re talking about, Mr. Minister, is somebody has  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3184 

 

been accustomed to seeing a physiotherapist once a month and 

then they find that either through more people needing the 

service of the Children’s Rehab Centre and therefore they can 

no longer get that service once a month and are told that they’re 

getting it once every three months or once every four months, 

that is a cut-back. It’s a cut-back to those people; a service that 

was there before on that frequent basis is no longer there. And 

whether or not you have cut back staff is immaterial. What is 

important, Mr. Minister, is whether or not those people are 

today getting the same kind of service that they were 

accustomed to some short time ago. 

 

Will you admit, at least to that extent, there has been a cut-back 

in the services of those people who require the physiotherapy 

services? Will you at least admit that? I’m not talking about 

staff cut-backs. I’m talking about the cut-backs of services that 

people were used to and can no longer get now. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Oh, I hear then. I recognize the point 

the member makes. I will say this though — and I know the 

member from Saskatoon South knows this well, having 

occupied this chair at one time — there is a matter here of 

assessment, and you will know that, of the assessment done by 

the professional staff. And you will also know that there’s a 

matter of while the professionals may say, Johnny needs to see 

the therapist, you know, actually visit the therapist this often, 

this many times per month or whatever, and while the people in 

the earlier stages of the rehabilitation . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The member from Regina Centre, I welcome 

you back to the . . . 

 

But in any case, to get back to your question, the assessment is 

done and if the assessment professional says that the 

requirement is for less visits, often — and you will know this — 

often the parents will not want to accept that, and they will say, 

you know, I think that Johnny was progressing better when he 

had the 10 visits rather than the five visits, of whatever. 

 

I mean, that is a factor, and I know you’ll be aware of that side 

of the factor. So I don’t say it is in the specific case that you 

outline, and I certainly don’t want this to be interpreted as my 

response t that case that you raised from Lake Lenore. I don’t 

want that to be the case, but I want to make that point because 

it’s important for members of the committee to know that that is 

a significant point in all of this. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I know the point that you are 

trying to make, and it’s unfortunate that in today’s society we 

can’t mention individual’s names, employees of government, 

for fear that they may lose their jobs. And, Mr. Minister . . . 

now don’t shake your head. I phoned people in your 

department, and I will not mention those people because . . . for 

fear that there will be repercussions. And I’ve also phoned 

people in Saskatoon and, Mr. Minister, on this particular case 

alone they told me that the staff simply wasn’t there. The 

required staff wasn’t there to meet the needs of those 

individuals who require that need. 

 

And it was not because of the assessment done on these 

particular individuals that they no longer required it. But  

the yardstick, Mr. Minister, was we don’t have the 

physiotherapists available in order to deal with all the needs that 

come to our attention. I’m not going to mention those names, 

and it’s immaterial to me. I’m not going to put someone’s job in 

jeopardy. And what I’m saying to you is, Mr. Minister, I talked 

to those people individually. They asked me not to give their 

names for fear of repercussions, and I said that I would not, but 

that I would bring it to your attention in estimates, that there is a 

need, an additional need for physiotherapy. And I think my 

colleague makes the point very appropriately when she says that 

you’re going to pay for this; we’re going to pay for this later on 

in life. 

 

I remember, Mr. Minister, and you well remember when you 

were on this side and I was on that side, and I was the minister 

of Health and I talked about preventative services. I want you to 

go back in Hansard and see what the former minister of Health 

said, the member from Wolseley, what he said about 

preventative services at all; criticized me very severely on the 

preventative services, saying that what we need right now is 

people who take care of active health needs. 

 

I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister, every dollar that you put in 

preventative services will pay you manyfold later on in life. It 

may not at the present time, but certainly later on. 

 

Mr. Minister, we can discuss this back and forth, and I think 

I’ve made my point and you can either agree or disagree, I 

really don’t care. That’s your prerogative. 

 

An Hon. Member: — But you care. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — No, that’s your prerogative. And either you’re 

committed or you’re not committed to the idea. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have talked to a number of people about the 

Department of Health. As you know, in Saskatchewan we have 

taken a real pride in the Department of Health. It is, and was, 

one of the shining star departments in this government — I 

mean in this province — for many, many years. It always could 

be counted upon as being one of the best in delivering services 

and meeting the needs, the health needs of the people of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Minister, I find it a little difficult to talk on this topic 

because I know some of the people in your department very 

well. And I want to say to those people, now I want to say to 

those people, this is not a reflection on any individual in the 

department. But, Mr. Minister, one of the problems that you 

have in the Department of Health today, twofold: one, is that 

you got rid of a lot of good, experienced, very capable people. 

They either left on their own volition because they couldn’t 

stomach what was going on, or they were forced out. Now, Mr. 

Minister, these very same people hold high position jobs in 

other governments or in other provinces. They obviously 

weren’t goo enough for this government, but now they have 

high-paying jobs and jobs of high responsibility in other 

governments and in other provinces. 

 

I refer, Mr. Minister, to such people as the former deputy 

minister, Ken Fyke; I refer to people like Dave Kelly; I refer to 

people like Peter Glynn; I refer to people like  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3185 

 

Duane Adams; I refer to people like Rick Roger; I refer to 

people, and I may have the first name wrong, but Don 

Philippon, I think it’s Don. All of these people are gone. I don’t 

know the reason why they are gone, but they were very capable 

people. 

 

And now, Mr. Minister, they are holding, many of these people, 

the vast majority of these people are holding very responsible 

jobs in other provinces . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — Where? In Manitoba? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I don’t think, Mr. Minister . . . not in Manitoba 

as the Minister of the Environment . . . I want to tell you where 

they are now and thank him very much. 

 

Ken Fyke is in Victoria running the hospitals in Victoria, the 

three or four hospitals — a top-notch job, a very capable 

individual. Dave Kelly who’s now working for the Government 

of Alberta — a very capable individual. Peter Glynn, picked up 

by Ottawa — very capable individual. Now I could go on and 

on with these people. Now I don’t know where Rick . . . I think 

Rick Roger also is in B.C. I don’t know where Don Philippon 

is, but the point that I want to make, Mr. Minister, in your blind 

partisan political moves that you made, you got rid of some of 

these people, either made the working conditions so impossible 

that they couldn’t stay — because I can well remember when I 

was minister of Health, there was no indication from any of 

these people that they weren’t satisfied working for the 

Department of Health. 

 

They were very proud about the department. They were very 

proud of the programs that they were delivering and the 

services that they were rendering to the people of this province. 

Why is it that suddenly, in the ’80s when the government 

changed, that these people either were told to leave or found it 

unfit to work for your department? I think that’s one of your 

problems — that’s one of your problems. 

 

And I would like the minister to just comment on why these 

very capable individuals . . . and hopefully, Mr. Minister, as I 

look across, I still see some very capable people there who were 

there before ’82, and that there will be no need for these people 

to look elsewhere, to search for work elsewhere. Because I’ll 

tell you, the people in the Department of Health in the ’60s and 

’70s were recognized as the most capable individuals, 

future-looking individuals, and it’s no wonder that other 

governments, when they found out that they were dissatisfied 

here, picked them up very quickly. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why did they turn on you? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Why did they . . . the member from 

Lloydminster said, why did they turn on me. I’ll tell the 

member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster that they didn’t turn on 

me, because we didn’t politicize the civil service. They did take 

it upon themselves to either vote against us or work against us, 

and I hope they don’t, the same thing that will apply with the 

civil service that you now have. 

 

I say to the minister that one of the problems I think that he has 

today, and when I speak to hospital administrators and I speak 

to people who receive the services of your  

department, they simply say that the quality of service — the 

quality of service — is simply not there. And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s twofold. Not that you don’t have any capable 

people there now, but because you’re understaffed, you’re 

overworking some of your people. They simply can’t do all the 

work you’re asking them to do and which they must do in the 

Department of Health. 

 

And secondly, because of their experience. Some of those 

people are inexperienced that you brought in and it’ll take time. 

It’ll take time before they get to know their job. And I think 

that’s one of the problems that you’ve had. And I wish the 

minister would make a brief comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I will. I promise the member I’ll make a 

brief comment on two or three of your points. I want to go back 

to the initial stages of the former minister’s comments and the 

member for Saskatoon South. He talked about his record as it 

relates to his comments that he had made in this House at some 

past time about his commitment to preventative medicine and 

preventative services and so on, which I would take in the 

context of our discussion earlier. It dealt with physiotherapy 

services, for example. 

 

The member was not in the House a few minutes ago when I 

was discussing with his colleague about some of the services 

which have been added in the physiotherapy and some of the 

initiatives that have been taken in the physiotherapy area since 

this government has come to office, under the able leadership of 

my predecessor, the member from Indian Head-Wolseley, and 

continuing under the Department of Health now. 

 

Let me just go through a couple of those. Community therapy 

program was an extremely significant initiative. I want the 

member to know that. It was extremely significant. And it was 

as a result of listening for a good, long time, all of us on this 

side of the House who were running. And I go back over this, 

back as far as my first time running in 1978, I heard this in the 

most remote parts of my constituency in Meadow Lake, about 

the lack of physiotherapy services. I heard from people who 

said, well I write to, you know, the Minister of Health, which 

I’m sure you’ll hear and obviously I know that you can’t 

respond to every request. 

 

But when an issue was building like that, what was your 

response? It’s find for you to hearken back to Hansard and you 

say, it is shown in Hansard that you said at one point that you 

have a commitment to preventative services, but when you had 

the opportunity to do something for physiotherapy services, 

now you, you who were the Minister of Health, what did you do 

in the area of community physiotherapy? Zero. Nothing. That’s 

what you did, but you talked about it in the House, certainly 

you talked about it here. 

 

(1545) 

 

What did you do in the area of adding extra spaces at the school 

of physiotherapy at the University of Saskatchewan? Nothing. 

Not anything. And that was an issue as far back as 1978, as far 

as back as my memory goes, and probably before that, probably 

before that. But  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3186 

 

certainly during your term of office as Minister of Health, did 

you do anything about adding extra space at the school of 

physiotherapy? No, you did not. You listened to that stuff and 

you came into this House and you said, oh, I’m committed to 

preventative services, and your answer on every occasion was 

no, there will be nothing. That’s what you said. That’s not what 

you said; that’s what you did or did not do. So we have added 

these. 

 

Let’s talk about the Wascana Rehab Centre, for example, a need 

that has been around for a good long time. Wascana Rehab 

Centre, as the former minister of Health will know, is located 

very close to this building, very close over here. And people in 

need of rehabilitative services, either accident victims or injured 

on the job, all of those kinds of things, and young people, 

children, children of families who have had to bring them for a 

good long time into Regina to very bad facilities. I will say to 

you they have not been good facilities for a good number of 

years at the Wascana Rehab Centre over here, not good 

facilities for a good number of years. 

 

You know what I hear when I go to the Wascana Rehab Centre 

now, while there’s construction going on around them and 

obviously we all know what happens when you’re trying to 

conduct the services that are provided with construction going 

on, you know what I’m hearing? You know what I’m hearing 

from those people now? Because what did they see when they 

made those kinds of requests for the kind of facilities, and 

first-class facilities, which are now being built for them? What 

did they hear from that same member who once was the 

minister of Health and who got those requests? He said no, we 

will not build a rehab centre in southern Saskatchewan; we will 

not join with DVA (Department of Veterans’ Affairs); we will 

not join with the veterans to build a facility which will be the 

first-class facility in western Canada — and it will. He didn’t 

build it. No. 

 

What did he build? What did those people see? What did they 

see from the windows of that substandard facility that that 

member left there? What did they see? What construction did 

they see going on then? They build the T.C. Douglas Building, 

that big white monolith of a building which is there for what 

reason? For the greater glory of Tommy Douglas. But did it do 

one thing for one person in need of rehabilitative services? No, 

not one thing for anyone who needed services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — But the people in wheelchairs sat in the 

doorways of that play, and what did they see? What did they 

see? They saw the smiling former minister of Health over there 

saying, no, we will not build these services, but we’ll build a 

big fancy building for Tommy. 

 

Well I’ll tell you, the people in wheelchairs now look and they 

say, we will have the services for ourselves; we will have the 

services for those who follow us and in the need of the kinds of 

services that we’re in the need of. 

 

And I’ll just say to the former minister, don’t stand here and tell 

us about your record as the minister of Health in days when 

potash prices were high, when agricultural prices were high, 

when oil prices were high. You had  

those kinds of opportunities with the Health budget in those 

days, and what did you do with it? You blew it. You blew the 

opportunity, and along with blowing that opportunity you blew 

yourself and your colleagues over to the opposition benches, 

and in your case you weren’t even there — 1982. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Now let’s talk a little bit about the 

former member’s comments as it relates to the Department of 

Health. And he mentions some of the individuals, which I 

would be reluctant to do, but he’s mentioned them. He 

mentioned individuals like the former deputy who is now in 

Victoria, Ken Fyke. You go and ask Ken Fyke if he left this 

province because he was upset with any direction of anything. 

You go and ask him that question. He will tell you that that’s 

not the case. I’m sure you have. 

 

The things that Ken . . . All I’ll say is this, and I could expand 

and I won’t., The things that Ken Fyke has said about the 

relationships that he had as a senior manager in the Government 

of Saskatchewan with that member who once was a minister of 

Health, do not and should not ever be repeated in a public 

forum that we’re in here. 

 

And he mentioned Don Philippon. Don Philippon left here on 

the best of accord. Don Philippon was an excellent public 

servant who will serve his new government well. He went there 

because it’s a career path. 

 

The member may not understand it. His career path is, come to 

the legislature of Saskatchewan, stay here for ever and ever, 

amen, and talk on a daily basis almost of what will my pension 

be. Well the pension is not part of what goes on around here. 

This gentleman that you talked about took a career path 

decision to go to another government so he doesn’t stay 

working for the same place for ever and ever, amen. I commend 

him for that although I wish he hadn’t gone because he was a 

good public servant. 

 

So don’t tell us about that and bring peoples’ names up here and 

say they left because of your innuendo about some kind of 

political interference. It did not exist and it does not exist. 

 

Now let’s talk about what we have in the Department of Health 

for public servants now. We have excellent public servants in 

the Department of Health and we have excellent leadership in 

this Department of Health — excellent leadership in this 

Department of Health. And you can say what you like if you 

want to, but I will tell you that there’s excellent leadership. And 

as time goes on, and as more people come to this government, 

and as people leave this government and change their careers 

and move to other places, which is the way of the world in the 

late 1980s I should remind the member, the way of the world, 

people do change positions and locations, and so on, and they 

follow a career path, and I commend people who will do that. 

 

But don’t stand in this House and tell me that the Department of 

Health is in disarray because of some political interference, 

because it is not the case. And I  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3187 

 

certainly, certainly will not nor should I ever be expected to 

take that from that member who was the minister of Health in 

some good times, and provided what for leadership? Zero. 

That’s what he provided. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, somebody once said the member 

does protest too much, and when you have a weak case you 

shout and foam at the mouth and make irrational statements. 

 

I challenge the . . . and in fact I give the minister permission 

here and outside the House, without any repercussions from me, 

to repeat any accusations made by the former deputy minister of 

Health of the poor relationship that he had with me. I give you 

permission outright, now, Mr. Minister, to say to the people of 

Saskatchewan that the former deputy minister of Health made 

those derogatory statements about me and the relationship that I 

had with him. I give you that permission right now and I’ll give 

you an opportunity to comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — the only reason that I would not take the 

temptation to do that is for this reason, Mr. Chairman, and I 

want to be very clear. It’s because of my respect for the former 

deputy minister of Health, not because of my respect for the 

former minister of Health. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I called his bluff, and we 

know exactly what the minister is spouting about because there 

are no such derogatory remarks made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Well, when it comes to facts, Mr. Minister, I 

think, yes, you take your leadership role from the Premier 

where facts mean very little but rhetoric and emotions means 

everything. I want to say to the Minister of Health that if he told 

the people correctly, the Wascana institute or the Wascana 

hospital was included in the 1982 budget that was brought 

down by the NDP government when we were defeated. That 

was in the budget, and if you’re honest with the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . and ask the people, ask the people of the 

Department of Health. They will tell you that sums of money 

were made available to the Government of Saskatchewan. I see 

the member from Wascana wants to jabber again from his seat. 

If he wishes to get into the debate, then stand up and say so . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, he’s doing an excellent job of 

being irrational and emotional, and not addressing the 

problems. 

 

Mr. Minister, I didn’t say, I didn’t say that the Department of 

Health was in shambles from my own experience. I am telling 

you what people out there who are receiving services, or are not 

receiving the services, are telling me. And I’m talking about 

physicians who have worked in this province for some time. 

I’m talking about hospital administrators. I’m talking about 

people who are in charge of physiotherapy and occupational 

therapy services in this province, and what they tell me about 

the Department of Health. 

 

And I indicated to you that maybe you were overworking  

the people in the Department of Health and you don’t have the 

manpower or the womanpower to do the kind of job that should 

be done. Mr. Minister, can you tell me now, how many vacant 

positions are there in the top echelons of the Department of 

Health? Let’s say director and above. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — If I understood your question, you said, 

director and above, just so I know where the cut-off line is? 

Okay, director and above. We have two executive director 

positions which are filled now at the present time in an acting 

capacity, one at the SHSP (Saskatchewan hospital services 

plan), and strategic planning branch has an acting executive 

director. But all positions are filled and we have two people 

who are in the acting capacity. Otherwise, all of the positions 

are filled. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, the last question. I just want to 

ask, are you contemplating doing any major shuffling or 

reworking of the people in your department in the next little 

while? And I’m thinking about the director levels, up. Rumours 

have it that there are going to be some major shuffling in the 

Department of Health. Are those rumours correct, or are they 

simply unfounded? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, we have . . . just as you . . . the 

two positions which I say are now filled in an acting capacity 

will be filled soon, you know, on a permanent basis, and just 

two days ago, so this may make the currency of this sort of 

rumour that you may have heard. 

 

John Heath, who is now the director of MCIC, has been 

appointed associate deputy minister of acute and long-term 

care. That’s to take effect on November 1, but he’s an 

employee, obviously, and here today as the head of MCIC, but 

he has been appointed and it takes effect on November 1. So in 

terms of . . . I’m not sure what else you might like. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — In other words you’re not contemplating any 

other changes in the immediate future of your upper staff. 

Thank you, Mr. Minister, that’s all that I have. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

would like us to move into another area of your concern — the 

important area of home care in this province. Mr. Minister, 

you’ve just said that I tend to be a reasonable member, and I 

hope that you will act as a reasonable minister over the course 

of the next hour. And please spare us, please spare us any more 

of those rhetorical flights that we witnessed a few moments ago. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have the annual report of the continuing care 

branch, and I’d like to just bring this discussion into focus on 

home care. I’d like to read from that report, describing the 

purpose and the objective of home care in Saskatchewan. The 

purpose and objective of the home care program: 

 

To preserve and maximize an individual’s ability to 

remain independent at home by offering services that 

provide needed care and support, and by fostering the 

widest possible use of available individual, family and 

community  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3188 

 

resources. 

 

The program is founded on the beliefs that: 

 

— individual can usually retain greater independence and 

have more control over their lives in their own homes 

rather than in an institution, and that 

 

— most individuals prefer to remain at home and to 

receive any required services at home. 

 

Mr. Minister, just as we start this, may I ask three simple 

questions. Do you, as minister, fundamentally support the 

philosophy, the purposes, and the objectives behind home care 

as they’re outlined here? Secondly, when did the home care 

program begin in this province? And thirdly, who was minister 

of Health at that time? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The answer very simply is . . . and you 

can rest assured despite . . . Before I get into this, you can rest 

assured, as I think you’ve called them rhetorical flights or 

whatever, you can rest assured that you will be saved that if, 

you know, if you continue to conduct yourself as you have 

since you’ve come to the House. It’s the member from 

Saskatoon South that brings that out in me. I’m sorry. I 

apologize to you. 

 

The answer is yes, I support the philosophy behind home care. 

And you said, when did it start in the province, and I know that 

you know the answer. But sure, that’s fine. It started in 1981 

under the former government and it’s been continued under 

ours. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It wasn’t ’81. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — ’81, was it not? 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, it wasn’t. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, 1979, I 

erred. It was 1979, not 1981. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who was the minister of Health? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m not sure who the minister of Health 

was, but it may have been the member from Saskatoon South. 

The department that he spoke so highly of must have got 

something by him if they put something good in. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, in the constituency that I 

represent, and in constituencies across the province, home care 

is a very significant program of your department. As you well 

know, home care provides nursing, nursing care, home-making 

care, meals, minor home maintenance. It allows seniors and the 

disabled to remain in their own homes. 

 

It was at the outset, and remains to be, an innovative program. 

It’s a very cost-effective program, as you well know. But it also 

provides something that I believe no prescription drug can 

provide; it provides something that no medical treatments can 

provide, and that’s human companionship. And a key part of 

home care and a key part of the success of home care, it seems 

to me, is in the  

friendly visit and the human companionship that it provides. 

 

It is filling, in our province, an extremely valuable need. Mr. 

Minister, I submit that home care clients, home care boards, 

home care workers are being given a bad shake by your 

government, and particularly by the budget that we are dealing 

with now. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to go to these Estimates — because that’s 

what we’re here to do — I want to go to these Estimates, and I 

read that in 1986-87, you budgeted $22.9 some million for 

home care. Will you tell the House today how much was 

actually spent in 1986-87 on home care? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — If you’re . . . On page 49, if I just go 

with the member, and we’ll just kind of walk through this now 

in terms of these numbers. The estimated 1986-87 was 

22,928,400, as you will see in there. We did in fact spend 23.5 

million. We spent very close to $700,000 more than that 

because of the pressures on the system that you’ve outlined and 

so on. And so we spent more than that last year. 

 

And just to give you a little bit of a perspective of where this 

has gone and how the . . . well certainly the need and the 

acceptance of home care and all of the factors that’s come into 

this across the province. In the last two years we’ve increased 

home care funding by 4.1 million or 20.7 per cent in a two-year 

period — 20.7 per cent increase over what was there, so 

certainly significant increases. 

 

And I will say, just as a general comment, there’s no question 

that that pressure continues. There’s no question that there is a 

need for home care services, those kinds of services. Because 

there is no question, as well, they take pressure from the 

institutions and the speed with which people will need to go 

into institutions if we can conduct this preventative type of care. 

So I recognize that, and we’re making every attempt we can, as 

these numbers will show. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, you indicate to me now that last 

year, in fact above and beyond the $22,928,400 estimated, you 

spent an extra $700,000, bringing the total to 23.5. 

 

Mr. Minister, then may I ask, why is there not some accounting 

of that in the supplementary estimates? Why does that extra 

$700,000, which you say that you spent last year, why does it 

not appear in the supplementary estimates? And it does not. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It’s because the moneys often comes 

from one subvote to another through a process called a 

virement, and it comes from the special care homes budget to 

home care where the increased pressure was. We were trying to 

emphasize the home care side in that year. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’m new at this. You’re telling 

me now that what you did was to short-change special care 

homes by $700,000, taking money from their budget, to add 

money to the home care budget; that it wasn’t new money; it 

was just money from special care  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3189 

 

homes transferred over to home care. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — That’s a normal practice, a normal 

management practice, to see where the priorities are as the year 

goes on and where the pressures are. Because I want to remind 

the hon. member that one of the major arguments that is made 

by home care people, and legitimate arguments, and I’ve told 

them had a legitimate — one of the major arguments that they 

will make is that with an increase at any time in home care 

funding you should be able to, you know, to decrease the need 

for institutional care. 

 

Now that’s obviously a very general sort of statement, but that’s 

always the argument that’s advanced, and I’m sure one that’s 

advanced by yourself and by me. If we were starting from a 

perfect world and building, we would certainly build in a major 

way on the home care side and try to diminish the need for 

institutionalization. That’s where we would start if we were 

starting from scratch, which we never have the luxury to do. 

And I know you agree with me. 

 

But the money that’s there, various projects within, you know, 

which are under way in special care or whatever, depending on 

when they come on stream or how the cash flow will work, 

there will be a few dollars here and there that can be pulled 

from that area. And they are pulled that way, and that’s what we 

did, and we found enough to be able to deal with the significant 

pressure in the home care area, which is . . . it’s not 

insignificant amount when it turns out to be very near $700,000 

which was added to the home care funding last year. 

 

And I might add, in this year’s budget, that that $700,000 is 

recognized and that kind of amount or that magnitude of 

amount remains in the system. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I want to spend a little time on this, Mr. 

Minister. First of all, you’ve taken the $700,000 from special 

care home funding. You seem to think that that was okay. I 

suggest if you want to do something like that again this year, if 

you want to transfer some money into home care from 

somewhere else, a more appropriate place you might go to look 

for it would be in the cabinet ministers' travel allowances and 

air flights part of your budget, somewhere like that. Special care 

homes need all the money that’s budgeted for them. I don’t 

think they would suggest they need less than what is budgeted; 

in fact, I hear they need more. So this taking from . . . robbing 

from peter to pay Paul is inappropriate, to say the least, in my 

opinion. 

 

Mr. Minister, you did then in fact — and I take your word for it 

— that you did in fact increase the funding to home care by 

$700,000. But that’s about $2 million less than commitments 

that were made by the former minister throughout the course of 

last year. I have in my hand a news release dated July 23, 1986, 

and if I may read from the release, directly from the news 

release, the headline is: “Two million funding to boost home 

care districts.” 

 

Health Minister Graham Taylor today announced that 

more than $2 million is being provided to 32 home care 

districts where there is a great demand for high need 

services. 

Note these next words, Mr. Minister: 

 

The additional funding is targeted at districts that are 

facing unique service needs. 

 

The additional funding. So I take that to mean that’s additional 

to what was originally estimated in the 1986-87 budget. An 

additional $2 million. And then we come to the month of 

September, September 15, 1986, which if my recollection 

serves me right, that’s about four days before the election call, 

we get yet another news release from the former minister. 

Headline: $700,000 additional funding to the home care 

districts.” 

 

Health Minister Graham Taylor today announced that 

$700,000 additional funding will be provided to home care 

districts to help meet the increasing client demands for 

high need services. 

 

So we had two commitments, two commitments of additional 

funding beyond that in the budget. First of all a July 

commitment of $2 million, and then a September, four days 

before the election, commitment of another 700,000. So that’s a 

total commitment of $2.7 million. Will you explain to me, Mr. 

Minister, what happened to the other $2 million? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like the member from Moose Jaw South 

not to use members names. The Speaker has ruled on that in the 

last few days, so I’d ask him to refrain from that. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of points. I want the member 

to understand it clearly, and it’s important that we both do. 

 

First of all, the money that I talked about, when I say it came 

from the special care home side, it did not come from the 

operational, you know, in terms of cutting back in any way on 

the operational. 

 

Let’s give you an example. If a home was scheduled and in the 

budget to come on stream, let’s say, on the first of a given 

month, the 1st of July, and so the money would be in the budget 

for the operations of that home with this many beds for the 

month of July. But if in fact the home did not open until the 1st 

of August, there’s one month of operational money which is not 

required by that home that had a budget. That’s the kind of 

money that we’re talking about in terms of these virements. 

 

That’s a very normal practice, and that’s gone on for ever. And 

I’m sure it needs to, because in dealing with the very large 

numbers that you do, obviously you will know this book is 

called an Estimates book for a very good reason. It’s a very 

educated guess, certainly, but . . . you know, not just a guess, 

but it’s a very educated sort of estimate of what will be the 

expenditures in the various branches of government. 

 

And just so I put it into perspective here, last year in the special 

care home area there was $174 million. This year it’s 190 

million. I mean, it’s not as though the special care  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3190 

 

home area is suffering as a result of this other initiative in the 

home care area, because it is not. Okay? 

 

Now I just want to . . . you mention in the release that I believe 

you were quoting from about an amount 2 million or 2.1 

million, or whatever. Now in the budget for home care, 

whatever amount is there, this year'’ amount — 23,628,400 . . . 

Okay, we’ll use this year’s number for these estimates which 

we are now dealing. 

 

There is a certain amount of that which is known, and all of the 

home care boards will know this, which are called targeted 

funds. How much would that be? At about the $2 million range 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . In this year’s . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . .Okay, 2.1 million in this year’s, out of that 23.6 

million that we’re talking about here, 2.1 million of that is 

called the targeted fund. 

 

And that will be based on areas that will experience some shift 

in their need, according to various factors — maybe some 

nursing home beds open in that area or whatever; changing in 

the census of their elderly people, proportion of elderly people 

in the home care district; the experience of the district in 

serving clients at immediate risk of requiring a hospital or 

special care home admission; the availability of hospital and 

special care home resources in the area; the financial resources 

available to the district through formula grant funding; and the 

overall provincial needs, which will be where they are in 

relationship to other home care districts who may not have the 

same kind of need. 

 

So there is some targeted funding, and 2.1 million of that 23 

million is that. And that targeted was also in the case last year. 

Okay? So as long as you understand it, I think we’re off to the 

races. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, we’re off to the races all right. 

 

Mr. Minister, last year in your estimates you estimated $22,928 

million for home care. You, through a virement, added — 

taking money from special care — you added $700,000. So 

totally last year you spent $23.5 million. 

 

We had a minister of Health going around the province saying, 

but we need more money for that. We see the need so we’re 

going to add that money. We’re going to add, he said in July, 

we’re going to add to that money. We’re going to add, he said 

in July, we’re going to add $2 million. Reasonable people, in 

hearing that, would assume the money is coming right now. In 

September, four days before an election call, he says, well we 

see the need; we’re going to add another $700,000. 

 

From your answer I’m still not sure where that money went. If 

what you’re saying now is that somehow it’s included through 

targeted funds in this year’s budget, if when the minister in July 

last year and September was talking about the budget for this 

year, well, Mr. Minister, then in fact they shouldn’t be called 

additional funds. And if the budget for this year as it’s indicated 

in the estimates is $23.6 million, and last year you actually 

spent $23.5 million, then we’ve seen an increase of $100,000. 

Now that’s nowhere near 2.7 million additional funds. 

 

And so, Mr. Minister, please explain this to members  

present; explain it to the clients of home care across this 

province; explain it to the home care boards. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll just go through this and I’ll give you 

the numbers and if you write them down because they’re going 

to need some . . . as I have needed to write them here. 

 

In 1986-87 what I have said is that of the amount spent, which I 

said was 23.5, right, 20.8 was the regular base, 20.8; 2.1 was 

targeted and that’s just in the normal process, 2.1 is targeted; 

and the 0.7 or 700,000 was added to the targeted funds. Okay? 

And it was, in fact, targeted last year. 

 

Now we come to this year, and in the development of this 

year’s budget, and in consultation with the people out there in 

the home care districts and so on who feel the same pressures 

that you and I know exist out there, they said the best way to 

deal with the 700,000 which we put in last year and which we 

said would remain this year — because you will remember we 

said, you will maintain the same money this year as you did last 

year, okay? — they said the best way to deal with the 700,000 

is not to add it to the 1.2 and make it, let’s say, 2.8. They said 

add it to the base, but add it to the base in those districts who 

have the very oldest population — in other words, the highest 

percentage of people over 75. And that is what was done. Now 

that was done in consultation with the home care association 

and the districts out there, okay? 

 

So this year . . . I’ll just go through it again. Last year, 20.8 

regular, 2.1 targeted, and 0.7 or 700,000 which was added as a 

result of significant pressures in some areas, certainly in some 

areas. Well we won’t get into the specifics of where they were. 

We may, but not just now. And that was a total of 23.5. 

 

And this year, 1987-88, in these estimates we’re dealing with 

regular of 21.5, which goes up, and the reason that goes up is 

because of the money I just mentioned. And the targeted 

remains for budgetary purposes at 2.1 million. Well it just 

remains at 2.1 million and it is targeted, and for a total of 23.6 

that you see in your Estimates book. Okay? 

 

Mr. Calvert: — No, Mr. Minister, it’s not okay, because I have 

in my hand a news release under the name of the former 

minister of Health, dated July 23, 1986, in which he promised 

the people of Saskatchewan an additional $2 million — an 

additional $2 million for home care funding — additional 

funding. Mr. Minister, I’ve asked it three or four times; where’s 

that $2 million? Where is that $2 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well what the former minister did in 

July was announced the distribution of the $2.1 million which 

was in the budget and which was distributed. Okay . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Now listen, because I want to make 

it clear, I want to make it very clear. The regular — what I’ve 

referred to for these purposes as the regular fund — and in the 

case of 1986-87, 20.8 million, that was the regular which was 

dealt with in each of the home care districts. This was the 

money that was distributed to them according to the base that’s 

been established in each of their cases. Okay? 20.8. The  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3191 

 

targeted 2.1 was for the certain areas that had the various needs 

according to the criteria that I’ve outline a few moments ago. 

Okay? 

 

The minister, for reasons that fail me just now, but has a news 

conference, or probably issued a release, I don’t know that he 

had a news conference; he probably didn’t, but he issued a 

release to say, now the 2.1 — which all the home care district 

knew were in the budget — he said here’s the 2.1 and it will not 

be distributed. That’s the fact. It’s not a bad idea. I may do that 

this year, I’m not sure. But in any case, that’s the case — 2.1 

million was there and that was what the announcement was, but 

it’s additional in the sense that it’s over and above the regular 

base line budgets which they had. But that’s the . . . well the 

member will know what I’m speaking of now, I’m sure. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I can see we’re not going to 

agree on this. Mr. Minister, you publish estimate figures for the 

spending of your department in given area. In 1986-87 you’ve 

published the figure saying that you were going to spend $22.9 

million. That’s the figure you published . . . not you, the former 

minister. So after this is all published and public, and everyone 

is aware of that figure, along comes the Minister of Health and 

has a new release and a news conference, likely, that says I’m 

adding an additional, an additional $2 million. He didn’t say 

2.1, he said an additional $2 million. 

 

You suggested a moment ago that the reason that he might do 

that escapes you. The reason that he might do that does not 

escape me. We know that we were all waiting for an election, 

and so what we’re having here is press release politics, press 

release politics. We get announcements of $2 million, and the 

$2 million never appears — $2 million additional dollars. 

 

Any reasonable person listening to the former minister make 

that announcement would assume, if they could trust their 

government, that this money is new money, in addition to the 

published figure. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I do not suggest that’s a good idea for you to 

follow, and I certainly hope we’re not going to hear 

announcements to the middle of this year where you lift figures 

out of here and announce it as new money. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll take your suggestion. I won’t do that 

this year. And the reason I won’t is because I’m informed the 

allocation of those funds was done at the end of June, and it 

would be just a little late, and it just goes to show the reason 

that . . . that reason escaped me, I’m just not as political. I just 

wouldn’t have noticed that that would be a political thing to do, 

and it went by me. You were political enough to pick it up, and 

I guess that’s the difference between us. 

 

But in any case, I think the explanation of the money is there, 

and you’ll see where it is. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, if I’ve learned anything about 

politics, I’ve learned the worse about politics by watching your 

government. 

 

Mr. Minister, we’ll leave that and we’ll go on to your fee  

increases this year, fee increases for the clients of home care 

services in Saskatchewan. It’s my understanding, Mr. Minister, 

that prior to your April announcement of the fee increase, that 

the poorest of the poor in our province receiving home care 

services — and by that, those who are fully subsidized under 

the system — their maximum fee for home care services was 

$30. You changed that, Mr. Minister, so that the poorest of the 

poor in our province now who receive home care services are 

obliged to pay up to a maximum of $50. That is, in one jump, a 

66 per cent increase — a 66 per cent increase. And, Mr. 

Minister, I ask you why you made that decision and how do you 

justify it? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, just an explanation. At the time 

that the $30 per month maximum fee for fully subsidized clients 

was established, which was — I’m sure it was at the inception 

of home care in ’79. That fee, that $30, represented 8 per cent of 

maximum of OAS-GIS (old age security and guaranteed 

income supplement) and the SIP (Saskatchewan income plan) 

benefits for a single person. Okay? Just 8 per cent — it 

represented 8 per cent of those benefits. The revised charge of 

$50 which is now in effect, represents 7 per cent of the 

maximum of those three benefits that I mentioned before. 

 

In terms of having some type of bench-mark, some type of 

comparative figure, it makes sense, and in fact it’s less than 

what it was when this thing started in 1979, charged 8 per cent 

of the maximum OAS-GIS and SIP, and now we charge 7 per 

cent of the maximum of those. We think it’s not onerous, in 

fact, we don’t believe at all that it’s onerous and the home care 

people don’t believe that it is either. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’m going to ask you, because I 

didn’t quite catch your last statement: did you say, in this 

House, that the home care people are not opposed — that the 

home care people are not opposed to this 66 per cent increase? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I’m sure that you will find home 

care people who are opposed. But as a general sense, there are 

many people in the home care system who are not opposed to 

an increase in these fees. Remember that fees for nursing and 

some of those services are not charged for and they believe that 

this is a reasonable thing, given the economic circumstances 

this province is in. 

 

Many of the thinking people within the home care districts and 

on the home care boards in this province, and there are many of 

them, believe that this is a reasonable rate, given the sort of 

bench-mark that I’ve laid out to you. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I have a copy here of a letter that 

went out to all the home care clients in Saskatoon. And I want 

to quote a sentence from that letter. I will quote two sentences. 

This went to the clients of home care: 

 

Please note that this direction (regarding the fee increases) 

comes from continuing care (comes  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3192 

 

from your government, Department of Health) and there is 

nothing we can do about it. 

 

We would, however, like you to know that this board and 

the province home care association (the provincial home 

care association) are opposed to the 66 per cent increase. 

 

So how can you stand in this House and say that the home care 

people are not opposed? The provincial association is opposed. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I will say to you that, yes, that’s 

true, there was a news release went out in — I believe you said 

Saskatoon. And I said to you that I know there will be . . . It 

wouldn’t matter what any of us did there will be some people 

who will oppose what’s being done. I mean, that’s to be 

recognized. 

 

But I’ll say to you, as well, the home care convention in 

November of 1986, at their convention, passed a resolution that 

asked the government to look very carefully at increasing client 

fees. They thought client fees should go up, and that was a 

resolution passed at their convention in November of ’86. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, who was it that suggest to you 

that the increase should be 66 per cent? Who was it that 

suggested that figure? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I mean, you will always . . . And I know 

why you or those opposed would say it’s a 66 per cent increase. 

I mean, we’re talking here about an increase from an amount 

that was set in 1979, okay? In 1979, as I’ve said, it was at that 

time $30, which was the fee from 1979 all the way through until 

this year. And at the time that it was set in 1979 that represented 

8 per cent of the maximum OAS-GIS and SIP. 

 

And what we said is . . . I guess the question is, how did you 

decide upon the level of increase? And that’s a legitimate 

question. And the answer to that question is, we looked at it 

very carefully and said, we should use this as a bench-mark 

because it seems a reasonable thing to do, because that’s a 

standard number that comes out and the people that are eligible 

for those benefits will receive them and they’re indexed and 

they go on. 

 

And so this says 8 per cent. It was 8 per cent in 1979. In 1987 

these fees, even though they’ve increased, are only 7 per cent of 

the maximum available under those other three benefits. That’s 

the bench-mark we use. We believe it’s a reasonable 

bench-mark to use and that’s how we came to the decision. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I want to read to you from the 

press release that was released by the Saskatchewan Home Care 

Association. This is not by some small group of individuals of 

one community, this is the Saskatchewan Home Care 

Association. As part of the government-s economic program — 

and that’s what this is a part of, part of your economic program 

in response to the deficit that you created — the increase in 

client fees is viewed by Saskatchewan Home Care Association 

president, Shirley Williams, as: 

Well beyond anything envisioned in discussions of 

possible fee increases. 

 

Well beyond anything ever envisioned in discussions. Mrs. 

Williams further stated: 

 

The effect of such an increase will not be to raise revenues 

appreciably since more people will be forced to apply for 

the subsidy. The Saskatchewan Home Care Association 

finds it difficult to support measures which disregard the 

frail, elderly, ill and disabled of this province, who since 

the introduction of home care have been afforded the 

support that is essential to enable them to live with dignity 

and security in their own homes (se concluded). 

 

Mr. Minister . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The date. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — The date? Sometime prior May 1, ’87. Sorry, 

this document’s not dated . . . before the announcement. 

 

Mr. Minister, no one could have envisaged a 66 per cent 

increase, and you may think this is small potatoes, but I’ll tell 

you it’s not small potatoes to a fair number of people that live in 

my constituency, and I’m sure of people who live in your 

constituency, and people that live across the province — this is 

not small potatoes. 

 

The result is the service they are being able to support 

themselves are either declining or, as the home care association 

points out, this simply forces more people to receive the 

subsidy. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I question the wisdom. First of all I question 

the wisdom of this increase. How much money do you expect it 

to generate in increased revenues? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — You know, the member raises a point 

that I somehow believe that this is just a small amount and it 

isn’t a problem for some people. I didn’t say that. I just say that 

when you’re given and trusted with the responsibility of trying 

to deal in the best way possible with all of the myriad of issues 

that are in a major department like this, you look at them all. 

And we looked at this one and we believe that this is a 

reasonable decision. Just so it’s all in perspective for those who 

are not as aware as you and I are of what we’re talking about 

here, and we talked about units of service and the maximum per 

month and so on. 

 

What we’re talking about here is that the maximum the service 

to home care clients was . . . there was a maximum of $30 that 

they would have to pay. And it is now a maximum of $50 that 

they would pay. And so no one, regardless of the level of 

service, would have to pay more than $50, just so anyone who 

isn’t sure in the committee would know that. 

 

And also the level of payment for a single unit of service, one 

visit or whatever, was $3 before and it is now $5 for one single 

unit of service. An hour of work or whatever around the place, 

whatever, is now $5 from 3. 

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3193 

 

That’s the context within which this discussion is carried on. 

The question, the specific question the member asked is about 

how much revenue will this generate. The increase generates 

$1.1 million, all of which — and this is the most important 

point of all of this — all of which remains with the home care 

boards for them to put back into the services that they provide 

at the local level. All of that 1.1 remains with the boards. 

 

So we did not cut out funding to home care. We don’t have less 

funding going to home care than we had last year. We have, in 

essence, the same amount, and they have access to this 1.1 

million which they will get through client fees, and I think it’s 

an eminently reasonable decision that was made, and it’s going 

over rather well. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, what you are doing, what you 

are doing is shifting the responsibility — responsibilities of 

your department, budgetary moneys that you should be 

providing. You’re shifting it then onto others, and in this case, 

onto the seniors and the disabled who receive home care. You 

just said you’re going to take from those another $1.1 million. 

 

Mr. Minister, in another day and at another time this might not 

be such an unreasonable increase. But I ask you to remember 

that the seniors who receive home care in this province, and the 

disabled, also have to bear the sales tax increase that your 

government has put on them. Because many of them are living 

in their own homes, they’re seeing their property taxes go up 

because of cut-backs from your government to municipal 

governments. They’ve seen their utility bills rise — power and 

telephone. And they asked me, just by the way, Mr. Minister, 

where’s the free phones they were promised some years ago. If 

they happen to drive a car, they now pay up front the gas tax, 

and come the first of the year they’re going to be paying 10 to 

15 per cent more for their insurance. These folks are now 

paying a deductible for their drugs, and they’re paying 20 per 

cent of the cost of their drugs, all of these increases put on them 

by your government. In addition to that, a 66 per cent increase 

in their home care. 

 

So I ask you, Mr. Minister, how you believe that that’s fair. 

How is that fair? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member can, 

you know, will, and did, in fact, in his outline talk about some 

of the difficulties and so on. And I would just say to the 

member, as I said in an earlier statement this afternoon, there 

was a time not long ago in the province when commodities, you 

know, which this society and this jurisdiction and the 

commodities whose prices will make the wheels turn in our 

province, had significantly higher prices. And in those days of 

those higher prices, you folks did not deliver — you did not 

deliver. 

 

So you can say that, and you can say, why are you so 

irresponsible to raise this fee from $3 for an hour of service to 

$5; why are you so irresponsible to say that they will have to 

pay up to $50 for a month’s service. I don’t say that I, you 

know . . . and I don’t, I don’t like to see that have to happen. I 

don’t like that. But these things have to happen. They have to 

happen; they really do. 

In the broadest sense, you must, in developing a 

provincial-wide budget, a budget of $3 billion, you must look at 

every aspect of every department, and we did that. 

 

And even in that kind of context, in the kind of context that I 

talk about in decreasing revenues and so on, in that kind of 

context we took this department which is the heart and soul, 

frankly — and it’s one-third of the budget, one-third — one 

dollar in every three that is spent by the Government of 

Saskatchewan is spent by this department, this Department of 

Health. And I know you know that, but I just want . . . you 

would look into that kind of context if you’re going to talk 

about gas tax and a lot of other things. And it’s very important 

that we look at it in that way. 

 

So we took this decision, we looked at it very, very carefully, 

the bench-mark that I just told you before, the maximum of 

those other benefits which will come to a single person we 

thought was a reasonable thing, I still believe was a reasonable 

thing, because you must have a starting point. I mean, on what 

basis . . . where did $30 come from in 1979? Would be a 

legitimate question. Why in 1979 was it set at $30 maximum 

and $3 for a unit of service? That’s a legitimate question. Do 

you know the answer to that? No, it was just pulled out of the 

air. I will say that to you, it was pulled out of the air. Or was it 

done on the basis of 8 per cent of OAS (old age security), GIS 

(guaranteed income supplement), and SIP (Saskatchewan 

income plan)? Now maybe it was. Let’s say it was set at 8 per 

cent. Well what I’m saying is we set outs at 7 per cent. 

 

(1645) 

 

So we can talk about this all day. But I’m telling you, I believe 

it was a fair decision. It was not an easy decision as many 

decisions in this position of responsibility are. They are not 

easy, but they must be made. And those that will take on the 

responsibility of leadership must provide that leadership, and 

we’re willing to do that. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, you talked about several things 

there. I want to refer to something you said early and something 

that you said late. You talked about things that are different 

today than they were in 1981, the early ’80s. Well I’ll tell you 

what’s different in this province. In 1982 the total public debt, I 

think, was in the neighbourhood of $43 million. The total public 

debt today is $3.2 billion. And that means in this budget 

estimate, we are this year spending $294 million — $294 

million — or better than a quarter of the budget that you 

administer to make the interest payments on the public debt on 

a deficit that your government created. Now that’s something 

that’s different. And if we weren’t paying that money to the 

bankers and the bond dealers and so on, if we’d have had a 

government that in tough times could have provided some 

sound management, we wouldn’t have that interest payment in 

this book. 

 

For that money, for that money, for that money, Mr. Minister, 

we could have 10 times the home care program — 10 times, 10 

times, Mr. Minister. So I submit to you that in fact what you are 

doing as a government is in fact trying to fight this deficit, 

trying to deal with this deficit, by attacking those who are most 

vulnerable in our society,  

  



 

October 7, 1987 

3194 

 

and among those are the seniors and the disabled who are now 

receiving home care services. And that’s what I think this is all 

about. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you advise me whether or 

not the Saskatoon district home care board received a $74,000 

decrease in their 1987-88 budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just to give you the numbers on the 

Saskatoon home care funding if you could take your pen out. 

And I’m sure you were listening when I was, with your 

colleague, going through the . . . what we call formula funds, 

and the targeted funds. Formula funds, 1986-87, $2.171,080. 

Okay? Formula funds: that was last year; ’87-88, formula fund, 

3,315,537. 

 

Okay, now targeted funds which are based on those criteria 

which I outlined earlier and which I will just lay out here. You 

know all the criteria? Okay. Based on age and so on, the 

opening of new nursing home beds and so on in Saskatoon, 

which there have been substantial: 1986-87, 960,000; ’86-87, 

960,000; 1987-88, 650,000. Okay? Thank you. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 

 


