













































August 21, 1987  Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 August 21, 1987 

 

 

1971 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I have the pleasure to make an 

introduction to the legislature this morning. Members will notice 

that seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, indeed just above me 

here, is a member of the Legislative Guide Service, indeed, the 

supervisor of the guide service, Lorraine deMontigny, and seated 

with her is her mother Mrs. Alma L'Heureux from Gravelbourg, 

Saskatchewan, and joining them is a visitor from England, Mrs. 

Dorothy Finch. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's noteworthy that Mrs. L'Heureux and Mrs. 

Finch have been pen-pals together, across the Atlantic Ocean, for 

46 years, and they met personally for the first time last evening 

when Mrs. Finch arrived from England for a visit here in 

Saskatchewan, and she will be spending the next three and a half 

weeks on a holiday in our province. 

 

And I would invite all hon. members to join me in welcoming 

both Mrs. L'Heureux from Gravelbourg and Mrs. Finch from 

England to the Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Grain Deficiency Payments 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 

Acting Minister of Agriculture, or in the alternative, the Deputy 

Premier, and it deals specifically with the grain deficiency 

payments which the Mulroney government has promised for this 

current crop year, 1987-88. Yesterday the Premier's office issued a 

statement indicating that the Premier proposed to go to the 

premiers' conference and lobby for a deficiency payment — which 

I had understood the Prime Minister had already promised — 

which indicated a relatively safe position by the Premier. What I 

want to ask, Mr. Minister, is this: can the minister indicate the 

position of the government with respect to whether a specific level 

of deficiency payments has been asked for? Have you asked for a 

figure or a range? Has the federal government offered a figure or a 

range for the deficiency payment promised by the Prime Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative to the issue of a deficiency 

payment, Mr. Speaker, my understanding is, in terms of the 

chronology of a deficiency payment, is that when the Premier 

attended the ministers of Agriculture meeting there was 

unanimous support for a deficiency payment, and I'm sure the 

Prime Minister is aware of that. I suspect our Premier will be 

making that point again at the meeting of premiers from all across 

Canada. 

 

In so far as the size of a deficiency payment, specifically, I can't 

say if there's a particular number. But I can say this, and I think 

this probably includes the view of all western premiers, that 

numbers that have been suggested in so far as what might make 

sense is a payment somewhere between 1.6 billion, I believe it is, 

and $3 billion. The lower number represents and reflects the 20 

per cent drop in initial prices this year and hence 20 per cent 

higher than last year, which was $1 billion, would make sense in 

that standpoint if one uses that rationale. 

 

On the other hand, if one uses the rationale that this deficiency 

payment should offset the effects of the subsidy wars and the 

marketing assistance programs that the U.S. has in place, and the 

deficiency programs that they have in place there to offset what 

that does to the world market, then the number becomes $3 billion. 

So that is the range and the rationale that I'm aware of as it relates 

to a deficiency payment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Part of your 

answer was a bit disturbing, and I want to ask, therefore: do you 

understand that the Government of Saskatchewan has a 

commitment from the federal government that a deficiency 

payment will be paid for this crop year, or do you understand that 

this is still in the negotiating stage? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The most recent understanding I have, 

Mr. Speaker, is that the Premier received unanimous support at the 

ministers of Agriculture meeting for a deficiency payment. And of 

course at those meetings, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture 

for Canada attends as well. So it seems to me that although I 

cannot stand here today and say definitively that the cheques are in 

the mail, that there's broad base support for that payment and I 

have every expectation that one will be forthcoming. 

 

I think what a lot of this discussion revolves around is (a), as 

you've rightly pointed out, the size of the payment and how it 

should be paid. There was some concern as to how special . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I think the minister has made his 

point. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That's the worst speech I ever heard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

sense of having heard that before, that comment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I direct a further supplementary to the minister. He 

referred to cheques being in the mail. Would the minister advise us 

whether it is the understanding of the Government of 

Saskatchewan that there will be one payment some time this fall, 

or is it your understanding that there will not be a payment this 

fall, but that the payment will be much later, perhaps a few months 

before an intended federal election? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My answer here is no different  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1972 

 

than my answer in this House on behalf of the Premier a couple of 

weeks ago when this question was raised before. I think much as 

that kind of detail — whether there's one payment or two, and the 

timing, etc. — is important, I think the concern and the important 

concern and the foremost concern of our Premier has been to 

ensure that there is a payment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our Premier has a very successful track record in terms of 

negotiating and impressing upon the Mulroney government the 

need for a deficiency payment in the past, and I have every reason 

to believe that our Premier will deliver for Saskatchewan farmers 

again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Payments for Irrigated Land 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 

to the Acting Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minster, the federal 

government announced, with the deficiency payments, that it 

would provide a supplementary payment to some of 

Saskatchewan's irrigated land farmers. But the unfortunate thing is 

that this payment will only include 20 per cent of the farmers who 

have irrigated land. 

 

I ask you: can you explain, Mr. Minister, why 80 per cent of 

Saskatchewan's irrigated land was not included in this special 

payment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I would take notice of that 

question. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, this supplementary payment 

. . . I want to ask the minister another question, and provide him 

with some information. Mr. Minister, this supplementary payment 

will be made only to irrigation farmers registered in recognized 

irrigation districts. It so happens that all of those registered 

irrigation farms are included in the riding of the Minister of the 

Environment, and nowhere else. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that 80 per cent of the 

irrigated land in Saskatchewan has been excluded from this 

supplementary deficiency payment, I ask you: is this just another 

example of you and your ministers playing politics with assistance 

that all qualifying farmers should have received? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In so far is it relates to details of 

payments for land under irrigation, Mr. Speaker, I've already 

indicated to the hon. member that I do not have those details, and I 

will take notice on behalf of the Premier who can report back to 

the House later with those details. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, while the minister is looking 

into that, I ask him to look into something else. Either there is 

politics being played here, Mr. Speaker, or the Premier, as the 

Minister of Agriculture, has failed to represent those farmers who 

are being excluded in this program. 

 

I say to the Acting Minister of Agriculture: why can Alberta, 

which has 1,350 acres of irrigated land and has had 1,100 of those 

acres included — nearly 100 per cent — why can Alberta find a 

way to get all of its irrigated farmers covered by this special 

provision, but you cannot, and the Premier cannot? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well for the third time, Mr. Speaker, I 

can't reply in any detail. I already indicated that when it comes to 

the issue of a deficiency payment, after last year's experience there 

was some discussion by some farm and farm groups as to the 

method of payment. And I can appreciate the difficulty in 

designing a fair program, and that is everyone's objective, because 

they had to decide on, initially, things like: should you pay on 

seeded acreage versus cultivated acreage; do you include just 

those crops, for example, that have been impacted on by global 

subsidy wars; and as well, the issue of irrigated land. 

 

I don't have the details and I'm not privy to the latest negotiations 

on this specific issue, Mr. Speaker, but I know it and other issues 

have been under constant review in so far as coming up with the 

fairest answer. 

 

Grain Deficiency Payments 

 

Mr. Goodale: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Specifically on this 

point and because of the confusion that did exist last year with 

much of the arithmetic relating to the deficiency payment, can the 

acting minister indicate to us in the numbers that he has used in the 

House today, do those numbers relate to a deficiency payment for 

all of Canada; do they relate just to the Canadian Wheat Board 

region; or do they relate to just Saskatchewan? Specifically what 

do the numbers relate to? 

 

And with reference to the method of payment, could the minister 

indicate — while that matter may not yet be solved — can he 

indicate to us: what is Saskatchewan's preferred recommendation 

for a method of payment for a deficiency payment should one be 

made this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well in so far as the first question, I 

would address there is, in terms of designing the deficiency 

payment and the model that was used for last year. 

 

All members should recall, and not forget in fact, how that model 

was arrived at. It was arrived at with a great deal of consultation 

not only with the provincial premiers and the Minister of 

Agriculture and our Premier here but as well the farm groups from 

across western Canada, including groups like the wheat growers 

and the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the United Grain Growers. So 

it wasn't something that politicians dreamed up in isolation, Mr. 

Speaker, first point I would make. 

 

And at the same time, I think everybody acknowledges that there 

never, ever is a perfect program. But one always strives for 

fairness and equity. And the important thing once again is that we 

got $1 billion. 

 

In so far as the numbers I used earlier, the 1.6 to $3  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1973 

 

billions, Mr. Speaker, I expect that the rationale behind those 

numbers, as I said earlier, and their application this year will be no 

different than last year, in so far as that national payment was 

concerned. 

 

Cuts to the Prescription Drug Plan 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Deputy 

Premier, and it deals with some rather incredible statements the 

Premier of Saskatchewan made a few days ago about your 

government's cuts to the prescription drug plan. He told a PC Party 

meeting in Redberry that he has always questioned the wisdom of, 

and I quote, "free drugs." That is the way the Premier of our 

province described the former prescription drug plan. 

 

If that has always been your position, Mr. Deputy Premier, can 

you tell the people of Saskatchewan why you didn't have the 

courage to put forward that position in last October's election? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn't at the Tory meeting 

in Redberry and if the hon. member was . . . and so I don't know 

what the Premier said at that meeting. 

 

I do know that as early as 1975 and 1976, when I was sitting in the 

very chair that the next leader of the New Democratic Party of 

Saskatchewan is sitting in now . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You weren't here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I was there, Mr. Speaker. He maybe 

wasn't here. And when he was here nobody noticed, Mr. Speaker. 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I can remember at that time that 

we were arguing for a plan modelled after the Manitoba plan. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Deputy Premier, that's a very nice little 

speech, and we're not into story time here. 

 

During last fall's election campaign, your party ran on a platform 

of expanding health care services and programs. There was no talk 

about cutting the prescription drug plan. If you were so opposed to 

the past prescription drug plan, why didn't you have the courage to 

tell people in October's election? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — No courage, no heart, and no brains. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I don't think those kind of 

statements are statements we want to use in the House. Order! 

Order. I think I made my statement, and now I'll allow the Deputy 

Premier to make his. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well those kind of statements, Mr. 

Speaker, I don't mind. I just consider the source. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I had quite 

a bit to do, Mr. Speaker, with the last campaign for our side. 

 

And as I recall the issues, they were largely related to agriculture 

and diversification and leadership. And those are three issues, Mr. 

Speaker — well, two issues for sure that the opposition doesn't 

know very much about. We'll see whether they know much about 

the third or not in November when the coronation takes place, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so I don't recall that health care or drug plans or . . . except 

that we had committed, indeed, to protect the integrity of the best 

health care plan in Canada probably, and probably in the world. I 

don't recall that being a major issue in the last campaign. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — A new question to the Deputy Premier. In the 

same speech, the Premier made the following statement, and I 

quote: "There is no one in this province who is not protected, 

absolutely no one, by the coverage of the new prescription drug 

plan." 

 

In light of this claim, can you explain to the people of this 

province why it is that senior citizens in Regina are going to Social 

Services and asking for food vouchers because they have spent 

their money on drugs instead of food? Explain that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I obviously don't accept that as fact, Mr. 

Speaker, and if the hon. member has that kind of information, I'd 

like to have it. I would like to also point out, Mr. Speaker, that 

today, this very day, we in Saskatchewan are spending more 

money on health care than ever before in our history by a very 

significant margin. We have the best drug plan in Canada by a 

very significant margin and, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to have 

the best health care delivery systems any place, any time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I would ask the Deputy Premier to check with 

his Minister of Social Services, check to see if the facts that I am 

giving you are correct. I say to you that people, including senior 

citizens, are being forced to apply for emergency assistance at 

Social Services because of your changes to the prescription drug 

plan, and I would defy you to check any case-load of all 

Saskatchewan social workers and come back to this Assembly 

with an answer as to whether senior citizens are applying for food 

vouchers because of your government's changes to the prescription 

drug plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — She has asked me, Mr. Speaker, to check 

with my colleague, the Minister of Social Services, as to fact. That 

tells me that she hasn't verified as to fact, and it's here in her vary 

alarmist mode, one more time, Mr. Speaker. But I will — I'll do 

that; I'll check with the minister to see if in fact any of those types 

of cases exist. 

 

  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1974 

 

Introduction of Legislation Promised in Throne Speech 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — My question is to the government House 

Leader. We're now at day 60 of the current session, yet we have 

yet to see any of the major legislation which was promised in your 

throne speech last December or by various ministers since that 

time. And I'm wondering whether the government House Leader 

can tell the Assembly whether he still plans to introduce a new 

electoral boundaries Act, an agricultural equity financing plan, 

legislation to cap all mortgages at nine and three-quarters per cent 

for 10 years, and conflict of interest guide-lines for elected 

representatives during this legislative session. 

 

And if those promises still stand, why won't you introduce 

legislation in the next few days, that major legislation, so that the 

public will have an opportunity to review that legislation prior to 

debate taking place in this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, it is our intention to deal 

with all legislation that was alluded to in the Speech from the 

Throne. And if I have the slightest concern that we were going to 

run out of work here in the next day or two, I would have our 

officials just rushing it forward. But I don't think we're going to 

run out of work here in the next day or two. And so, Mr. Speaker, 

we will just go through the normal course of having it go through 

all of the normal channels to avoid to the extent that we can, any 

glitches in the legislation. As we know, in the past from time to 

time when legislation is rushed forward, it has to come back for 

repair, and we want to avoid that to the extent that we can. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Words like 

intention and normal channel may have some vague meaning, but 

when it comes to your government, the public interprets that as 

last resort. And I want to get it clear. I want you to tell the public 

— are you saying the that the legislation still hasn't been drafted, 

or are you saying that the legislation has been drafted but that 

you're waiting until the very last minute to hide it from public 

view and to only have debate at the very last minute. Is that what 

you're saying? Which is it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don't know if it was that member or not, 

Mr. Speaker, but one of the members from that side of the House 

some time ago said to the media that we're going to be here till 

March, and if we are going to be here till March, I think that will 

give us ample time to review all of this legislation. 

 

Having said that, there are certain checks and decision points and 

approvals that are necessary to get legislation to the floor of this 

Chamber, and we don't intend to jump over any of those. We're 

going to bring it forward in the normal way. 

 

And I remember again, Mr. Speaker, when I was sitting in the 

very chair, the very chair that the member for Riversdale is sitting 

in now, I used to raise . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 

please. Order. We can't have a question period if  

we're going to have constant interruptions, and we'll move to the 

next question. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, compared to previous 

sessions of this Assembly, when it comes to introducing 

legislation, you're the one that's moving with all the speed of a 

water buffalo stuck in a mud hole. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Let's quit beating around the bush. Will 

you introduce that legislation so that the public will have a chance 

to review it, to study it before debate takes place in this 

legislature? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, he had so many 

cheer-leaders over there that I didn't hear the question, but what I 

assume the question was, is: would I, with all due haste, table that 

legislation or the legislation that he's alluded to in this House. 

 

And I can say, Mr. Speaker, that as soon as the legislation is 

prepared and has gone through all the hurdles, including drafting 

instructions, and approval by cabinet, and review by the 

Legislative review committee, and the lawyers to take a look at it 

to see that it's accurate in detail, and all of those things have been 

checked . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. Now 

we have constant interruptions, and one or two members realize 

that they have been taking up the bulk of the time with these 

constant interruptions. And without naming who they are, which 

constituency or anything like that . . . Order! I would ask for their 

co-operation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, these pieces of legislation 

are at various stages along the path, and they will be here in due 

course. But I say once again, when I was sitting in the very seat 

that the member for Riversdale is sitting in now, we used to have 

the same kinds of discussions, and he used to have the same kinds 

of answers. And, Mr. Speaker, if nothing else, I am a very good 

student. 

 

Filing of Grain Reports to Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

minister responsible for the crop insurance corporation, and it 

deals with what I think is the inability to serve the farming 

population of Saskatchewan. 

 

On July 28, Mr. Minister, you issued a news release reminding 

farmers enrolled in the Saskatchewan crop insurance plan that they 

had until August 15 to send in their stored grain reports. Well I 

think that's great that you gave them notice that they had to be 

filed, but I think the problem arises in . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 

think the admonition which I just gave to members a few minutes 

ago applies to both sides of the House. 

 

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1975 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's very hard to put 

your question when the members across are heckling all the time. 

 

The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the crop insurance corporation 

did not mail these forms out until August 12, three days before the 

deadline, and this happens to be in the middle of harvest, basically, 

for many farmers in different areas of Saskatchewan. And I want 

the minister to confirm today that, in fact, the August 15 deadline 

will be extended to give all farmers the opportunity to make sure 

they get in their stored grain reports. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

first question I've had in the House in 60 days in regards to 

farming. In answer to the hon. member's question, if he had been 

listening to the radio or watching the newspaper reports, if was 

extended to August 22 because in North Battleford area there had 

been a couple of the staff sick and some of the reports hadn't got 

out. So we extended the date all over the province and then we 

announced it on the radio, and it was in the papers as well. 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Well a couple of 

sick staff can hardly be blamed for all of the reports being sent out 

so late. I think it's a very, very poor excuse. It has nothing to do 

with moving of offices or sick staff, and we want you to assure us 

that you've taken corrective action so that the other deadlines 

concerning the crop insurance deadlines in the province for 

Saskatchewan farmers will be met, and they can be served well by 

the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, in answer 

to the member's question, we have in fact monitored very closely 

all the different deadlines that are out there. In some cases — there 

will always be some cases; we have 32 offices around the 

province — in some cases there will be at times a delay in getting 

a form out or in getting forms back in by some farmers. In many 

cases the farmers themselves forgot to return them in time. 

 

We acknowledge that if they're a little late, if the farmer doesn't 

pick it up or it's not sent out to him, we've extended the deadline to 

August 22 for the storage grain reports. If there is a case again 

where it comes up where something is late or a farmer doesn't 

make it, we'll deal with it accordingly and appropriately. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might have . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The Deputy 

Premier is attempting to get the attention of the House but isn't 

being very successful. So I ask the hon. members to please give 

him the opportunity to make the point he wants to make. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I wonder if I might have leave of the 

Assembly before orders of the day to deal with a motion to 

adjourn the House to accommodate us on Labour Day weekend. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The motion is as follows: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns on Friday, September 4, 

1987, it do stand adjourned until Tuesday, September 8, 

1987. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 

 

Imposition of Duty on Potash Exports to U.S. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I rise 

under rule 39 to present a motion of urgent and pressing necessity, 

Mr. Speaker. We have just received the news, and it may not yet 

be known to all members of the Assembly, that a decision has 

been forthcoming this morning from the United States commerce 

department with respect to potash exports from Saskatchewan to 

the United States. And it would appear that the commerce 

department is recommending the imposition of duties ranging 

from 9.14 per cent to 85.2 per cent on Saskatchewan exports of 

potash to the United States. 

 

In view of that very serious news, Mr. Speaker, having just arrived 

in the last few minutes, if there is leave of the Assembly, I would 

move: 

 

That this Assembly receives with great alarm the news that 

the United States commerce department has today imposed 

duties upon our potash exports to the United States, ranging 

from 9.14 per cent to 85.2 per cent, and this Assembly calls 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to produce a 

comprehensive agenda of potential actions to be taken to 

defend Saskatchewan's vital potash industry. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of Ombudsman 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Berntson:  

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor recommending that Gerald Peter 

McLellan of the city of Regina, in the province of 

Saskatchewan, be appointed Ombudsman, pursuant to 

Section 3 of The  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1976 

 

Ombudsman Act; 

 

and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Ms. Simard: 

 

That all the words after the word "That" in the first line be 

deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 

 

this Assembly refer the matter of the appointment of an 

Ombudsman, pursuant to section 3 of The Ombudsman Act, 

and the method of recruitment and selection, to a select 

committee of the legislature. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — What we've been trying to do in this debate 

which began last night and continued for some three hours, Mr. 

Speaker, is to somehow get the attention of members opposite on 

the questions that arise with respect to this resolution, and to try 

and get across to the consciousness of government members as to 

the significance of what they're doing and the important 

implications of this resolution and some of its very unfortunate 

aspects and some of its very unfortunate outcomes. 

 

I was present during much of the debate last night and heard quite 

a large number of speakers from this side of the House who tried 

in various ways to get across to the government just what was at 

stake here and just how serious the situation was. I got the 

impression, in watching the debate, that we weren't succeeding; 

somehow we weren't getting across to the members of the House 

just how serious this resolution is. 

 

I thought before getting into the substance of my remarks, Mr. 

Speaker, I would just review some of the main objections to the 

procedure that's been followed by the government with respect to 

the appointment of the Ombudsman. 

 

It was pointed out in terms far more eloquent than I could put 

myself, the fact that the Ombudsman is a servant of this 

legislature; the Ombudsman is not simply an employee of the 

government; the Ombudsman is not a deputy minister; the 

Ombudsman is not any kind of a permanent head; the 

Ombudsman is not any sort of junior official that has to answer to 

the Deputy Premier or the Premier, or anybody like that. 

 

The Ombudsman answers right here to all of us — to me as much 

as to the Deputy Premier. And I have a right, I have a right which 

has been respected in all other jurisdictions in Canada, to have a 

say in the recruitment of that person, in the selection of that 

person, and in the approval of that person's appointment. And that 

hasn't happened. And I don't think that's right. 

 

What's happened is that the government has made its own 

selection without any consultation with us, and has brought before 

this House this resolution, backed by its majority, and it doesn't 

care what we say about the subject. It just doesn't care what we say 

at all. It's not interested whether we approve or whether we 

disapprove; it intends to put its own man in this position,  

come what may. And I don't think that's right, and I don't think 

hon. members on that side of the House think it's right either. 

 

Obviously some of them do. Obviously some of the movers and 

shakers in the government side of the House have decided who the 

Ombudsman is going to be, and everybody is expected to salute 

and put up their hands or rise in their place at the appropriate time 

and vote in favour of it. 

 

But some of those members on that side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, are known to some of us, and are known to be men and 

women of conscience and principle. And they must know, as I 

know and my colleagues know, that this is wrong. This is a wrong 

process. It is inconsistent, as we have argued over and over last 

night, with the way in which this office has been handled in the 

past — the way in which two Ombudsman have been recruited. It 

is entirely inconsistent with either of those situations. 

 

And the government can't just say. well, we're sorry. They haven't 

said that yet. But it would not be an answer for them to say we're 

sorry, we got it wrong, we just slipped up, too much time passed, 

we meant to consult with you and we didn't — because that wasn't 

the case. The retiring Ombudsman, himself, warned the 

government that his term was coming to an end and that they 

ought to take certain steps in order to fill the position. I'm told that 

they were warned in that respect twice — one of my colleagues 

reminds me of that — and took no steps. 

 

They were also alerted by us, that is, the opposition, that the 

former Ombudsman's appointment was coming to an end and it 

would be necessary to appoint a new one, and we wanted to be 

consulted about it as we, ourselves, when we were the 

government, consulted with the opposition in respect of the 

appoint of Judge Boychuk and Mr. Tickell. And we asked the 

government for a similar courtesy in this case, and it didn't 

happen. 

 

And those are not accidents, Mr. Speaker. There's no other 

conclusion possible then that it was a deliberate policy not to 

consult the opposition with respect to the appointment of this 

person. And I put it to members opposite that you know — that 

many of you know — that that's just not right; that we ought not to 

be doing it this way; that we owe a higher duty of responsibility 

and care to the people who sent us here to ensure that these 

matters are proceeded with properly. And I appeal to your 

consciences, your principles, to somehow get a hold of this 

situation on that side of the House and back off and start over 

again here and see if we can't get it right. 

 

The office of the Ombudsman, the concept of a public officer who 

stands between the people and the administration of government, 

is a very important concept in our democratic system. It is 

relatively new in Canada. It is not so new in other parts of the 

world. And our leader described, in some detail yesterday, how the 

office evolved and how it worked, and how Saskatchewan made 

the decision back in the early 1970s to introduce that office into 

Saskatchewan, and how it's been introduced in other provinces in 

Canada. And I'm sure members opposite realize the importance of 

it. 

 

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1977 

 

A public official, a servant of this House, to which the citizens of 

this province can go with complaints that they have concerning the 

administration of government programs. What a wonderful idea! 

What a noble concept! And it is one which the government 

opposite has apparently decided to perpetuate by deciding to fill 

the position. We had rumours last winter, last spring, that the 

office was being . . . that there was some consideration being 

given to abolishing the office. Obviously the government . . . these 

rumours were false, or the government decided to perpetuate the 

office, and I agree with that decision. 

 

What I do not agree with, and what I suggest many members 

opposite cannot agree with, is that the office should be 

compromised; that the office should be made into some other kind 

of institution than what it has been previously in Saskatchewan; 

than what it has been in other provinces and in other countries. 

 

And the difference, Mr. Speaker, the difference that is a necessary 

implication of this resolution is that the office becomes one that is 

the government's. The government decides who the Ombudsman's 

going to be. The government does all the selection, all of the hunt, 

all of the advertising — if there is any — all of the recruitment, all 

of the screening, all of the interviewing, all of the final selections, 

and comes here with a fait accompli and says to this House: this is 

your Ombudsman; this is your servant. 

 

Now that's wrong. Members of this House must know it's wrong, 

and I think we should be large enough to back off. I think we 

should be generous enough to back off and come at the question 

again and get it right. 

 

Now we know what the right way is, Mr. Speaker. I mean, we're 

not breaking fresh ground when we ask ourselves how this job of 

selecting an ombudsman ought to be done. We've done it before in 

this province. It's been done in other provinces, and been done 

recently in other provinces. And everybody here knows how it 

should be done. It ought to be advertised not only in Saskatchewan 

but across the country. 

 

When applications are received, they ought to be screened. The 

opposition should be involved in that screening process. When a 

short list has been arrived at through the screening process, 

interviews should take place where the qualifications can be 

assessed in light of a personal interview with the potential 

appointee. And the opposition ought to be involved in that 

process. I'm not saying the opposition should dominate it, or that 

there's any requirement as to how the committee is made up in 

terms of numbers of government members and number of 

opposition members, but we ought to be involved. 

 

And then finally the selection process should come to this House. 

And there ought to be no question — there ought to be no question 

raised as to whether the process has been followed, and there 

ought to be no question at all as to whether the appointee is 

suitable. 

 

And that is, I think, the most important point, because the 

Ombudsman that is appointed by resolution of this House  

ought to enjoy, unquestionably, the confidence of this House in 

order that he or she can do the job that we require, and do it with 

credibility, and do it without any kind of a shadow hanging over 

their head as to whether they're an appropriate person to do the job 

or not. 

 

Now if anyone on that side of the House challenges that analysis, 

then I'd like them to stand up and say it. 

 

(1045) 

 

We've heard in the debate so far, Mr. Speaker, from the Deputy 

Premier and the Minister of Justice, who talked about the 

qualifications of Gerald Peter McLellan, the person who is being 

proposed for appointment. And so far in my remarks I haven't 

talked about Gerald Peter McLellan at all. I've been talking about 

the process — how the selection ought to have been made. 

 

And it is on that point that I beg anyone on that side of the House 

who has a contrary view to get up and state it and tell me: what is 

it about their procedure that is better than the one that I've 

suggested — the one that we followed previously in 

Saskatchewan, the one that's been followed all across Canada? 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that we won't be hearing anything on 

that score. But there are men and there are women on that side of 

the House who must know that I am right — people with the 

highest kind of personal morals and principles who know that the 

resolution that's being brought before this House is wrong, and 

that the Ombudsman ought not to be appointed by this process. 

 

Now, why? — why is the question that I want to talk about now. 

Why was this procedure followed? And we've heard a number of 

answers to that question suggested by this side of the House last 

night, and I won't repeat them. They're not flattering to the 

government. No matter which one you take, they're not flattering 

to the government. Not a word from that side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, as to why traditional procedures were not followed, why 

the appointment was not made following procedures followed 

twice before in Saskatchewan, and followed elsewhere in Ontario, 

Alberta, and wherever else. 

 

No explanation for that, because I suggest that there isn't one that 

the government would dare to utter — would dare to utter. The 

press would be all over them and tearing them apart for their 

motives because, try as I may, I can't conceive of an honourable 

motive for the government proceeding in the way that it has. 

 

And what's at stake, Mr. Speaker, is the credibility of the office, 

the preservation of the office as a place where citizens of this 

province can go with their complaints — with their complaints 

about maladministration or misadministration on the part of the 

government. And they have to be able to go to that office with the 

confidence that the incumbent is prepared to listen to their 

complaint and to deal with it fairly. 

 

And it is really regrettable that Mr. McLellan starts his term of 

office, as he probably will if the government carries on with this 

idea, with that kind of a shadow  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1978 

 

hanging over his head. He doesn't deserve the handicap of starting 

his term of office in this important position with that kind of a 

shadow hanging over him, and I feel for him. If he were to resign 

tomorrow, we would certainly understand the reasons why, and it's 

not his fault. 

 

In many respects, you know, it didn't come as a surprise, Mr. 

Speaker. And I say that because it has become all too familiar. 

Speakers have said this before me, but I want to repeat it because I 

feel it very deeply: it has become all too familiar. 

 

For some reason, this government has, in a number of instances, 

failed to follow the traditions and the conventions which have 

governed Saskatchewan politics, Saskatchewan governments, for 

years and years and years. And we don't know why. We haven't, 

on this side of the House, been able to figure it out with any 

certainty at all. And the press hasn't figured it out either. Some day 

someone will know who is the guiding spirit over there that gets 

the government off the rail so often with respect to the traditional 

and conventional ways in which things are done in this province. 

 

Who it is, for example, who decides that a budget won't be 

introduced until the month of June? Who is it that decides that the 

bad news in the budget will be leaked out by bits and pieces and 

chunks to the people of Saskatchewan over a long period of time? 

Who is it that decides that special warrants will be used in a way 

in which they've never been used in this province before? Who is 

it that decides that the legislature won't start until June 17, as was 

the case this year? 

 

Now the starting of the legislature is no particular magic, but the 

bringing of the budget was tied to the beginning of the . . . or the 

recalling of the legislature. And that was a serious matter and a 

serious departure from the norms and the traditions and 

conventions of this province. And some day historians will 

uncover who it is over there or what group of people over there 

have decided that these conventions and these traditions can be 

flouted, and flouted at will, without regard for consequences at all. 

 

It's not just a question of not being competent, although many, 

many people in this province have questioned the competence of 

the government. And it's not just a question of being bad managers 

or not just a question of not catching on as to how a government 

works. Those are possible explanations, but they're just not true. 

 

Someone over there is deliberately making decisions to depart 

from established, rational norms and just carry on the Government 

of Saskatchewan in whatever way they please. They feel free, Mr. 

Speaker, to do whatever they want to do without regard to the fact 

that it may fly in the face of conventions, traditions, and 

established norms. 

 

In reality, it seems to me that they look at government as their own 

personal little project, something that they can do with as they like, 

something that they can . . . a kind of trough to which they can 

invite their friends, and their friends can drink from it. They feel 

free to reward their friends in any way that they can find, and to 

reward the privileged. 

 

And from the perspective of this side of the House, as well as 

outside the House, there's just no other conclusion that seems 

possible or rational, then that someone over there has decided that 

they can do whatever they like and that they don't have any public 

responsibility to govern in accordance with established 

conventions and established traditions. And that is a pity, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I'm all too well aware that there's nothing I can say that will 

suddenly result in a magic transformation of this government into 

one which acts as a government should. I mean it's going to go on 

doing more or less what it's doing until the people arise up and 

throw them out of office. 

 

I was referring to the trough idea and the friends coming to drink 

from the trough, and we raise in this House the example of George 

Hill over and over and over again. I'm sure that the members 

opposite would wish that we'd come up with another name so they 

could be hearing something different. We keep using Hill because 

he's the most outstanding example of patronage. I mean, there 

surely can't be one person in Saskatchewan, outside of the Hill 

family, and the immediate government circles who can understand 

what it was in George Hill's background that qualifies him to be 

the president of one of the largest corporations in Saskatchewan. 

Nobody can figure it out. 

 

I mean, there's my old friend, George Hill, a practising lawyer in 

the small city of Estevan, absolutely no experience in the 

administration of anything beyond his little law office — his little 

law office — and suddenly he's catapulted into the chief executive 

officer position of one of the largest corporations in this province. 

Now no one, no one that I know of outside of that government can 

understand or approve of the appointment of George Hill. 

 

Now that surely is a good example of what I've been saying, a 

good example of a government that is just determined to do 

whatever it pleases without any regard whatever to how things 

ought to be done. And I can't imagine a corporation in the private 

sector who would go to Estevan and pick out of a small law firm 

the head of that firm and catapult that person, without any 

previous experience, training, or background, into one of the most 

important positions in this province. 

 

I'm sorry to keep belabouring the point of George Hill, but it all 

has to do with my point, Mr. Speaker, that this government does 

not act as a government should. It does not act according to the 

established conventions, traditions, and ways in which 

governments have operated all through the free world. This is in 

many respects a renegade and rogue government, determined not 

to act according to principle, but to act according to their own 

view of what is politically expedient and what they want to do 

themselves. 

 

Now there are many other examples. We saw last December the 

government reorganization Act, and the way in which that 

bypassed traditional procedures in this legislature. It allowed the 

government to reorganize itself in ways that were not traditional, 

and which were a complete departure from what had been done 

previously in Saskatchewan and in other provinces in Canada,  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1979 

 

and indeed in other democracies in the world. 

 

We also saw the Public Accounts, which for years and years have 

been released when they are ready in the spring, so that when they 

came off the print, off the presses and were bound and ready, then 

they were distributed. Here we saw the Public Accounts of this 

government delayed and delayed and delayed until the last 

possible moment and finally, reluctantly, handed out late in the 

month of June. Any why? Well, the government didn't want to be 

criticized, didn't want the opposition to have this information and 

then start issuing press releases advising the public of 

misappropriations, misspendings, and that sort of thing on the part 

of the government. 

 

We complained and we complained, and we pointed out that that's 

not the way things have been done; that's not the way a good 

government acts — but to no avail. And the only conclusion I can 

come to, Mr. Speaker, is that there is someone or some group, 

small group of people over there, who have decided that this is 

how this government is going to behave. But again I challenge 

some of my friends opposite — who I know do not share that view 

of government — and I challenge them to try and get hold of this 

situation and have this government act as a government should. 

 

I want to come back now to the precise resolution that's in front of 

this House. Mr. Speaker, I've known Gerald Peter McLellan for 25 

years — longer than that. And I have no particular axe to grind 

with McLellan; I like him — I like him personally. I must say, 

with respect to him, that I don't know what it is in his background 

that qualifies him for this particular job. I know that he is a lawyer, 

and I know that he has a commerce-educational background, and 

those are not insignificant qualifications. 

 

But the job of an ombudsman requires more than your law degree 

and your commerce degree — it doesn't even require that; but I 

mean it requires more than that, Mr. Speaker. It requires a proven 

ability with respect to some of the things that an ombudsman must 

do and supervise day after day after day. And I must say, with 

respect, that the Gerald Peter McLellan I know has not had the 

kind of life experience that would automatically lead you to 

conclude that he would be a top candidate for the Ombudsman. 

But we don't know that, you know. 

 

We hear about this man's qualifications in very brief speeches 

made in this legislature last night. And all that information is just 

thrown at us across the aisle, and we've never seen it before. 

We've never seen his resume. We've never seen anything that he's 

written. We haven't been briefed on any particular cases that he 

has been involved with that would be relevant to this question of 

being an ombudsman. And that comes back to my central point: 

that consultation is of the utmost necessity in the appointment of 

an ombudsman. 

 

And I wait in anticipation for a speech from that side of the House 

to tell us why traditional procedures were not followed, and why 

the government thinks that the procedure that they followed was 

acceptable for the appointment of an ombudsman. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'll be supporting the  

amendment and voting against the resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(1100) 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would like to ask at the outset 

that hon. members please remain quiet while the vote is being 

taken. It is very difficult for the Clerk to hear at times what the 

hon. member has actually said. 

 

(1116) 
 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 18 

 

Blakeney Atkinson 

Shillington Anguish 

Romanow Hagel 

Tchorzewski Lyons 

Thompson Calvert 

Rolfes Lautermilch 

Mitchell Trew 

Simard Van Mulligen 

Kowalsky Goodale 

 
 

Nays — 27 

 

Muller Martin 

Duncan Toth 

Andrew Sauder 

Berntson Johnson 

Taylor McLaren 

Smith Swenson 

Swan Swenson 

Muirhead Baker 

Schmidt Gleim 

Hodgins Neudorf 

Gerich Gardner 

Hepworth Kopelchuk 

Hardy Britton 

Klein  
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question before 

the House, Mr. Speaker, is a motion moved by the member from 

Souris-Cannington, the Deputy Premier, and it's a motion that 

recommends the appointment of one Gerald Peter McLellan to be 

appointed as Ombudsman. 

 

I rise to speak in opposition to this motion, Mr. Speaker, and I 

bring to the attention of the viewing public and to this Assembly, 

that the motion that was just defeated by this government was a 

motion put by the opposition, by my colleague from Regina 

Lakeview, and the motion referred to the appointment of the 

Ombudsman, and that it be done using a procedure where the 

method of recruitment and selection be referred to a Select 

Committee of the Legislature. By defeating this amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, the government side has shown, once again, how they're 

prepared to railroad their own views through this Assembly 

without using the  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1980 

 

procedures and the traditions that have ordinarily and regularly 

been used. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I would like to do is: I would like the 

members opposite to consider for a moment — just for a moment 

— what it would be like if the shoe was put on the other foot. I 

would like them to consider for a moment what would happen, 

say, two years from now, if they could imagine this scenario. 

 

Two years from now, when that government will have fallen to 

pieces and we'd have had an election and we'd have been 

re-elected — the members on this side would've been elected as 

government, and we would have been faced with the situation, 

perhaps in the future, of coming up with an Ombudsman, and 

making an appointment to an Ombudsman. 

 

Now we could . . . and what would happen, what would the 

members think if the new premier or the new deputy premier and 

that time said: well look, we're not going to bother consulting with 

the members opposite on this at all. We're going to go straight to 

the firm of Bekolay and company — Terry Bekolay happens to be 

a former president of the New Democratic Party — we're going to 

go straight to his firm, and we're going to appoint somebody from 

there. 

 

But even prior to doing this, one of the members of his firm has 

already been appointed chairman of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, and another member of his firm will have been 

appointed the chairman of the Labour Relations Board. What 

would the members think? What would the members opposite do? 

Would they just sit quietly by, or would they think: well, maybe 

there's room for questioning here? Would they consider that? How 

would they feel if they were in the opposite boots? Even if we put 

the situation that the member that was coming up was already a 

chairman of a hospital board, and he was maybe, possibly, a 

member of a school board. He might have been chairman of a 

community college. He might have been working with his church 

for a long time and had an excellent professional record. 

 

But take that scenario. How would the members feel? Well I think 

that the people of Saskatchewan would expect them to bring up a 

protest, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think they would expect that. And 

that's exactly what we are doing, Mr. Speaker, because in this 

particular case the parallels are exactly to the way I described 

them. 

 

We have a situation where one Gerald McLellan has been 

appointed from the law firm of George Hill and Dennis Ball. And 

George Hill, we know, is a chairman of Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation at approximately $200,000 a year, former PC 

president. Dennis Ball, from the same firm, has been named 

chairman of the Labour Relations Board three years ago when we 

got no consultation whatsoever. 

 

Now Mr. McLellan may have all of the qualifications, or he may 

not have. That is beside the point at this stage, Mr. Speaker. That 

is completely beside the point. The question is the matter of 

process. How was this done? There was no courtesy and no 

common sense applied to it. It was done unilaterally without 

coming to this side and  

going through the procedures of saying: we've got several people 

that we would like to put forward. We've advertised; we want to 

consult with you on this; who do you think would do this job 

fairly, coming to a mutual agreement? But that wasn't done, Mr. 

Speaker. It was not done. 

 

And then I think of, Mr. Speaker, what is the result if somebody 

comes in there, into this situation, without having the confidence 

of both sides of the House — without having the confidence of 

both sides of the House? 

 

In our democratic system, Mr. Speaker, there is a series of checks 

and balances that's put into place to protect our democratic system. 

In the legislature there is the government, and then there is the 

opposition — a check and a balance — a check so that the 

legislation is put forward; if there are things that the opposition, or 

there is a portion of the population that feels could be improved or 

is not done better, that is the job of the opposition to put it forward. 

 

In industrial relations the checks and the balances are provided by 

management negotiating with unions. In schools the check and the 

balance between the administrators of the school and the students 

are done by the school board or sometimes a student council. 

 

Now the Ombudsman has a very specific purpose here. His job is 

to serve as the counterweight. It's that one avenue of defence, one 

avenue that a citizen can go to in the event of some feeling that 

maybe the bureaucracy has treated that person unfairly. And I was 

trying to think of an example, and it isn't very difficult, Mr. 

Speaker, to think of an example where an ombudsman might need 

it. There were 3,600 complaints to the Ombudsman last year. 

 

I'm thinking of a situation right now, Mr. Speaker, in my own 

home riding, where the government has made a decision to close 

North Park Centre. Now you'd think of a situation of a relative 

who may feel that if the government unilaterally takes his or her 

relative out of North Park Centre, against their wishes, that that 

person's human rights may be violated, and that person will 

already have gone to the minister and to the MLA and to the 

mayor and any other group. And if she'd gone to the minister, as I 

have — and I can give you a very concrete example — and would 

go to the minister with a sentence like this: 

 

We were at a meeting in Prince Albert . . . 

 

This is written by a lady from Clavet. This is an actual situation: 

 

. . . on Monday the 27th, regarding the closure of North Park 

Centre, and we were very disappointed. Grant Schmidt and 

Mr. Muller (and it's a quotation) were there. They would 

only talk to 11 people, and we had to wait outside the room. 

In our opinion, they were not prepared to listen to what 

people want for the residents of North Park Centre. They 

seemed to think closing this home is the only answer. 

 

Well, what if they've gone that far? What if they've gone to the 

minister and they got no response? And then what if  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1981 

 

they write their MLA? And I have a letter here, which every MLA 

has got, and I could put into the record, but for the purpose of 

saving time I won't. And what if they've gone to every possible 

route, Mr. Speaker? They've gone every possible route, and they 

don't know what to do and they're very frustrated about the 

situation. Well possibly that is where they could go to the 

Ombudsman. I have a letter here from a relative from Regina, and 

I'd be glad to let the minister take a look at this letter because I 

think he needs to look at it. And it says again, about the same 

matter: 

 

North Park Centre should not be closed. If closure is 

eventually achieved, it is recommended a charge be laid 

under the government for the disregard of human rights 

legislation. 

 

Now it would be a very simple matter for somebody of good, 

strong, financial means to hire a lawyer and do that, 

independently. But this is an action brought on by the government, 

originated by the government. It's an action against a citizen of 

Saskatchewan — a place for an ombudsman, a real place for an 

ombudsman to act. So if there is an ombudsman who's perceived 

to be fair, it's only natural that I would feel comfortable to 

directing a citizen like this to seek the Ombudsman's advice and 

proceed with it in the event of such an action. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I've been a schoolteacher for some time, and 

whenever it comes down to setting up some type of appointment 

or an operation in schools, in order for it to work, it must at least 

be perceived to be dealt with in fairness. And I want to give you 

an example which is also parallel to the case of how an 

ombudsman should be appointed. Let's consider the example of a 

school-board chairman who might decide, and unilaterally decide, 

to appoint a guidance counsellor. Now you know that a guidance 

counsellor has several duties. Among them is consulting — 

students consult with them — and among them is, he has to give 

the student advice, and also has to have a good working 

relationship with the administration and with the teachers. 

 

Now if the school-board unilaterally appointed somebody because 

he was part of a particular firm, or because he was a good buddy 

or a good friend of this particular chairman, you know that that 

school-board chairman would have lots to answer to at home in 

that school-board meeting if it went against the wishes of the rest 

of the board members, and particularly against the wishes of the 

parents. And this is a very similar parallel, Mr. Speaker, very 

similar parallel. In order for the Ombudsman to do his job, or her 

job properly, you should enjoy the full confidence of this House. 

And I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 

reconsider and defeat this motion. 

 

(1130) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I ask today 

why we should believe the members opposite, why we should 

believe that the Conservative government has suddenly found an 

interest in the office of the  

Ombudsman? It just flies in the face of everything that has been 

happening to date. 

 

In 1982-83, Mr. Speaker, the provincial Ombudsman's office had 

16.8 person-years of employment there, and yet in 1987-88 that 

has reduced to 13.4 person-years or a reduction of 3.4 

person-years. That at a time, Mr. Speaker, when the case-load for 

the Ombudsman's office has moved from 2,565 people to 3,245 

people in 1986, an increase of well over 15 per cent . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . and the member for Weyburn would be well 

advised to listen to some of the numbers so you would realize how 

devastating you are to the office of the Ombudsman — that office 

that was set up to protect some of your constituents as well as 

some of mine. And you would be well advised to do what you can 

to make that office work. 

 

This process, Mr. Speaker, that is being used in the selection of the 

new Ombudsman is one that we really take offence with, and it is 

indeed a very, very far cry from the previous practice in the 

previous two appointments of ombudsmans. These appointments 

were done in full consultation with all opposition members, 

members from all parties spoke in favour of the appointments. 

And I ask you why, Mr. Speaker, why did they speak in favour of 

it? And the answer is simply this: the consultation process was a 

very, very real process. The members of all opposition parties 

were deeply involved in the advertising and the interviewing and 

the selection of the Ombudsman. So there was no question about 

the capabilities of the Ombudsman, or no question about whether 

that person would not be doing their job. Every party agreed that 

the choice of the previous two ombudsmans were excellent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other members of the opposition have spoken 

very well in this matter. The process that the government is using 

is wrong, and part of why it is so wrong is that the Ombudsman 

answers to the legislature. Mr. Speaker, the Ombudsman answers 

to you as an individual member, and to me as an individual 

member, and the same to each member of the government. 

 

No member of this legislature is more or less important in the 

appointment of the Ombudsman than any one else. The incoming 

Ombudsman has to have the faith and the trust and the good will 

of the opposition and, of course, the faith and the trust and the 

good will of the government. We want, Mr. Speaker, we want to 

support the Ombudsman's office. We want to support and, indeed, 

we want to be a part of the advertising and the selection and the 

choice of the incoming Ombudsman. 

 

So I ask the government to try what many people that I have been 

talking to have suggested, and that is that all parties try to work 

together in matters such as the appointment of the Ombudsman. 

For many years now people have said, why is it that in the 

legislature we are always having an adversarial position where the 

government is saying one thing and the opposition is saying the 

other, and it's always a clash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a golden opportunity: the government 

squandered an opportunity that has twice previously been used—

that opportunity to work in  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1982 

 

consultation and directly with all members of the opposition in the 

selection of an ombudsman. The path was beaten for the 

government. All they had to do was follow past practice, and 

indeed we would have been working together. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It was too fair for them, though. 

 

Mr. Trew: — My seat mate, the member for Duck Lake, 

indicates that that was too fair for them and indeed that seems to 

be the only possible reason for the ramming through of your 

choice of Ombudsman. And it's the process that we object to. 

 

We have been asking repeatedly for people on that side, on the 

government side, to stand up, not to speak from their seat, as the 

member for Weyburn is, but to stand up and tell us why. How in 

the world can you defend this process, this changed process? How 

is it in any way more fair? How is it going to make the office of 

the Ombudsman work in a more fair manner for everyone's 

benefit? And when I say everyone's benefit, Mr. Speaker, I mean 

the benefit of all of the citizens of Saskatchewan; how is this 

process going to help it? 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the incorrigible lack of interest in this 

institution, in the interest of the legislature, I want to just point out 

to members on both sides of the House that because the 

government has a total disregard for the legislature and for, 

indeed, for the selection of the Ombudsman and the process that is 

used, because of their lack of interest in this matter, I will be 

voting against the amendment. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Against the motion. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Against the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is, I would 

think, a misnomer to say that it is a pleasure for me to enter this 

debate. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that given the history of the 

appointment of the Ombudsman in Saskatchewan to date, that is a 

sad day for Saskatchewan that we should be standing here today 

going through the kind of debate that we're going through now. 

 

Today it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, if we are to believe that the 

expected will happen and that when this motion comes to a vote 

that the government members will stand in support of that vote, 

we can only conclude that on August 21, 1987, the Government of 

Saskatchewan officially decided to trample on the rights of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, as I look at the history of the time 

that I've served in this legislature and the conduct and the 

decisions and the plans that have been put forth by this 

government, that there is a pattern. And sadly, Mr. Speaker, I am 

reminded today of Bill 5 — Bill 5 which passed at 1 in the 

morning on December 24, at a time in which the people of 

Saskatchewan, the large majority of those people of 

Saskatchewan, were asleep; a Bill that —  

passed in the dark of night, and intended to be passed in the dark 

of night — gave the Government of Saskatchewan the ability, the 

legal authority to literally wipe out, create, and mix and match, 

and change the operating objectives of government departments 

without setting foot in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

And I said in my speech in debate on Bill 5, Mr. Speaker, what I 

say again today: that I have been appalled by the fact that the 

Government of Saskatchewan would see fit that it is in the best 

interests of I don't know who — I don't believe the people of 

Saskatchewan — to conduct the affairs of the Government of 

Saskatchewan behind closed cabinet doors. And it seems to me 

that that desire to conduct the affairs of the Government of 

Saskatchewan without the ability for the public, for the people 

who are most affected by the conduct of this government, to 

understand and to question, through their elected representatives, 

through people who through . . . by whom, through the democratic 

process were sent here to represent their best interests. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that there has been a denial of some 

very basic principles about the accountability of elected officials in 

the Government of Saskatchewan to the people of Saskatchewan. 

And I see that here again today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What an irony — what an irony that the Government of 

Saskatchewan is choosing to ram — and I use that word 

selectively — choosing to ram through the selection of the official 

advocate of the people of Saskatchewan. What an irony! — and an 

advocate that we all know, those of us who serve in this 

Legislative Assembly on both sides, an advocate who has the 

power to, in many cases, go beyond our abilities as MLAs to get 

answers to problems for constituents in dealing with the 

Government of Saskatchewan and its departments and Crown 

corporations. 

 

We will all have had experiences, and we will continue to have 

experiences, where a constituent comes to us with a problem, and 

after doing our best to solve that problem, to get an answer, to get 

justice and fairness in the way that the government is dealing with 

them, that we end up by referring them to the Ombudsman. And 

why do we end up referring them to the Ombudsman after we've 

done our best, members on both sides of the House? Because we 

know the Ombudsman is the legal and official advocate for the 

people of Saskatchewan with the authority to require that official 

documents and papers will be made available, with the authority to 

call for witnesses that we don't have as members of this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And so we see today, Mr. Speaker, we see today the government 

prepared . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member from 

Weyburn sitting opposite, offering comment after comment after 

comment in this debate without the courage to stand and say his 

point of view. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — We have had debate, Mr. Speaker, on this Bill to 

appoint the official advocate of the people of Saskatchewan with 

10 members now having stood from  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1983 

 

the opposition expressing our regrets, expressing our second 

thoughts about the wisdom of the proposal of the government, and 

only two, only two from the government side having the courage, 

having the courage to stand and even speak. And when they did, 

what did they do? They gave some kind of weak-kneed, knee-jerk 

kind of reaction, limp-wristed kind of explanations as to why the 

citizen of Saskatchewan they are proposing to be the Ombudsman 

should be so. 

 

Did they even have the courage, Mr. Speaker, when the Deputy 

Premier and the Minister of Justice stood to propose that Gerald 

McLellan would be the Ombudsman, did they even have the 

courtesy to send across a resume of that individual to allow the 

opposition to even explore or to even read the very basics of what 

they purport to be the qualifications of this individual? And what a 

sad day when the Minister of Justice stood last night and gave his 

limp-wristed defence of the appointment. 

 

And what we're going to end up with if the government carries this 

motion, Mr. Speaker, is an Ombudsman who is tainted, an 

Ombudsman tainted not by his actions, not tainted by his 

reputation, but be tainted by the deplorable approach to this 

appointment that's been demonstrated by the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Hagel: — They have chosen to carry out this appointment of 

the official advocate of the people of Saskatchewan in a way that 

the press and the public and the opposition has described as tainted 

with patronage. 

 

They have tainted the Ombudsman in his ability to act as the 

advocate for the people of Saskatchewan by conducting this whole 

appointment in what I call a secretive kind of way. 

 

And it was with pride, Mr. Speaker, that I reflected last night on 

the amendment to this motion put forth by the member from 

Regina Lakeview. She put forth an amendment which was 

thoughtful, which was objective, and which, most of all, Mr. 

Speaker, was sensitive to the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

She did not put forth an amendment to say Gerald McLellan 

shouldn't be the Ombudsman. She put forth simply an amendment 

which was defeated by the members opposite — every one of 

whom stood and voted against that amendment. She put forth an 

amendment which provided an opportunity to make the 

appointment of the Ombudsman of Saskatchewan an objective, 

legitimate decision not only in legal terms but in the eyes, most 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, of the people of Saskatchewan who will 

come, and will continue to rely on the Ombudsman to be their 

advocate in dealing with the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Voted down by every government member present 

in the Legislative Assembly today. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, it's never been done this way before — 

never been done this way before. And let me just take a quick 

review, Mr. Speaker, of Hansard, in the way that the Legislative 

Assembly conducted its affairs in the appointment of its two 

previous Ombudsmen. 

 

And let me refer, Mr. Speaker, to Hansard of March 12, 1973, 

when the Hon. A.E. Blakeney, premier of Saskatchewan that day 

— in those days, Mr. Speaker, in which Saskatchewan people 

were proud of what they had and were optimistic of the future and 

came to trust and rely on the good judgement of their government 

— when the Hon. A.E. Blakeney, seconded by the hon. Roy 

Romanow, moved the first motion to appoint in the province of 

Saskatchewan the first Ombudsman. 

 

And in that debate, Mr. Speaker, on the appointment on March 12, 

as debated on March 12, 1973, let me quote from the very first 

words entered into debate by the leader of the opposition, D.G. 

Steuart, who said . . . And let me quote, Mr. Speaker. He said, and 

I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, first I would like to make it very clear that as 

far as the individual is concerned, Judge Boychuk who has 

been chosen for this position (and I underline these words), 

the Premier told me about this sometime ago and asked if we 

had any objection to the individual and I said no, he is a fine 

man and enjoys an excellent reputation. 

 

The first Ombudsman in Saskatchewan. March 12, 1973. Let me 

read that sentence again: 

 

. . . I would like to make it very clear that as far as the 

individual is concerned, Judge Boychuk who has been 

chosen for this position . . . 

 

And underline these words for the members opposite, who will 

have to stand and be accountable to their constituents to vote on 

this motion. He said: 

 

. . . The Premier told me about this sometime ago and asked 

if we had any objection to the individual and I said no, he is a 

fine man and enjoys an excellent reputation. 

 

There were four speakers in that debate, Mr. Speaker, and they all 

spoke in favour of the appointment of an Ombudsman, and that 

Ombudsman. And the Hansard will show that the motion was 

agreed to without a contradiction, carried unanimously, the 

appointment of the first Ombudsman in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Let me refer then, Mr. Speaker, to Hansard of March 11, 1977, in 

which this Assembly appointed the second Ombudsman in the 

province of Saskatchewan. A motion moved again, Mr. Speaker, 

by the Premier, the Hon. — and I use that word very selectively, 

not only officially but also with personal character as well — the 

Hon. Allan Blakeney, and again seconded by the Hon. Mr. 

Romanow. And in this motion, Mr. Speaker, the motion was to 

approve David Tickell as the second Ombudsman for the province 

of Saskatchewan. And let me quote from the Hon. Mr. Blakeney 

in speaking to the motion he put  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1984 

 

before this House. And he said, and I quote again, Mr. Speaker, 

from March 11, 1977 of Hansard: 

 

When Judge Boychuk resigned to assume the newly created 

post of Chief Judge of the Magistrates' Court we were faced 

with the task of finding a successor. 

 

Now how did they do it? Let's listen, Mr. Speaker, to Hansard and 

the Premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

We advertised across Canada and received many, many 

applications. After extensive correspondence and interviews 

we decided to recommend to the House the appointment of 

Mr. David A. Tickell. 

 

And then he goes on about 60 seconds later, Mr. Speaker, to say: 

 

I, some months ago, advised the then Leader of the 

Opposition (some months ago advised the then Leader of the 

Opposition) and the Leader of the Conservative Party of the 

proposed appointment. 

 

Debate shows from Hansard again, Mr. Speaker, that 

subsequently S.J. Cameron stands in the Legislative Assembly and 

says, and I quote again: 

 

Mr. Speaker, If I may address one or two comments to this 

matter. As members know this is an appointment which is 

made by Members of the Legislature as distinct from the 

Government, and we were, as the Premier indicated, 

consulted in advance of this appointment. We indicated to 

the Premier that we would be supporting the move to have 

Mr. Tickell appointed as the Ombudsman. 

 

And then stood the member from Qu'Appelle, a Mr. J.G. Lane. He 

had by that time, Mr. Speaker, he had by that time crossed the 

floor and he was no longer a Liberal. He was a born-again Tory. 

And is there a difference? But he stood as a Tory in this 

Assembly, and he said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with other members of the 

House on behalf of the Progressive Conservative Party in 

extending best wishes to the new Ombudsman. 

 

And he then went on to say: 

 

I would hope that the argument for Mr. Tickell, that was 

given by the Premier, would indicate that the Government 

and the Assembly intends to increase the areas of jurisdiction 

for the Ombudsman. 

 

And Hansard shows again, Mr. Speaker, that motion was agreed 

to. And I'm told by those who were there it was agreed to without 

opposition. Mr. Speaker, today, August 21, 1987, Hansard will 

show that this motion to appoint the third Ombudsman in the 

history of Saskatchewan will not, will not carry unanimously. 

 

I know it will not carry unanimously, Mr. Speaker,  

because I for one will be opposing the appointment — opposing 

the appointment, not because I have any personal vendetta against 

Mr. McLellan, but simply because the appointment has been 

tainted with the biased, secretive, patronage-oriented kind of 

history and performance in this very act by the government 

opposite. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in concluding and noting that 10 members from 

this side have stood to speak to express their concerns loudly and 

clearly about this appointment, and only two from the government 

side have bothered to even utter a word, I conclude, Mr. Speaker, 

by asking members opposite, including the member from 

Weyburn who has abundant observations to make, to stand and 

make their positions known to the public of Saskatchewan. And I 

invite the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, to defeat this motion, to 

provide the opportunity to go back and do it over and do it right 

this time round so as to arrive at a third Ombudsman in 

Saskatchewan who is not tainted by the partisan conduct of the 

government opposite. Mr. Speaker, I am sad to say that I feel 

obliged to vote against the motion before us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to oppose the motion put 

forward by the Deputy Premier of our province, the member for 

Souris-Cannington. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, before I begin I want to read into the record a 

section of The Ombudsman Act that's very clear in terms of the 

process that should have been followed by the members opposite, 

and I want to read into the record, section 3(1) and (2) from The 

Ombudsman Act. Subsection (1): 

 

There shall be appointed, as an officer of the Legislature, a 

commissioner for investigation to be called an Ombudsman. 

 

Subsection (2): 

 

The person appointed as Ombudsman shall be a Canadian 

citizen and, subject to section 5, he shall be appointed by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council on the recommendation of 

the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is simply this: how does the 

appointment of Gerald McLellan by the Premier of this province 

constitute a recommendation of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan? How does it constitute a recommendation of this 

Legislative Assembly of which we are all members? We have all 

been elected by our constituents, and we all have the right to sit in 

this House, and we are all members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I'd advise the member from Estevan, who may be the Premier of 

this province, he may be the Premier of this province, but he is not 

yet . . . he does not yet constitute the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. Not yet. 

 

Mr. Premier, and Mr. Deputy Premier, the member from 

Souris-Cannington, I think you people have violated the very 

traditions of this House, and you should be ashamed, and we are 

appalled. 

 

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1985 

 

And I want to talk about the traditions of this House when it 

comes to the appointment of the Ombudsman. On March 12, 

1973, Ernest Carl Boychuk was appointed by this legislature with 

the unanimous consent of the House. And I want to talk about 

what Dave Steuart, the then leader of the Liberal opposition, had 

to say about this appointment, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, first I would like to make it very clear that as 

far as the individual is concerned, Judge Boychuk who has 

been chosen for this position, the Premier told me about this 

sometime ago and asked if we had any objection to the 

individual and I said No, he is a fine man and enjoys an 

excellent reputation. I certainly wish him well in this 

undertaking that he has agreed to do on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan. Again, I want to say very clearly that we 

will co-operate with Mr. Boychuk in every way that we can 

to allow him to make a success of this particular position. 

 

How interesting. We had a recommendation by the Legislative 

Assembly agreed to by all persons in this Legislative Assembly; 

the consent was unanimous. That was the appointment of our first 

Ombudsman in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

And here is what the Minister of Finance, the present minister of 

Finance, who was then a member of the Conservative opposition, 

said on March 11, 1977, about the appointment of the present . . . 

or the past Ombudsman. And he said this: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with other members of the 

House on behalf of the Progressive Conservative Party in 

extending best wishes to the new Ombudsman. He has big 

shoes to fill, I think the Members would agree. I would like 

to also on behalf of the Conservative Opposition, thank 

Judge Boychuk for the manner in which he served as 

Ombudsman of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And he went on: 

 

Surely if we have an individual with the capability of Mr. 

Tickell it is time to increase the levels of government which 

would be subject to investigation by the Ombudsman. 

 

And he was talking about extending the jurisdiction of the 

Ombudsman to investigate deputy minister and cabinet minister 

decisions. In the end he said, of his speech: 

 

On behalf of the Conservative Party, I would like to extend a 

thank you to Judge Boychuk for the admirable way in which 

he carried out his duties as Ombudsman and wish Mr. 

Tickell best wishes in his new position. 

 

Very interesting. The member, the Finance minister of this 

Government of Saskatchewan, agreed with the recommendation of 

the Legislative Assembly that Mr. Tickell should be appointed. He 

agreed. 

 

And what do we have today? We have a situation where  

our Leader of the Opposition wrote to the Premier on several 

occasions, talking about the need to appoint a new Ombudsman. 

He talked about a group of people from both sides of the House 

getting together to start the process for the selection of our 

Ombudsman. 

 

And what happened? In that time frame, the Ombudsman, David 

Tickell, who had once been in good favour with the members 

opposite, brought forward a report on the situation in the 

Department of Social Services as it pertains to foster parents and 

foster children. 

 

And what did the members opposite do? The Premier of our 

province, and the Minister of Social Services in our province, plus 

numerous other Conservative members across this province 

started to question the need for an Ombudsman's office. They 

were putting forth the argument that it was an extended opposition 

on this side of the House, that it was now the job of the MLA to do 

some of the functions of the Ombudsman. 

 

Of course, that was not acceptable to the people of this province; it 

was not acceptable to the people on this side of the House, and a 

great hue and cry went out, telling the members opposite that this 

was totally unacceptable, that we still wanted an Ombudsman in 

this province who could deal in a non-partisan way with concerns 

raised by various citizens in our province of Saskatchewan when it 

came to their dealing with government. 

 

(1200) 

 

So instead of going against . . . instead of eliminating the office of 

the Ombudsman, what they decided to do was appoint a person of 

their choice. They decided not to consult with the NDP opposition 

or the independent member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. They 

decided to appoint one Gerald McLellan. And as a result of that 

appointment they have clouded the very Office of the 

Ombudsman. They have put into jeopardy the integrity of that 

office, and they have done that because they did not have the 

consent of this side of the legislature. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that goes against all traditions of this 

House. I referred to, earlier, the tradition when we first brought 

forward an Ombudsman in this province in 1973, when all 

members agreed. I talked about what happened in 1977, when all 

members agreed. And for the first time in the history of our 

province we have a situation where we do not have an agreement 

of this House because of the very process that the members 

opposite chose to use. I think that what they're worried about is 

that somehow if they have an independent, non-partisan 

Ombudsman who they can't control, that various government 

decisions will come to light. And they don't want that to happen. 

 

On occasion after occasion after occasion they have tried to 

muzzle the citizens of our province. And you may ask how they 

tried to do that. They have cut funding to the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission, a watch-dog agency that defends the 

human rights of our citizens. They have cut funding to the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Association which lobbies for better 

rights for our citizens and improvements to our Human Rights 

Code. 

 

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1986 

 

They have cut the John Howard Society which does a lot of good 

work with people in trouble with the law. And it's interesting that 

the very person, David Tickell, who they had some difficulty with 

in terms of his report on foster children, after he left the position of 

Ombudsman, went over to the John Howard Society. And what do 

we see? We see that the John Howard Society under his 

directorship has had its funding cut severely. 

 

Muzzlement. They have cut money to the auditor's office. The 

auditor scrutinizes the financial decisions of this government and 

sees whether or not they are living up to acceptable accounting 

practices and sees whether or not they are spending the people's 

money in an appropriate manner. And what they've done is cut 

that office as well. 

 

And the cuts go on and on and on. The Voice of the Handicapped, 

who criticized the government, has had their funding cut. Self 

Help Council in Saskatoon, which is an advocacy group for people 

on social assistance, had their funding cut. They've cut and they've 

cut and they've cut. They want to muzzle people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That's really what this appoint's all about. They have placed 

Gerald McLellan in a terrible position, because it doesn't matter 

what he does as Ombudsman, he will never have the complete 

support of this side of the House because of the manner in which 

he was appointed. And I think that that's a terrible situation for Mr. 

McLellan, and it's a terrible situation for the traditions of this 

House, which have historically been to consult both sides. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be opposing the motion put forward by the 

Deputy Premier of our province. I would advise him to listen 

carefully to what we have said. I would urge members opposite to 

vote against the motion put forward by the member from 

Souris-Cannington. They have put Mr. McLellan in a terrible 

position. We think that they could alleviate that situation by 

appointing a committee of this legislature that represents both 

sides of the House and then we could effectively and collectively 

appoint an Ombudsman that would really have the best interests of 

our citizens and the support of our citizens at heart. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I rise to participate 

in this debate, Mr. Speaker, I am very much saddened by what has 

transpired both inside and outside this House with respect to the 

appointment of a new Ombudsman for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know the government's nominee. Gerry McLellan 

was first introduced to me some years ago by a former member of 

this Assembly, and a person who went on to be a former member 

of parliament, Dr. Cliff McIsaac. As far as I know, Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. McLellan is a fine person. He might well make a very good 

Ombudsman for Saskatchewan. 

 

Under proper circumstances, Mr. Speaker, I would probably be 

inclined to support his nomination. But because of the 

government's handling of this appointment — not because of Mr. 

McLellan, but because of the government — I am in a very 

difficult and  

troubling position. While I might want very much, Mr. Speaker, to 

endorse Mr. McLellan, to do so would be to endorse the methods 

chosen by the government to bring his nomination forward. And 

in all good conscience, Mr. Speaker, those methods cannot be 

approved. More than being troubling or difficult for me, the 

methods employed here by the government must be troubling and 

difficult for Mr. McLellan and for the institution of the 

Ombudsman itself. 

 

Contrary to all the past practices and traditions of the legislature, 

the government has chosen not to consult on this matter. The 

government has chosen to act arbitrarily and unilaterally without 

even informing anyone of what they were proposing to do. They 

ignored the official opposition; they ignored myself as a single 

member in the opposition; they ignored all of their own members 

in the government caucus except for a select few in what might be 

called the inner cabinet. They ignored, Mr. Speaker, all of the 

established precedents. They ignored the spirit of the 

Ombudsman's Act and they ignored the very meaning of what the 

Ombudsman is supposed to be. 

 

The Ombudsman, Mr. Speaker, is not an employee or an officer of 

the government. He is an officer of the legislature, responsible to 

the legislature, reporting not through a cabinet minister, but 

reporting directly to this House. He must be, Mr. Speaker, an 

independent advocate for the rights and the interests of 

Saskatchewan people. He must be above partisanship; he must be 

above favour; he must be above patronage; he must be above any 

possibility of question. 

 

And that is why in the past there has been the practice and the 

tradition of advanced consultation to ensure before the fact, that all 

members of the House were in accord upon the person to be 

selected. Because of the government's chosen course of conduct in 

this case in making this nomination, the opposite has now turned 

out to be the case. Questions, Mr. Speaker, abound everywhere. 

And the government has demonstrated a kind of arrogance that is 

truly unbecoming generally, and certainly unbecoming in relation 

to the specific appointment of an Ombudsman. 

 

While I might very much want to support the motion, Mr. 

Speaker, I cannot in all good conscience do so. And in casting that 

vote I do not want to be taken in any way, shape, or form, as 

expressing any kind of criticism about Mr. McLellan as an 

individual. 

 

What I want to criticize, Mr. Speaker, what I think I am 

duty-bound to criticize, is the method the government has chosen 

in this case to try to proceed with this particular appointment. 

Unfortunately it compromises their nominee and it has serious 

implications for the office and for the institution of the 

Ombudsman in the future. I suspect, Mr. Speaker, when the vote is 

finally taken, that the government's political will will prevail, and 

the nomination will be confirmed. 

 

That being the case, Mr. Speaker, I certainly wish their nominee, 

Mr. McLellan, every success in the very difficult task upon which 

he is about to embark, because it will be an especially challenging 

task for him. The job of Ombudsman is never easy. It is a tough, 

delicate, and  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1987 

 

difficult role for any citizen of our province to undertake. 

 

Unfortunately now, in this case and into the future, the job is going 

to be that much tougher, that much more difficult, because the 

government, instead of pursuing the normal and proper methods 

established in the past, has chosen a much different course — in 

my judgement, an improper course that places an incredible 

burden upon the individual who is about to assume these 

responsibilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I certainly hope that that crushing burden does not 

prevent him discharging his obligations and his duties to the 

people of Saskatchewan, and to this legislature, in a proper way. 

He is going to have a very tough job to do. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to voice my opposition to 

the motion that is before us today. And, Mr. Speaker, before I do 

so, I want to tell the members of this House that when I was a 

minister of the Crown, and the Ombudsman at that time made 

some criticism related to my department, there were many times 

where I wished that there hadn't been an Ombudsman. But on 

reflecting on the criticisms that were made, and in taking it back to 

my department and looking at those criticisms, I was thankful that 

there was an Ombudsman who could draw those things to my 

attention as a minister of the Crown in order that I would be more 

cognizant of the fact that there were individuals out there who had 

to be protected against a bureaucracy. And, Mr. Speaker, since I 

have been out of the government for four years, from 1982 to 

1986, I have become even more aware of the importance of an 

Ombudsman that can act independently of the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to join with all the members on this side of the 

House who have expressed so eloquently their opposition, not to 

the individual as such, but to the process which the government 

has adopted. In the first two appointments, Judge Ernie Boychuk 

and David Tickell, we had unanimous agreement in this House. 

And there was consultation that took place between the Premier 

and the Leader of the Opposition at that time. We didn't have this 

long, drawn-out debate on the process. 

 

And I want to say to the Minister of Justice, in his speech last 

night on this issue, that he missed the point. He was trying to 

defend the individual that was appointed, and trying to say how he 

was qualified for that position. I don't know the individual, Mr. 

Speaker, but I can tell you that if an individual accepts a position 

like this under the conditions that he has accepted, it tells me 

something about that individual. I think he demeans himself. I 

think that he does not have the character and the outlook and the 

experience in life. And he does not understand the role of the 

Ombudsman if he accepts under those conditions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I think he has compromised himself 

and he has compromised the position of the Ombudsman. I for 

one, as an MLA — and, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear, 

the Ombudsman is an employee, he is a servant of every elected 

member in this  

House — I for one will have doubts about whether or not this 

individual, under the circumstances under which he has to accept 

the position, will be able to independently make his investigations 

into the abuses that people find themselves under, under this 

government. 

 

It would always be questioned: did he compromise his position? 

Even though he may not, his integrity, Mr. Speaker, has been 

attacked by the government opposite. And I ask the members 

opposite, it is not too late to withdraw this. Stand this motion 

today, go back and consult again, and then come to this House. 

Consult with the opposition on another individual. 

 

(1215) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the people here today — we've had two 

people in this position, two men in Mr. Boychuk and Mr. Tickell; 

why would we not have considered a woman for this position at 

this time? Why did they not bring forward the name of a woman? 

Are they telling us that in Saskatchewan we don't have a woman 

that qualifies for this position, that could carry it out 

independently, that could do an excellent job? I say to the 

government opposite that you are wrong, and you should have 

considered it. 

 

And had you accepted our amendment to refer this back to a select 

committee of the legislature, then we could have done that. And I 

think the whole process, Mr. Speaker, maybe should change. 

Maybe since the Ombudsman is a servant of the elected members, 

maybe the government should ask the members for names of 

individuals in their constituency, or in Saskatchewan, that they feel 

could meet all the criteria that are necessary for that individual to 

function as an effective Ombudsman. 

 

These lists could be submitted to a select standing committee of 

the legislature. They could priorize the list, and they could make 

then a suggestion of a list to the Premier, who then in consultation 

with the Leader of the Opposition would come up with a name of 

those individuals that we could select. After all, as I indicated, that 

individual is an employee, a servant to the elected members — all 

elected members. We all know that the ministers on that side 

really don't need another Ombudsman. But the back-benchers on 

that side and the members on this side certainly need that kind of 

an advocate to work for us on behalf of our constituent. 

 

And I'll tell you, ladies and gentlemen opposite, that if you go out 

there and talk to the people, there is a lot of criticism of 

heavy-handed and secretive government. This is one more step 

that you are taking to consolidate that cynicism that is found out 

there in Saskatchewan. And I think that it is about time that we 

start being open with the people that have elected us here. 

 

I have talked to a number of my constituents, and former 

employees of the government, who underwent a so-called early 

retirement process. I made this statement in the budget speech, Mr. 

Speaker, and I want to repeat it. One member said to me that it 

was safer for him to play Russian roulette and survive than it was 

to say no to the early retirement that the government had offered 

him,  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1988 

 

because he said if he hadn't accepted it, a week later the job would 

have been abolished. 

 

Now I'm saying to the members opposite, people like this, and 

there are hundreds of them, need the support and an advocate of an 

independent Ombudsman. And what you have done today in the 

individual that you have nominated or put forward, you've 

compromised that individual. And I'm saying to you that that is 

unacceptable to us here. 

 

I ask the Deputy Premier, would he not reconsider, stand the 

motion today, bring it back to your caucus and to your cabinet, 

and then come back into the House? Bring that process back that's 

worked so effectively in the past, consult with the opposition, and 

let's get an individual in there, Mr. Speaker, that we can all 

support, that we all have confidence in, and that the citizens of 

Saskatchewan can say yes, we have an independent, effective 

Ombudsman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I can't accept the present process, 

even though I do not know the individual. I am not opposed to the 

individual as such, but I do want to say that I cannot accept the 

process and therefore I will oppose the motion presented. Thank 

you very kindly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

enter this debate very briefly to echo many of the sentiments — I 

don't think I can state them better than have been already stated by 

the members on this side of the House — but to echo the same 

sentiments about what kind of a sad day this really is for the 

province of Saskatchewan and the legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we agree that in political life there will 

always be ideological and political differences which divide us. 

Thank goodness that's the case. That's the essence of democracy 

— varying points of views, fought hard, debated hard, resolved, 

implemented; electorate accepts or rejects those decisions. 

 

But I like to think that there's another category of activity in our 

political activity, Mr. Speaker, which activity is, in a sense, 

non-ideological, non-political. A sense of political activity which 

enhances the nature of Saskatchewan, the quality of life of 

Saskatchewan, which, if you will, even to put it to a higher or a 

different level, enhances the civilized state of our society and our 

province that we can all agree to whether we're Progressive 

Conservatives or New Democrats, or whatever. 

 

If you think back on the evolution of democracy, it's been a hard 

struggle, as we all know in our history books. You, sir, occupy a 

venerable Chair. I candidly admit that some of us on all sides of 

the House in the heat of the battle here probably don't pay the kind 

of respect to the Chair that we should, but that is temporary and it 

passes by. But at the end of the day the chairmanship and the 

Speakership and the legislature is an institution which enhances 

what democracy is all about. 

 

And that's exactly what the Ombudsman is. The Ombudsman is 

another little additional step in the parliamentary process, in the 

parliamentary democracy development of our countries. Those of 

us who believe in this great institution of parliamentary 

democracy, it's another important building block to divising that 

civilized, humane, caring, decent society. 

 

There has been over the years a large amount of debate about 

whether or not the Ombudsman is in fact a clash, an ideological or 

if you will, a fundamental clash between the principle of 

parliamentary democracy. I recall well, Mr. Speaker, debates 

which said that we don't need an Ombudsman because it is the job 

of the MLA to carry forward the complaints of individuals with 

respect to the bureaucratic decisions or the actions of government. 

 

And to some extent there is, in my judgement — not everybody 

agrees — a merit to that point of view. We do carry forward our 

complaints. Every one of us comes to our constituency office and 

we have worries of people who are affected by social service 

cut-backs, or worries with respect to Human Rights Commission, 

or unemployment insurance — it's a federal responsibility. It 

doesn't matter what it is. We all try to do our job in advancing the 

interests of our individual constituents and rectifying the errors of 

bureaucracy. So there is some merit to that point of view. 

 

But at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, in Europe, New Zealand, 

and elsewhere, and eventually in Canada, we came to the 

conclusion — we, meaning citizens of this province and of this 

country — in a non-partisan way, that there was no fundamental, 

basic conflict. That there was in fact, an addendum, a valuable 

addition to the role of the MLA by the establishment of the office 

of the Ombudsman. And we said that no matter how good a job an 

MLA does, there is only so much that he or she can do. 

 

But what we need to have is a person with the resources, and the 

independence, and the willingness, and the determination, and the 

intelligence, and the principle to ferret out administrative abuse, 

whether it is purposeful or whether it's accidental, so that 

individual people in Saskatchewan or Canada or wherever an 

Ombudsman is located, will have a better chance to have a better 

say and a better day in court. And that supplements . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And so like — perhaps this may be a bit of a 

far-drawn analogy — as it was we developed the Speaker's chair 

with independence. And over the long years of struggle that that 

took place and certain other practices, so it was in recent years that 

we, as democrats and parliamentary democrats, evolved the 

institution of the Ombudsman. 

 

A new facet, a new dimension which, I think personally — I even 

like to think that the government opposite still believes, although 

I'll make a comment about that — an institution which I think can 

only grace and enhance that ever illusive goal which we are 

always going to pursue, that we have pursued, that we are 

pursuing, and those  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1989 

 

who will follow us will continue to pursue, and that is a finer, 

better democracy with greater equality and greater freedom for the 

individual people of this province and this country. That's what we 

did to set it up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And in doing so, Mr. Speaker, you develop 

certain traditions by the way of the selection of this office. We 

developed a system which put aside those things which divide us 

on ideological basis between the Progressive Conservatives or the 

NDP or the Liberals. We said that if this is democracy, it is central 

to all of us, regardless of our ideology. We said that if 

Ombudsman is an additional adornment to democracy, it embraces 

all of us of all persuasions. And our mechanisms for selection, our 

support for the institution, our support for the person who occupies 

the office has to be in a non-partisan way. It has to be in that spirit 

of enhancement and growth. 

 

I fully recall in 1973, the former premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan, the member from Regina Elphinstone, getting up 

in his chair as premier, introducing the first Ombudsman's Bill in 

the history in the province of Saskatchewan. I don't know how you 

feel, Mr. Speaker, about it, but I tell you, I feel . . . and almost 

everything that I've done on a first time, a special pride to be a part 

of the first. That day in 1973, I think it was, was a day for me, as 

an individual member of this House, was a day of pride and joy 

and happiness because I was a part in a small way, we all were — 

NDP, Liberal, Conservative — we were all a part of being a first, a 

first in improving the democratic processes of Saskatchewan. 

That's how we felt back in 1973. 

 

It's all been well documented now to you, sir. The record is clear 

of the process of consultation. We've had very partisan debates in 

this Chamber before. Mr. Speaker, I have, if I may say so 

immodestly, even contributed to those I suppose from time to 

time, and we've held our feelings very hardened and sometimes 

very bitterly, but not outside this Chamber. 

 

Nobody was more partisan and more eloquent in his attacks of our 

government than the current senator from Saskatchewan, Senator 

Davey Steuart, who at that time was the Liberal leader of the 

opposition and who also was the deputy premier in the former 

government of the late premier Ross Thatcher. Nobody was more 

partisan or more eloquent than Senator Steuart was, but he was 

able to put aside . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — He rose above it. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — He rose above that kind of partisanship. He 

rose above his personal concerns when the Ombudsman's motion 

came, to realize that it was an enhancement to the process, that it 

was something which we all as Canadians could rejoice in. And he 

could do so, Mr. Speaker, in large measure because he had been 

fully, fairly, and properly consulted by his main adversary of the 

day, the premier of the day, the member from Regina Elphinstone. 

And we were able to rise above our political partisanship to 

appoint in a unanimous way, Judge Ernie Boychuk of the 

provincial court, to do that. 

 

And this was repeated again in 1977 when Judge Boychuk moved 

on to other duties after an illustrious and distinguished career, and 

the appointment of Mr. Tickell. I won't bore you with the citations 

which the member from Battlefords very eloquently, and others, 

have advanced which verify the consultative process. 

 

I may not agree with the current Premier's position on a number of 

things in this province's policies, the way he's directed it — and 

obviously I don't. Clearly, he doesn't agree with some of the 

solutions that we advance. But surely, Mr. Speaker, is it too much 

for me to hope, is it too much for us to dream of the fact that there 

are some areas in our lives in Saskatchewan which simply 

transcend the differences between the Premier and the Leader of 

the Opposition? Is it too much to dream that we might be able to 

continue to build upwards and onwards in our democratic struggle, 

and find that same kind of process of consultation as we did in the 

periods from 1973 to 1977? Is that too much? Have we so 

descended in this province to such bitterness and such anger in our 

political discourse now, that it is impossible for something as 

fundamental as the Ombudsman, that it's impossible for the leader 

of the province — my leader, my Premier, that's who he is — to 

come to the members of this opposition and to advance an 

argument why we should accept a person to the position of 

Ombudsman. I don't think it is. 

 

(1230) 

 

I think what this represents, Mr. Speaker, this whole process, is 

more than Mr. Gerald Peter McLellan. I, frankly, don't know the 

individual. I don't know what kind of a job he will do. I, frankly, 

don't know what kind of a job he can do in the light of an 

unprecedented debate in opposition to this. I don't know, but that's 

secondary. 

 

But to me, Mr. Speaker, I rise with a heavy heart because I am 

seeing here, not progress, I am seeing here a retraction and a step 

backward. I am seeing here a minister of continuing education 

who relishes in this by his comments from his chair, taken during 

the course of my speech here, the member from Weyburn, who 

simply does not see the importance in this context. To him, 

presumably, by virtue of the comments that he makes to my 

colleagues on this side, he does not see this as a dark day, 

backwards to the democratic process of our province of 

Saskatchewan. Well I'm sorry to say for him that I disagree. And 

I'm sorry to say for him and for his colleagues that there will come 

a day soon in our Saskatchewan political life where that kind of 

callous approach will be rejected, and rejected firmly by the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And may I say also, Mr. Speaker, two very 

other quick points that I make before I take my place to vote on 

this motion. I'm not going to, again, belabour the question of the 

process — I've made that, my colleagues have made it much better 

than I could — and how I believe it to be a fundamental attack on 

democracy in this province. But the record is clear about how 

we're . . . the only way to describe it is muzzling such things as the 

Human Rights Commission, such as the Ombudsman.  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1990 

 

The statistics are clear. Fewer people in the Ombudsman's office 

doing more and more of the jobs of people who have nowhere else 

to turn. 

 

And let's not kid ourselves. And I say to the member from 

Weyburn, we all know this is not an easy time economically for 

you, for any government. But let's not kid ourselves about the 

facts. There are hundreds of people who are desperate — I don't 

blame here in this speech, for the moment, your government or 

whatever; I have some thoughts about that on another occasion — 

hundreds of people who are desperate and have nowhere to turn. 

 

I spent a good deal of yesterday in my constituency office in 

Saskatoon Riversdale, and the day before that time. And I don't 

want to overstate the case, but we have all experienced people 

who are in a tearful, desperate state of affairs. There is nowhere 

else that they can turn to. We can say to them, well, go get a job; 

or we can say that we'll do the best that we can do; or I can say, go 

to the Ombudsman. 

 

And what we're doing by this act, Mr. Speaker, is we are slowly, 

painfully, nick by hurtful nick like a razor blade, cutting back on 

people's hopes that there is somebody somewhere who is going to 

be able to give them an effective and fair hearing about their 

problem, which may not be in the minds of many of us the greatest 

problem in the world, but is to those people the greatest problem 

that they face. And we're cutting off their hope in doing so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Do we want to be thought of in that way? Do 

we want to be thought of as legislators, niggardly? Do we want to 

be thought of that, regardless of whether we agree or disagree on 

potash or uranium or farming policy, do we want to leave the 

legacy with our children and to leave the legacy with the people of 

Saskatchewan that we are so niggardly that we're cutting back on 

the expenditures of the Ombudsman? That we are so niggardly 

that we can't even take a five-minute consultation with the Leader 

of the Opposition as to who that person should be? Is that the 

legacy we want to leave? 

 

I don't want to leave that legacy. I don't think that that is an 

important thing that this province of Saskatchewan is to be left this 

way. I don't believe it to be a question of humour. Others may; 

fine, that's their right to do it. I think that the legacy we ought to be 

doing and seeking to leave is an opportunity, a legacy of getting 

more access, more access by ordinary people to this government 

and to the legislature and the legislators of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and we're not doing it. 

 

I want to close, Mr. Speaker, by saying, as I've said, that this 

saddens me very much. But I also want to say, in closing, that I 

think that this is a symptom, if not a symptom, perhaps a 

characteristic — I think it's perhaps a symptom — of a 

government that has lost the confidence of the people of 

Saskatchewan and is running scared from the ordinary people of 

the province of Saskatchewan; this motion is. 

 

This Mr. Speaker, is not — this motion — the act of a  

confident government. The actions of the member from Weyburn 

are the actions of a person who's whistling by his political 

graveyard, Mr. Speaker. This is not the actions of a Deputy 

Premier or of a Premier who believe that they are confident in 

themselves enough to understand what the democratic process is 

about to be able to approach the Leader of the Opposition. It is not 

a government which is confident in where it stands or what it 

intends to do for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The only one thing that they're confident about is that there will be 

political defeat for them for little things or big things like this and 

for everything else that they've been doing since 1982. And as a 

result, what they have done, is they have retrenched themselves 

into a secret conclave where they make decisions in secrecy. They 

implement them on the people of Saskatchewan, whether it's a 

budget or an Ombudsman, and they do it without any respect for 

democracy. And I say they're going to pay a big price for this with 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And more than that, and more than that, more 

than just a government that has lost touch, more than a 

government which is secret, this is a government which has 

become arrogant — this is a government which has become 

arrogant. 

 

It would have cost this government nothing — and maybe the 

Deputy Premier still will do it — it would have cost this 

government nothing whatsoever to have taken up the suggestion 

of my colleague from Saskatoon South or any one of my 

colleagues. Even now it costs them nothing to say, we're going to 

suspend this motion and seek consultation, genuine consultation. 

What would have been the cost to that? Nothing, politically. It 

would have enhanced their stature. And more importantly, leaving 

the politics aside, it would have done justice and graced all of us 

of this Assembly, regardless of what political stripe we're on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unless the Deputy Premier does that, we have no 

other alternative, none whatsoever, but to vote against this motion 

because of the negligent, uncaring — putting it bluntly — arrogant 

way in which it's been foisted upon this Legislative Assembly to 

vote against it. And in doing so, Mr. Speaker, this will not be a 

step forward for democracy or for Saskatchewan; it'll be a step 

back. 

 

But when we do vote against it, we do so with one promise to you, 

sir. That sooner or later — probably sooner than later — there will 

be a government in power in Saskatchewan which will work to 

restore and strengthen democracy, and which will restore the 

office of the Ombudsman for the ordinary person of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to say a few 

words in closing debate on this motion.  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1991 

 

I agree with the member from Riversdale that this is a sad day. It is 

a sad day because, Mr. Speaker, they could not rise above their 

political partisan aspirations and deal with this matter in the 

objective way that other legislatures have. 

 

And I've heard members opposite talk at length about how Davey 

Steuart, the former leader of the opposition and others had . . . and 

the member for Qu'Appelle, and I think the former member for 

Nipawin, and talk about the consultations that have taken place, 

Mr. Speaker. Well I know that I was a party to at least two of 

those consultations, and I don't recall any short list. I don't recall 

any screening. What I recall, Mr. Speaker, was a name that was 

presented to me. And we did say, yes, government, this is your 

candidate and this individual must enjoy the support of the 

legislature so that he can indeed carry out his duties without a 

cloud hanging over his head. And, Mr. Speaker, today is sad in 

that respect because members opposite have chosen to put this 

person in this position under that particular cloud. 

 

Mr. Speaker, words often belie actions. And we talked a while ago 

about . . . I think it was the member for Fairview that was talking 

about people at the trough. And I want to talk about that for a 

minute, Mr. Speaker, because he talked about it at length. And let 

me tell you where the NDP come from when you talk about 

people at the trough. Here is a resolution that was dealt with at 

their last convention, and it says: 

 

Whereas it is necessary to have civil servants and board 

members of provincial bodies who are dedicated to 

promoting the New Democratic program of democratic 

socialism, be it resolved when the New Democratic party is 

elected, a careful screening take place to ensure that such 

people are in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's where the New Democrats come from. That's 

where the New Democrats come from, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That's where New Democrats come from, 

Mr. Speaker. And in this case I don't think words do belie actions. 

Because I remember, Mr. Speaker, I remember not that many 

years ago when I was conducting what was called an exit 

interview with one Gerry Gartner, a very highly placed individual 

in the former administration. He was deputy minister of 

Agriculture, and at the same time, a bagman for the New 

Democratic Party. 

 

I can remember, Mr. Speaker, their appointment of John Burton, 

who was a former NDP MP. And they talk about credentials. They 

had this person heading up the transportation agency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let's talk about credentials for a while. Not once did anyone here 

criticize the credentials of one Gerald Peter McLellan. All they 

could criticize, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that he was a partner, a 

law partner of George Hill who was once the president of the 

Conservative Party of  

Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, he was also a law partner of 

Kim Thorson, who was once the NDP minister of Energy with 

that very . . . the member for Elphinstone as his premier. 

 

So, you know, if there's guilt by association, Mr. McLellan must 

be a schizophrenic. I don't understand their arguments, Mr. 

Speaker. They haven't questioned his credentials. They haven't 

questioned his credentials. Not once have they questioned his 

credentials. They've put a cloud over his head, but they have not 

said that this man shouldn't be in that office for reasons of 

incompetence or inability to conduct the duties of that office. 

 

(1245) 

 

One other point, Mr. Speaker. One other point. While I would 

enjoy this, I don't have the heart for it right now, but I have nine 

pages, nine pages of what I call the NDP trough. I'll just deal with 

one of them here. It looks like the whole Koskie family was well 

looked after. There's a . . . I don't have the heart for it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me just say that from the time of the retirement or 

the stepping down, if you like, or the moving on to greater things, 

of Judge Boychuk as the Ombudsman to the appointment of the 

new Ombudsman, Mr. Tickell, I believe was 14 months. Now the 

Acting Ombudsman, as I recall, who served in that position for 14 

months, there was no consultation as it relates to the person who 

served in that position for 14 months. Not any, as I recall. Nothing. 

Nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when they finally did select an Ombudsman . . . And 

he was supported unanimously by all members here. And he was 

selected by the, at that time, minister or attorney general — I think 

came out of his department, as a matter of fact — and was 

endorsed by all members here. But the process that he talks about 

didn't exist. There was no short list. There was no screening. There 

was no nothing. There was a name presented, and that was it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Was there advertising? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And you're going to have to make up 

your mind on advertising, the member for — is it Nutana? 

 

An Hon. Member: — South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — South. The member for South says, 

surely to goodness we can find someone in Saskatchewan who is a 

woman that can take this job. I agree with him. I don't think we 

have to go to Toronto and Vancouver and Montreal to find 

talented people for this position or any other position, to serve the 

public in Saskatchewan. 

 

Well the point I was trying to get before that little digression, Mr. 

Speaker, was this. As the Act clearly states, when the position has 

been vacated, an Acting Ombudsman must be appointed. That was 

done when Judge Boychuk vacated the position, and it was done 

when Ombudsman Tickell vacated the position. I believe, I 

believe that it was April 1, Mr. Speaker, that a letter was sent to 

the Leader of the Opposition from the Premier, saying that it was 

his intention to recommend  

  



 

August 21, 1987 

1992 

 

one Gerald Peter McLellan to the position of Acting Ombudsman. 

 

To my knowledge, Mr. Speaker, to date, five months later, there 

has not been one, not one, criticism or objection to that letter. Not 

one, to my knowledge. That is five months, Mr. Speaker, five 

months, and nobody has criticized the credentials of this man. Yet 

in their very partisan way, they choose to put a cloud over this 

person's head as he takes the office of Ombudsman in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that's shameful, Mr. Speaker. I think it is shameful. 

And they could not find it in their hearts or souls to rise above 

their partisan political debate as all other legislature have in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that Gerald Peter McLellan is eminently 

qualified for this position. I urge all members, Mr. Speaker, to 

support this motion so that this person can take up that position 

without the cloud that they have imposed on it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1252) 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 27 

 

Muller Martin 

Duncan Toth 

Andrew Sauder 

Berntson Johnson 

Taylor McLaren 

Smith Swenson 

Swan Martens 

Muirhead Baker 

Schmidt Gleim 

Hodgins Neudorf 

Gerich Gardner 

Hepworth Kopelchuck 

Hardy Britton 

Klein  

 

Nays — 17 

 

Blakeney Atkinson 

Shillington Anguish 

Romanow Hagel 

Tchorzewski Lyons 

Thompson Calvert 

Rolfes Lautermilch 

Mitchell Trew 

Simard Van Mulligen 

Kowalsky  

 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to Amend The Land Titles Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:58 p.m. 

 

 


