


















































July 13, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 13, 1987 
 
 

1113 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you, and to the members of this Assembly, a 
couple we have visiting here from Germany; they are sitting in 
the Speaker’s gallery. Their names are Heide and Ernst Urmann 
from West Germany. And with your permission, I would like to 
say a few words in German to welcome them. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in German.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, help me welcome the guests and wish them a good 
trip back to Germany. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased to bring to the attention of the House some special 
visitors we have here this afternoon from the Glencairn child care 
centre. There are 13 students between the ages of 6 and 11 in the 
Speaker’s gallery who are here to tour the legislature and watch 
the question period. I am looking forward to meeting with them 
for pictures and some refreshments after the question period. 
They’re accompanied by Brad West, Pauline Lagassé, and 
Annette Parisloff. I ask all members, Mr. Speaker, through you, 
to join me in welcoming these guests to the legislature this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Deduction of Increase in Flat Tax 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to direct a question to the Minister of Finance. Mr. 
Minister, I want to ask you a question about another example of 
how you have misled Saskatchewan taxpayers over the last 
several weeks. 
 
One June 2, when you announced an increase in the flat tax on 
net income, you said in your announcement, which I have here, 
and you said: 
 
In order to achieve the increase of one half of 1 per cent for the 
entire year, the flat tax will be increased by 1 per cent for the final 
six months of this year. 
 
Nothing in your announcement talked about retroactive 
deductions. And yet, throughout Saskatchewan thousands of 
people have now found that they are having retroactive 
deductions on their flat tax. I have here example of . . . one 
example of check stubs from one individual who represents 
thousands, in which the deductions for the pay period from the 
first part of June to the first part of July amounted to an increase 
in the flat tax  

of $91.81. Not many people can afford that kind of surprise. 
 
Along with those checks that came out, Mr. Minister, was a letter 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’d like the 
member to get to his question. I think he’s had a rather lengthy 
preamble, and I would like to have him get to the question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I intend to get to 
the question, Mr. Minister, can you explain why a major number 
of major Saskatchewan hospitals are applying the flat tax increase 
retroactively on payroll checks? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The budget did 
make it clear that the half point increase in the flat tax would be 
effective January 1. And when I made the announcement that the 
tables would be adjusted July for September . . . or June 30, I do 
share the . . . and let me state that disappointment is too mild a 
word, that some employers have chosen to make the deduction of 
the first six months in one lump sum. 
 
There is no requirement under The Income Tax Act, no 
requirement provincially, that they make those deductions. Quite 
the contrary, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact, I am advised that 
the Department of Health will be notifying employees that it is 
the employer’s choice to do that. I find that the employers are, 
frankly, being unfair, and that they should do it over the period of 
six months. So I share the hon. member’s concern about the 
actions of some employers. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, sharing people’s concerns 
after the fact is not good enough. Mr. Minister, all of these people 
have received letters saying that their retroactively is due to your 
increase in the flat tax announced in your budget. 
 
If Saskatchewan’s major hospitals, who have hundreds of staffs 
and a very sophisticated management system, are making this 
kind of an error — as you call it; and I’m not sure it’s their error 
— if they’re confused about how this process should work, can 
you assure the Assembly that no other employers have been 
confused by this tax hike as well? And what, Mr. Minister, are 
you going to do to clarify the problem which you have created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I can remind the hon. member: when the flat 
tax was introduced in Saskatchewan, if I recall, it was only one of 
the major employers in the province that chose to deduct it all at 
one lump sum, and that was the hospital employers. And the now 
Leader of the Opposition raised that particular matter at that time. 
 
Quite frankly, I would have thought that the major hospitals 
would have recalled the fact that the imposition that had on their 
employees. There is no obligation, and I  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1114 
 

would urge, again, the hospitals — they had the choice to deduct 
the tax over the course of the following six months. They have 
the right to make that decision. I disagree with the employer’s 
decision. I think the employers are being unfair to employees to 
deduct it all at once. I understand that, as I say, the Department of 
Health will again be indicating to the major hospitals of the 
unfairness. They do have the right to do it. I think it’s unfair; I 
think they’re not dealing fairly with their employees. But again, 
they do have the alternative of deducting it over the period of six 
months. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, you didn’t tell Saskatchewan taxpayers or employers 
anything about an alternative when you made this announcement 
on June 2. 
 
What you’re doing, Mr. Minister, is that you’re taking large 
chunks of those deductions now on a retroactive basis, and you’re 
causing people a great deal of financial suffering by having 
allowed this kind of a massive deduction because of the 
confusion which you have created by your unfair approach to 
budget making. 
 
Mr. Minister, don’t blame it on the hospitals, and don’t blame it 
on the taxpayer . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I’m 
afraid the hon. member is once more getting a bit too lengthy, and 
I would ask him to put his question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, it is a problem which you 
created because you’re never able to do what you are saying 
you’re going to do. It’s your problem, and I ask you: what steps 
are you going to take, or what steps have you taken, to make sure 
that this problem does not continue into the future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I understand to date that the 
only ones that we’re aware of, large employers that are taking this 
action, happen to be the major hospitals. They’re the only ones 
that have been brought to our attention. 
 
If I recall, when the flat tax was introduced, again it was only the 
hospitals that chose to take the rather Draconian step of making 
the deduction all at once. 
 
If others are having, frankly, a little more consideration for their 
employees by spreading the deduction over the period of six 
months, then, Mr. Speaker, I think that the responsibility does fall 
on the employers that are under discussion this morning. The fact 
that one major group of employers only are deducting it in what I 
think to be an unfair way, I don’t think reflects on the way that 
the tax is deducted across the province. 
 
And so they do have the option. I find it, as I say, I think 
disappointing is a polite word, that the major hospitals . . . there is 
no requirement, notwithstanding what the member from The 
Battlefords said from his seat, no requirement that they have to 
make that deduction all at once from Revenue Canada or the 
Department of Finance or the province of Saskatchewan. 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, is the Regina General Hospital one who has acted in the 
way of which you disapprove? Is the Pasqua Hospital one? Is the 
Plains Hospital one? And does your government own all three 
hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member knows 
full well how the hospitals operate. And they are employers, Mr. 
Speaker, and they do have that option. I suggest that if, of all the 
employers in the province, that only the hospitals have chosen to 
make the deduction at once from one pay check, then obviously 
that is not the government. 
 
Secondly, I find it, as I say, terribly unfair for that narrow group 
of employers to have singled out their employees in such an 
unfair manner. 
 

Renewal of Licenses of Investment Companies 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — New question, Mr. Speaker. My 
question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs, and it deals with the protection of 
investments made by Saskatchewan people. 
 
Madam Minister, your department has licensed, under The 
Investment Contracts Act, the firms First Investors Corporation 
and Associated Investors of Canada. The license was renewed in 
January of this year and revoked. I believe, earlier this month 
after it became apparent that these firms were in trouble. Clearly 
the duty of your department, Madam Minister, to see that these 
firms are operating in accordance with provincial law. 
 
My question then is this: since a number of Saskatchewan people 
are now finding that their savings are, or may be, at risk, could 
you tell this Assembly what criteria your department used in 
deciding to renew the licenses of these two firms on January 1? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I can advise the hon. member that the 
two firms in question were licensed as extra-provincial 
institutions operating in Saskatchewan. And as is the practice 
across Canada, when any province, whether it be B.C. or 
Manitoba or Ontario, license an extra-provincial institution to 
operate within their jurisdiction, it is the practice to rely upon the 
incorporating jurisdiction to see that regulations are upheld. 
 
And I might say to the hon. member that we were given two days 
notice from the Government of Alberta that they would be 
cancelling the licenses of those two particular firms. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Madam Minister; 
supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, we are talking 
about the administration of Saskatchewan law, and my question is 
this. It concerns how we got into this mess and after all the 
evidence that financial firms in western Canada were in trouble, 
and your department  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1115 
 

decided to license them. I ask you, Madam Minister: does not the 
Act which you administer state in specific terms that if the 
superintendent of insurance is of the opinion that, for any reason, 
these firms should not be granted a renewal of license, then the 
license should not be granted? I ask you again, does not the Act 
provide that? And I ask you, what criteria were used to decide 
that these firms should be renewed in their licensing and their 
ability to sell investment contracts to Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the 
member in his first question that Alberta is the incorporating 
jurisdiction and as such has the primary responsibility for 
regulation of companies . . . of this company’s affairs . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not what the Act says. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — That’s not quite correct. I might say to 
the member that’s chirping from his seat. 
 
The practice across Canada is for provinces to rely upon the 
incorporating jurisdiction to see that regulations are met, that 
capitalization criteria and that type of thing are met. We licensed 
the two particular firms as extra-provincial institutions operating 
in the province. There is some requirement for them to file with 
the superintendent certain documents, but those documents really 
are filed here, and we rely upon Alberta as the incorporating 
jurisdiction to delve into the parent company and see that things 
are as they should be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Madam Minister. 
According to my information, in 1985, the Alberta Securities 
Commission rejected a prospectus filed by First Investors because 
they said too many mortgages were in arrears. I ask: did your 
department have that information? If not, why not, and if so, why 
did they not investigate to see whether or not these companies 
were in difficulties before your department renewed their license 
on January 1, 1987? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I would have to take notice 
on the specific questions asked by the member, but I would just 
reiterate that I can understand the anxiety of the investors. You 
know, they’re feeling quite bad because as of this point they don’t 
quite know what the status of their investments are. But I 
understand there is a meeting tomorrow night in Regina with the 
different departments. And I believe the Department of Finance 
will be sending a representative, as will my department, as will 
the federal department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. As you are 
aware, Madam Minister, the Act which you administer, The 
Investment Contracts Act, provides that any such investment 
contract selling company have assets on deposit with a chartered 
bank or trust company which will be sufficient at all times to pay 
out the outstanding investment contracts. 

My short question to you is this: was that complied with? Can 
you now tell the investors that the money was in the banks or 
trust companies as required by Saskatchewan law? And will you 
now assure them that their money is safe, or if it’s not, tell them 
why that provision of the law was not enforced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I will say one more time. 
Alberta is the incorporating jurisdiction. The companies in 
question were licensed as extra-provincial corporations working 
within the boundaries of Saskatchewan. And as is the practice, 
and has been for many, many, many, many years, it is the primary 
responsibility of the incorporating jurisdiction to see that 
capitalization requirements are met and all those things are as 
they should be. I did indicate to the member that I would get the 
information on the specific questions he had asked, and I shall do 
that forthwith. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A number of allegations, Madam Minister, 
have been made about the way these two firms and their salesmen 
dealt with the Saskatchewan public. I trust we aren’t going to 
allege that this is also an Alberta responsibility. I trust this, at 
least, will be accepted as a provincial responsibility. 
 
These investors claim that they were assured that all companies 
were one and the same, and that if one got into trouble, all would 
help out. They claimed they were never told their money was 
being transferred from Principal Trust to the other companies. 
They say they were told that their investments were better 
protected than they would be if they were covered by the 
Canadian Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
 
Could the minister tell this Assembly if her department is 
undertaking an investigation into these allegations and when we 
might expect a result. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 
member’s question. Yes, I have read about those allegations in 
the media, and some of them have been brought to the attention 
of the department. However, upon examining some of the 
policies that investors have brought to the department for 
examination, I might indicate that on several places it is stamped 
in bold print that these investment contracts are not covered by 
Canadian Deposit Insurance Corporation. They’re clearly on the 
signed contracts with these people. 
 
It is very difficult, I think, for us to say yes or no. I do believe that 
there will be legal action open to individual investors should they 
want to pursue it, if they felt they were wrongly informed by the 
investment counsellor. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary, Madam Minister, the 
allegations are of two sorts. One, that the salesmen were not 
honest with them, and two, that the material was not clear. 
 
Madam Minister, some decades ago it was determined by this 
legislature and the government of the day that the  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1116 
 

average public are unable to protect themselves, are unable to 
understand these documents unless they’re very sophisticated 
investors. That’s why the taxpayers, through their tax dollars, pay 
your salary and the salary of other officials, to do that for them. 
And they suggest, Madam Minister, in this case you’ve been 
derelict. I ask you: what are you doing to accept your 
responsibility to protect the Saskatchewan public after the fact by 
investigating these allegations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I will just . . . In response to 
the member, we have had a number of investors come to the 
department with that type of complaint — that they were wrongly 
guided by some of the sales people. But when they produced the 
contracts that they signed, in very large bold print on the contract 
it clearly states that the investment certificate that they signed was 
not covered by Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
 

Cuts to the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 
 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. 
 
Mr. Minister, the provincial budget chopped nearly $200,000 and 
five staff positions from the Human Rights Commission. And a 
few months ago, a judge had thrown a complaint out that was not 
dealt with in a timely manner by the Human Rights Commission 
because of a serious backlog of cases. Why, in the light of this 
backlog, have you chosen to cut this important watch-dog agency 
that protects the right of all citizens of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the budget increase for the 
Department of Justice, which encompasses the Human Rights 
Commission, in fact increased this year some 17 per cent, and 
that is fairly significant, relative to most other departments of 
government. 
 
Now the problem was that you had to increase, number one, the 
cost to policing the R.C.M.P. coasts. There was some stress and 
strain on the corrections and so that we had to try to keep that 
particular group whole. As the hon. member, as a lawyer, would 
know, it’s rather difficult to contain the costs of the court system, 
if you like, and they tend to establish for themselves what they 
wish to spend, resulting in that in this department we had to 
demonstrate, I think, that while nobody likes, necessarily, to cut 
staff back, the economic realities were such that had to curtail it. 
 
Now we believe that with the Human Rights Commission, I think 
they are to receive something like 15 per cent less than they did 
last year. I know that could be difficult for them. 
 
I met with the people today. We discussed how they might get 
through the year with that particular funding, and they indicated 
to me that they would do their level best to (a) continue to 
provide the necessary function of a  

human rights commission with the budget that is there. 
 
Now I think they, like everybody else, have had to get by in 
difficult times, and therefore I think they will shoulder their 
responsibility accordingly. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
made a number of choices in your budget. You chose to cut the 
Human Rights Commission by $200,000 and five staff persons. 
For whatever reason, you made that choice. But you also chose to 
maintain the political staffs of the Premier and cabinet ministers 
at 183 people, with a budget of some $10 million. Now I would 
like you to tell the people of Saskatchewan what that says about 
your priorities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It says the following. I’m sure that the 
staff of the Premier’s office and every other department has in 
fact been pared down; with a smaller cabinet, in fact, we have 
fewer people. 
 
The members opposite have a set amount of funding that they get 
through the Legislative Assembly. I don’t see them complaining 
that they didn’t have to have a cut taken to them. And I don’t 
think that they would ever deny that the staff hired by the NDP is 
not political staff in nature. 
 
And I think everybody in government took an exercise as we 
went through this process, Mr. Speaker, as we went through the 
process of this budget. We made some difficult choices, and some 
of those choices obviously were difficult. 
 
The reality is that you have to (a) have increased revenues. In a 
time of difficult agriculture problems, it’s tough to have revenues 
increased. So the members opposite want few taxes, Mr. Speaker, 
on the one hand; they want a lower deficit on the other hand, Mr. 
Speaker; and they don’t want to make any cuts in the third place. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, even in tough times other provinces have managed to 
protect the rights of their citizens because that has been a priority 
for them. Alberta’s Human Rights Commission has a staff of 23, 
and even though the Alberta government has been cutting 
spending by some 20 per cent in its recent budget, the Human 
Rights Commission staff hasn’t been changed. 
 
Manitoba’s Human Rights Commission has a staff of 23. We 
only have 15 here, and we’re in the middle of those two 
provinces. This is comparable. Why is it that these and other 
provinces put a higher priority on the protection of their citizens’ 
human rights than Saskatchewan does? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we need 
to take a back seat to Manitoba or Alberta or British Columbia, 
and in fact we don’t, in the way we operate government, whether 
it’s in the court system or whether it’s in the Human Rights 
Commission. 
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1117 
 

As I indicated to the Human Rights Commission today — I have 
indicated to them on previous occasions. Everybody has to 
tighten their belt a bit. In the case of the Human Rights 
Commission, for example, they have a group of employees who 
work on a 32-hour work week. Now I . . . And it’s not for me to 
tell them how to run their operation. But it would seem to me that 
somebody that have staff that have a union contract with a 
32-hour work week . . . Is that really a proper work week, or 
could they maybe work a little longer. I’d throw that out to them. 
It’s not for me to tell them how to do it. It’s for them to determine 
their own way, and maybe that’s appropriate that they should 
only work 32 hours. I don’t know. Those type of questions. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I am convinced that the Human Rights 
Commission will in fact, with the budget that they have to live 
with, which is less than 15 per cent from last year, Mr. Speaker, 
that I am sure that they will be able to meet their obligation to 
protect the rights, Mr. Speaker. And I have all the confidence in 
the world that Mr. Kruzeniski and the people involved in the 
Human Rights Commission will, in fact, do their job and we will 
carry on . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 
have mentioned before that when the Speaker is on his feet, I 
would ask hon. members to respect that, and I think it is not in 
keeping with the dignity and decorum of this House if hon. 
members continue to talk after the Speaker is on his feet. And 
here today we witnessed a debate going on from both sides of the 
House after I was on my feet, for a considerable length of time 
after I was standing. I ask your co-operation in this. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 
Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Corporation Capital Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Tobacco Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Education and Health Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Farm Security Act 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — With me is Doug Moen and Sam 
McCullough from the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m a bit 
disappointed to see that the Bill directed to farm security is not 
being handled by the Minister of Agriculture, and I’m sure that he 
has many, many duties to do, and is in fact right now, at a very 
important meeting; and the problem that I find in this is that he’s 
had ample time to bring this before the House when he was here, 
but I find it odd that he chose not to be here when the Bill was 
being brought to the floor. I find it odd that an issue as important 
as farm security doesn’t seem to be that high in the priority of the 
Minister of Agriculture. And in fact, the statute has run out as of 
July 1, so there was time before to direct his attention to this. So I 
kind of feel that possibly there’s a reason for him not being here, 
and that reason, I suggest, is the fact that he’s not that concerned 
about the security of farmers in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Regardless of what anyone says, Mr. Chairman, 
the farm crisis continues to go on and continues to worsen. We’re 
losing farmers at an alarming rate. And unfortunately all 
indications say that this trend is going to continue. 
 
We have this situation. In the world today we have Ronald 
Reagan in the United States, we have Thatcher in Britain, right 
wing governments, right wing powers in Germany and France 
and Argentina and Canada, all talking about agriculture and what 
they’re going to be doing for agriculture. And I find it very odd 
that this right wing faction cannot bring themselves to, although 
they preach the importance, to get together for the mutual benefit 
of their farmers. 
 
And I see Brian Mulroney and our Ministers of Agriculture who 
should be in there talking about agriculture and trying to get some 
common consensus. After all, they’re the right wing buddies of 
all these other people. The dilemma continues, continues to 
worsen. 
 
The front is one of right wing co-operation, but the facts show 
continuing subsidy wars, to the dismay of Saskatchewan and 
North American farmers and, I might add, to the glee of the 
multinational grain traders. 
 
One would think that this elite group would be able to tie their 
principles around a theme of mutual concern and remedy the 
situation. Actually the reverse is true. You hear not one mention 
of an international grains agreement — not one mention. With all 
these buddies around the table, Canada and Saskatchewan are 
losing because they don’t have the people . . . we don’t have the 
right people in place to hold the fort for Canada and 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thousands of Saskatchewan farmers are losing sleep over  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1118 
 

where their next dollar is coming from. They’re making major 
farm decisions in light of uncertainty — tremendous uncertainty. 
I ask: when are the concerns of the public are going to be 
answered by this government. Unfortunately, I can’t see that they 
ever will be. 
 
Just look at this government’s formula for disaster at the time 
when we need security. No support for grain transportation; no 
support, or reduced support, for beef producers going to a 
national tripartite system; farmers receiving less dollars; reduced 
support for hog producers by moving to a tripartite system with 
little or no input from the farmers of this province; no support for 
land transfers; and a completely reckless approach to the injection 
of money into agriculture, using no sense of a long term planning 
or security of programs — just reckless, throwing money at the 
situation without dealing with the real problem. A political 
solution, not the solution that we need. 
 
We see a government pushing a free trade deal with the United 
States that will completely eviscerate our system of orderly 
marketing. Some concern, I say, Mr. Chairman — some concern. 
I think the real concern of this government is for power and 
personal prosperity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, this Bill is needed now as much 
as it was in 1944 because we have a number of similarities 
between then and now. Farmers put into the position of hopeless 
surrender; lives and livelihoods obliterated overnight from the 
lack of real concern for the social fabric of this province. We see 
a mood where monetary gain and power supersedes people, Mr. 
Chairman, and that is very, very wrong. In my books, people, 
farm families, and the dignity of rural people come fist, long 
before manipulation of assets and commodities. 
 
Mr. Chairman, farmers need the security and protection from all 
these unnatural forces that they are subjected to today. Farmers 
need to know that they will have a place to live and a role to play 
in Saskatchewan. Farm security is the foundation on which lies 
our whole rural infrastructure. And, Mr. Chairman, this 
legislature has to review on an ongoing basis the security given to 
maintain that way of life. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister if he knows, 
or if his officials know, how many farmers made use of the 
provisions and protections offered by The Farm Security Act in, 
let’s say, 1986, or for some similar period of time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — While they’re getting that information, I 
could perhaps respond to the couple of points made by the hon. 
member. First of all, the member raises: why is the Minister of 
Justice dealing with this in Committee of the Whole and not the 
Premier, Minister of Agriculture. The simple answer to that is 
that this particular Bill, as a number of other Bills, falls within the 
jurisdiction and the purview of the Department of Justice and the 
Minister of Justice. And therefore, when you’re responsible for a 
particular Bill, then that’s usually the minister that carries it 
before the House. That’s point  

number one. 
 
Point number two, the Premier who is also the Minister of 
Agriculture, is today meeting with his colleagues from across the 
country, including the federal Minister of Agriculture, at a 
national agriculture meeting dealing with some of the very 
questions that the hon. member raised. 
 
Now you talk about a faction of right wing organizations. Well I 
can assure the hon. member that the involvement by our province, 
and certainly by the national government, in a variety of 
international dimensions to try to come to grips with the whole 
question of the farm problem that is now rampant throughout the 
world, one of the groups is the group called the Fair Traders or 
the Cairns’ Group. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity as Minister of Trade to attend both 
meetings of the Cairns’ Group. Now the Canadians are the lead 
spokesmen of that Cairns’ Group. And let me set out the 
left-wing group that are involved in this Cairns’ Group: (1) 
government of Bob Hawkes of Australia, socialists; Government 
of New Zealand, which is a socialist government; Government of 
Canada that’s not a socialist government, and we’re very happy 
about that; the Government of Hungary — I don’t think you’d 
class them as right-wingers, or at least the last read I had as 
Hungary was not a right-wing state; the government of the 
Philippines of Corazon Aquino — I don’t think many people 
would class Corazon Aquino as the ultra right wing. 
 
Now there’s clearly the countries of Thailand. You might say 
Thailand is a right wing country or Malaysia is a right wing 
country. There are three countries of Latin America. And you can 
allocate what tag you want on those of Argentina, Brazil, and 
Chile. And the people were not chosen as to whether they were 
left or right. The people of that particular group, that Cairns’ 
Group, were chosen as representing both the East and the West 
and the South and the North, and the developed countries and the 
developing countries, or the underdeveloped countries. And that’s 
how that group was brought together, and I think to the credit 
were brought together by the governments of both Australia and 
of Canada. 
 
Now the member makes light that we have done nothing with 
regards to the international problem. Well for the first time ever 
in history, agriculture is on the agenda — agriculture in dealing in 
grains — is on the agenda of GATT (General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade). It was put on GATT at the Uruguay round last 
fall. 
 
And today the two significant issues being dealt with in Geneva 
by GATT are (1) trade and agriculture in grains, and (2) the trade 
in services. Those are the two key areas that are being dealt with. 
Most recently, at the Venice summit, you saw some movement to 
try to come to grips with that problem of the large, major trading 
countries, being United States, B.C., and Japan. 
 
You go back to the Canadian dimension of taking that particular 
agenda, first of all to the Tokyo summit last spring, or last 
summer, followed up by a variety of international meetings, 
including the fairly significant  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1119 
 

breakthrough by most people of the most recent OECD 
(Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) 
meeting where the OECD countries agreed to move off of the 
support programs, that tended to encourage production, and move 
into support programs that tended to stabilize the farmer — 
something that our Premier’s been talking about for some time, 
and certainly the Government of Canada’s been talking about for 
some time, and certainly the Government of Canada’s been 
talking about for some time, and certainly the focus and purpose 
of the Cairns’ Group have been talking about for some times. So I 
think that is progress. 
 
Now in an event of agriculture, clearly it’s easy for somebody to 
stand up in your place and simply say you’re doing this, this, this, 
and this wrong, and you offer not so much as any idea how you 
deal with the international question. 
 
Now to get to the specific question you asked about how many 
. . . I’m advised that, in response to your last question, is that all 
farmers in Saskatchewan have the benefit of this particular 
legislation. So how many have relied on this particular 
legislation, I suppose one could argue that virtually every farmer 
that is out there farming in some way, directly or indirectly, relies 
on this particular piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Actually my question, Mr. Minister, was how 
many made use of this legislation, this protection offered by 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well it would be perhaps somewhat 
difficult for me to say how many took, or made use of it, in the 
sense that, in a way that they perhaps were negotiating with their 
particular financial institution; or what do you mean specifically 
as how many took advantage of it? 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I’m surprised, Mr. Minister, that in these times 
of financial crisis that you wouldn’t be monitoring that situation 
and finding out exactly what this Bill is doing for how many 
farmers. If this Bill isn’t . . . If nobody uses the provisions of this 
Bill, then maybe the Bill isn’t any good. 
 
So I would just like to say that, I would just want to know — I 
mean, surely you’re on top of the situation — how many farmers 
used the provisions of the Act — and there are a number of them 
— to get protection from foreclosure, or their home quarter . . . 
losing their home quarter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think the hon. member indicated in 
his earlier statements that (a) you supported this. I think I 
indicated on introduction and second reading of this particular 
piece of legislation, as the legislation has been in place for some 
40, almost 40-odd years now — better than 40 years. I think it 
was introduced in 1944, there was, I think, a three-year sunset 
clause to it, and that has been “sunsetted” every three years since 
1944. It runs its course out again, I think, back at July 1 of this 
year, 1987. and what we were proposing to do with this particular 
legislation is extend it on indefinitely so  

that we wouldn’t have to simply come back into this particular 
legislature. 
 
Now does this particular Act, and is this particular Act the 
backbone of any prevention of foreclosures? Probably the answer 
is: probably not as much it was back in 1944. 
 
The second part of this particular legislation deals with . . . on 
seizure of crop you cannot seize beyond . . . you cannot seize 
more than one-third of the particular crop. Now how much of that 
is used in the new way by which foreclosures are done or that 
type of thing? I would guess probably not near as relevant as it 
was perhaps 20 years ago. 
 
With regard to the home quarter, the home quarter is not, as you 
know, under this particular legislation. It’s not that every home 
quarter is going to be prevented from being seized, if, as you 
understand how this particular legislation was. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, I’m a bit disappointed, and obviously the 
minister doesn’t know how many farmers used this Act to retain a 
decent crop share, or how many of them made use of the Act to 
protect them from foreclosures on homestead. And I would’ve 
liked to know if your department . . . I would like to think that the 
department’s a little more on top of things than that. 
 
But in any respect, I will go on to something you’d mentioned 
about the timing of the Act. It appears to me as though section 7 
of The Farm Security Act at present is not in force because you 
allowed the time to run out. I don’t know why you could not have 
stirred yourself into action before that happened. And I should 
add that it looks as if section 5 of the Bill will be retroactive to 
cover this present period. 
 
But I would like your assurance, Mr. Minister, that there will not 
be any gap or any period of time not covered by the Act because 
of the inability of your government to get a very short, one page 
Bill prepared. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I am advised by officials that while we 
would not want to delay this unduly into August of September or 
something like this, but that the retroactive nature of it, the fact 
that it has been retroactive for a couple of weeks, there should be 
no problem with it at all. 
 
If it was to drag on for some period of time, intervening court 
actions, there could be problems. But that’s why we’re trying to 
move this Bill forward sooner. I think when this particular act 
comes before the Assembly in the committee stage, it’s clearly a 
decision of the House Leader, and it is before the House as the 
first major Bill before the House going through detail by detail. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — You indicated that there should be no problem. I 
would like a little more assurance than that. Could you just state 
that there would be no problem with this Act being retroactive 
back to July 1? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member should know that you 
never usually get those kind of commitments out of an Attorney 
General and certainly out of the Justice department, or out of 
lawyers being involved in it one  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1120 
 

way or the other. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So then you’re saying that there’s a possibility 
that if someone had a problem in the period after the last Act 
terminated, that they would not have any protection by that Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No. If the hon. member is familiar with 
the way the process works, it’s not likely that one is into the 
pleadings and into the court process, etc., in a period of two 
weeks’ time. Usually it’s dragged out over a far longer period of 
time than that. 
 
I asked the question of the particular officials in the Department 
of Justice. They indicated to me that they saw no problem with 
the gap in there, as long as that gap did not start to range into a 
month, six weeks, eight weeks, something like that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well it’s not the process that I’m as worried 
about, as the farmers out there who may not have the protection 
that they need to continue their likelihood. So without a firm 
commitment, I guess there’s really not much I can do except ask 
the minister again, that if there’s any cases that do come forth, 
that create a problem, will you personally ensure that they will be 
looked after in a manner in which this Act lays out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I can only indicate to the hon. 
member what I’ve indicated before, that we would not see a 
problem develop. I suppose there’s . . . whenever you’re 
involving the courts, or the law, or lawyers, they get paid for 
trying to find exception. And I expect that we’re not going to see 
a problem. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, a couple of 
questions for the minister. It’s been, of course, a long time since 
this original legislation was passed in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I wonder if the minister could tell me if any of 
the references in the legislation to lender or mortgagee, if those 
references would apply, or could apply, hypothetically, to more 
modern lending agencies that have come along since the 
legislation was originally passed? I’m thinking specifically of 
government lending agencies such as the Saskatchewan 
Agriculture Credit Corporation. Would it be covered by this 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In the classic forum of the Department of 
Justice, they indicate that they believe that most of the type of 
documents that agricultural credit corporation, the one. 
specifically you referred to, would fall within this, although there 
is a grey area as to whether or not this in fact binds the Crown or 
does not bind the Crown. 
 
I don’t think that has been . . . apparently has not been tested, and 
there has been provincial financial institutions for some period of 
time that have not been tested in the courts and there is 
jurisprudence on it. certainly it would not, as I understand the 
law, bind the Farm Credit Corporation which would be a far 
larger institution because of the jurisdiction question between 
federal and provincial. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I thank you for that answer,  

and it’s that very problem that was the reason for my asking the 
question. 
 
Earlier this year, I’m sure you are aware, there was a court ruling 
in the province of Saskatchewan that specifically said that the 
Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan was not bound 
by he Saskatchewan Exemption Act. And that has presented a 
number of difficulties for farmers already in severe financial 
distress. 
 
I wonder if it would be possible, Mr. Minister, to: number one, 
clarify the point with respect to this legislation insofar as that is 
within the jurisdiction of the province of Saskatchewan; and 
secondly, could I ask you to venture an opinion as to whether the 
government might be coming forward with legislation to make it 
clear that the Saskatchewan Agricultural Credit Corporation is, in 
fact, bound by The Exemption Act and not escaping the 
reasonable rules of that legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well let me suffice it to say the following: 
that this particular legislation is being brought forward now 
because of the expiry date of June 30. The intent of the 
government is to look at this particular type of legislation and 
perhaps try to co-ordinate it all together, perhaps into more 
meaningful legislation. 
 
If you pick this and the various other pieces of legislation that 
would assist farmers to prevent foreclosures that become too 
routine and too easy, whether it’s the Land Contracts (Actions) 
Act, Limitation of Civil Rights Act, Farm Land Security Act, The 
Farm Security Act — there’s a whole host of them. It would be 
our hope to try to consolidate those where possible. But as you 
can appreciate, the job of consolidating all of those Acts becomes 
a rather long job and one that should not be taken lightly, so that 
you do not in fact end up creating yourselves more problems than 
you’ve sought to solve. 
 
So in answer to the hon. member’s question, I think it would be 
our intention to come forward with further agriculture legislation 
designed with a view to assist the farmer, and certainly the farmer 
being faced with financial pressures, at this point in time. This 
legislation could quite easily in the future be swallowed up by a 
more all-encompassing Bill. 
 
And the reason we’re doing this today is to catch that particular 
group that would fall under this legislation so they don’t get into 
the situation the hon. member from Humboldt referred to, and 
that is a gap measure in there prior to that legislation being 
brought forward. 
 
My personal view is that I think that the legislation that has 
developed in this province, perhaps since the ‘30s, very often 
what governments do is we simply bring in another particular 
legislation. We make a lot of changes to it, and sometimes don’t 
sit back and rethink it . . .and rethink the situation for the 
mid-1980s as opposed to what the situation was, maybe in the 
early ‘70s, when farms were on some difficult times, or back into 
the various cycles through history. 
 
So I think that there probably needs to be, and we are at this point 
in time looking very, very seriously at that within our department, 
within the Department of  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1121 
 

Agriculture, as to what that might be. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Just one final question, Mr. Chairman, on that 
point. I’m pleased to hear that that broader review may be taking 
place. And it does appear that as these successive pieces of 
legislation have flowed through the legislature over the last 
number of years, that one of the holes that has developed has in 
fact been the case where a farmer is dealing with a government 
lending agency, whether that be federal or provincial, and some 
of the normal protections that might apply if he were dealing with 
a private sector lending institution are not available because he is 
dealing with a government agency or one kind or another, as we 
found out this spring, most graphically, in the case of the 
Agriculture Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan vis-a-vis The 
Exemptions Act. 
 
And I wonder if the minister could give us his assurance that as 
that broader review takes place, that he and his officials will have 
a particular eye out for that kind of omission that could end up 
treating some farmers in particularly distressful circumstances, in 
a rather unfair manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think that’s clearly something we’re 
looking at. And I think historically if one was to look at it, one 
was always to the view that the banks were — and the financial 
institutions, banks, credit unions, etc. — would take a hard line 
with people; that if it was a government department, whether it’s 
the ag credit corporation or farm credit corporation, whichever, 
was a benevolent lender. And perhaps, you know, and I would 
say in a few cases, but there’s probably cases where maybe the 
farmer looks at the so-called benevolent lender in a different light 
than he might in some other one. 
 
(1500) 
 
And as a result, I think that over a period of time, maybe rules 
have sort of developed up . . . whether rules or traditions have 
developed up to raise that exact point. And I think if we are to say 
aye to something like ag credit corporation or to farm credit even, 
if you are going to be in the business of lending money, then you 
are expected by your particular people you’re responsible to, 
whether it’s the legislature of Saskatchewan or Parliament of 
Canada, to do things in a proper and prudent and business-like 
way, then you should also follow the same rules that other 
people, and the same protections should be provided against you 
that the others would have. 
 
Now clearly that’s something that we are looking at it. I take your 
point very seriously. I think it’s a legitimate point to be raised, 
and it’s something that we will pursue. As to the farm credit 
corporation, as you can appreciate, there’s a jurisdictional 
problem there which makes it somewhat more difficult. 
 
The House amendment, if I could perhaps read it, it comes at 
clause 3 . . . section 3, sorry. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 

Clause 3 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There’s a proposed House amendment to 
section 3 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend clause 3(b) of the printed Bill by striking out “further”. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — No, Mr. Chairman, I was on my feet before . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, if bill 11 is passed with this section, The Farm 
Security Act will no longer be extended for a three-year period, 
but rather will be enforced indefinitely. 
 
As I understand it, Mr. Minister, one of the reasons the three-year 
renewal provision was in place was specifically to bring the Act 
before the legislators of the province regularly so they could 
review and see if any alterations were required. Do you not see 
any merit in the regular review of this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, I . . . I mean, we debated within our 
caucus with regards to whether it should be three years or 
whether it should be one year or whether it should be for an 
indefinite period of time. And as I indicated to the hon. member 
from Assiniboia, that’s what we’re attempting to do now is to try 
to consolidate many of these particular pieces of legislation found 
in a variety of Acts together. 
 
So what we felt that we would do is prolong this one so that you 
don’t end up having to keep one going at a date of December 31; 
another one is dated July 1; another one might be dated August 
31. So there’s a whole different series of these things. So I think 
what we will try to do is get it on to one path. 
 
I have no objection to having legislation that comes periodically 
before this Assembly for reassessment. Quite frankly, I would 
tend to subscribe to the idea of sunsetting legislation. This is 
designed only to fit it into the category to buy that time. 
 
I don’t think that anybody is going to . . . I think any new 
legislation is going to have a dimension of the homestead to it. 
All right. So from that point of view I think you’re going to see 
the type of stuff that you see in this particular Bill, in any 
subsequent Bill brought forward by this government or any other 
government across the country. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, as you know, from time to 
time federal legislation applying to the banks or federal 
government agencies that rate mortgages will change, interest 
rates change; lending institutions will change their policies or 
practices. And of course commodity prices fluctuate and they go 
into extended trends, and that drastically alters the circumstances. 
 
And I would just wish and hope that this is an important enough 
issue to have it come back time after . . . every three years or as it 
has been, and for the purpose solely of ensuring that the Act is 
doing what it set out to do. And I would take it then that that 
process will be encompassed by whatever legislation comes in, 
that there’ll be a periodical review so that this whole body can 
oversee it  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1122 
 

and ensure that the Act is working properly, and that that would 
not be a waste of time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m not going to prejudge now the way 
the legislation will go, whether it will come back every year or 
two years or three years or how it will be. I can simply say this, is 
that I have been in this legislature now nine years, and I can 
assure you that if you are a member of the legislature in a 
province like Saskatchewan, you’re going to deal with agriculture 
questions on a yearly basis. 
 
And if it’s this year’s and the last few years has been the farm 
debt question or the low commodity prices question, then clearly 
that’s what it’s going to be. Another year it might have been high 
interest rates, and that was the question that we faced. 
 
So while the issues in agriculture constantly change, usually in 
this legislature there’s been a . . . .there perhaps has been a 
marked absence by not seeing any questions in this session on 
agriculture. But as a general course, agriculture tends to have a 
fair degree of presence in the legislature of this particular 
province. 
 
So I think that you’re always going to see farm programs being 
reviewed in this legislature. It has for nine years, as I indicated. 
So whether it will be three years in the new legislation, I would 
not wish to be tied down to that. But certainly to review 
legislation of agriculture, I think it almost goes without saying 
that it should be. 
 
Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
can you or the officials of your department indicate just how 
common it is for a mortgage on farm land to include an 
exemption which would have the effect of rendering section 7 of 
the Act useless? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Perhaps the hon. member could clarify 
this. Section 4 that we’re on . . . dealing with. Section 7(11) is 
simply the date of June 30, or July 1, 1987, that the Bill ran out. 
That’s what that particular section involves. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, well thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that 
the department should be concerned about the way there’s routine 
exemptions made under section 7, the whole section. And I 
would like to think that there’s going to be . . .there should be 
some provision to have that exemption process curtailed as a 
good many farmers are being hurt by it. And therefore, Mr. 
Chairman, I’m going to move, seconded by the member from 
Regina North East, an amendment: 
 

That section 4 of the printed Bill be deleted, and the following 
be substituted: 
 
Subsection 7(9) is repealed. 
 
Subsection 7(11) is repealed, and the following substituted: 

That every agreement or bargain — verbal or written, 
expressed or implied — that the provisions of this section do 
not apply, or that any right provided by this section does not 
apply, or which in any way limits, modifies, abrogates or, in 
effect limits, modifies, or abrogates, any such right is void. 

 
An Hon. Member: — Could the hon. member explain what his 
amendment is about? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Explain it, sure, certainly. 
 
This amendment would repeal section 7(9), and repeal section 
7(11), and substitute the statement that I read. Okay/ Which 
basically says that nothing can be signed away by the farmer — 
signed away, written or verbally — that would exempt that 
section of the Act from doing the job that it was intended to do, 
and that is to maintain the home quarter for the farmer to live on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Just so I get it straight. What you’re 
saying is that no foreclosure could take place on any home 
quarter. Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — That’s right, Mr. Minister. And that is a very 
important aspect on these times that we’re having that we have 
some security on that home quarter. As I said before, these things 
change from time to time, but right now that security is very, very 
important. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would raise and caution this particular 
point to the hon. member, with his amendment, is that the second 
largest financial institution in Saskatchewan farm debt is the 
credit union movement. Is the hon. member saying that any 
legislation . . . this particular legislation would prevent any action 
on any home quarter, as that security . . . in other words, would it 
take away the entire security of the home quarter? Is that what the 
hon. member is saying? 
 
I would have a little difficulty with that. I think that it’s too much 
of a blanket statement. I think that legitimately we can look at a 
situation where you say the home quarter — and the home 
quarter back in 1944 maybe involved the farm buildings and the 
home quarter — and that was a legitimate concern. Today the 
home quarter might be, in one particular farmer’s case, that lives 
in town, for example, maybe he has a few buildings in town or on 
the farm. If you have intensive farming operations, your entire 
operation could be on a home quarter, which would mean that 
could not foreclose upon that particular property at all, and you 
would effectively destroy the security of those particular loans. 
 
So I think that you should think through this particular 
amendment before you advocate it totally. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I have given it considerable 
thought. What’s happening now is that we’re running into a 
situation where we’re losing, daily, number of farmers because 
they don’t have security of the home quarter. We can sit idly by 
and see that go on, and if we ever turn around this crisis that 
we’re in, we can say, you know, turn it back. Because I know that 
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1123 
 

what you’re saying is that it may dry up credit, and the farmers 
don’t have the right to have that land as security. 
 
But the point is, right now the way we’re going, we’re losing 
farmers in droves. And so right now we need that security of 
home quarter just to maintain that family unit on that home 
quarter. 
 
And I move this amendment, because I believe it is simply not 
good enough for us to renew this statute if portions of it are no 
longer doing the job that they were originally intended to do. 
 
When the CCF government passed The Farm Security Act in 
1944, one of the most important sections of the Act was one 
which denied the company holding the montage the right to 
foreclose on a homestead. A homestead was defined as the 
quarter where the residents and buildings were located. 
 
The Act was immediately very popular with farmers who had 
come through some pretty tough times, tough years, in the decade 
and a half prior to 1944. In many cases, all the significant assets 
of a farmer were pledged as collateral for the borrowing he had to 
do in the previous years, Mr. Chairman, there were more than a 
few examples of farm families being put off the land with just the 
belongings they could carry, because their mortgage payments 
were in arrears and the bank foreclosed. 
 
Prior to the The Farm Security Act, foreclosure could often, and 
did, include a farm family’s home, leaving them out on the road. 
The Farm Security Act put an end to that. 
 
(1515) 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, in the years between 1944 and today, the 
banks and mortgage companies have had their lawyers work out 
an end run to The Farm Security Act. The lenders simply require 
an exemption to be signed, and once that is done, the protection 
guaranteed to farmers under section 7 of the Act no longer apply 
to the mortgage. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you may not regard this as a significant 
problem, but I do. Saskatchewan farmers pay more than $452 
million annually in interest on debt of more than $5.2 billion. The 
level of interest payments amounts to about 15 per cent of farm 
expenses, by far the highest in Canada. More than 43,000 farmers 
have debt to be paid off, and many of them have had land pledged 
as security of it, and is not paid off. 
 
With commodity prices being what they are, a good many 
farmers are in danger of losing their land. They are not getting the 
help and protection they need from the PC government in Ottawa 
and Regina, and let me give you a brief example. 
 
The Farm Land Security Act has operated since January, 1985, 
and as of the end of June 1987 has handled 1,141 cases where the 
lenders wanted to foreclose on a family farm. 
 
In 298 of those cases, the lender and farm family 

negotiated some arrangement that put off, at least for the time 
being, the foreclosure. Well over 460 cases are not yet completed, 
which means some of them have dragged on for many months. 
 
Of those, the farm land security board has managed to complete 
. . . the board wrote a report to the courts favourable to the farmer 
in 76 cases — only 76 cases — and in 1990 cases wrote a report 
favourable to the lender. eleven hundred and forty-one 
foreclosures, Mr. Minister. And your Farm Land Security Act 
manages . . . that recommended . . . the recommend that the farm 
family be protected on their land in only 76 cases, a small fraction 
of the number of people who are in trouble. That’s a very poor 
performance. 
 
And the counselling and assistance for farmers program is not 
much better. In the fiscal year ‘86-87, there were 1,095 applicants 
for farmers for loan guarantees that would keep them on the land. 
In the case of 345 of those farm families, no guarantee was 
forthcoming. In the remaining cases where a government 
guarantee was arranged, because it is not full 100 per cent dollar 
for dollar guarantee, the lenders are only offering to make loans 
on a fraction of the counselling and assistance program 
guarantees. 
 
The federal farm debt review board is of little use to debt-ridden 
farmers. A foreclosure can be stalled for only 120 days under the 
federal Act, and no more. And the 120-day stay can only be used 
once every two years. 
 
So clearly, Mr. Minister, we need some additional protection for 
farmers threatened with foreclosure. I call on all members of this 
Assembly who hold the interests of farmers above those of the 
banks to support this amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me respond to the hon. member with 
regard to the exclusion of this particular section. Since 1982 to 
the present, there has been 14 applications under section 7 for 
exclusion of a mortgage at the point of commencement of 
foreclosure actions. Fourteen. Those 14 applications are included 
in the total applications. Of the 14 applications at the foreclosure 
stage, there was one application in 1982; in 1984 there were four 
such applications, with the nine remaining applications received 
from 1985 to the present. 
 
Of the 14 applications, eight cases are still undecided and in the 
midst of negotiations among the lenders, the farmer, and the 
provincial mediation board. Two cases have been settled between 
the farmer and the lender with the board’s assistance, one which 
the application from 1982 preserved for the farmer the full 
homestead, in one case, and the residence and the farm yard in 
the other case. Four applications have been granted, two of which 
have been subject to conditions preserving the farmer’s residence, 
and two with the farmer agreeing to the exclusion order during 
the negotiations with the lender. 
 
So, I think what the hon. member, while he might be talking 
about some other attack that he might take, in this particular Act 
since 1982 has involved 14 cases. So I  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1124 
 

don’t think it’s the area that the particular individual is looking at 
for the protection that he talks about. 
 
Amendment not agreed to, on division. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. I’d ask the member for 
Regina Centre to be quiet when the chairman is reading the Bill. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Farm Security Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title, with the amendments. 
With leave as well. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today I want to 
address an issue of importance to my constituency and, indeed, to 
all of Regina. That is the area of the dump, the present waste 
disposal area that Regina is using. 
 
And my questions are largely dealing with the relationship 
between the dump and the aquifer. As the minister is no doubt 
aware, nearly 40 per cent of Regina’s drinking water supply 
comes from the aquifer, part of which is underneath the present 
sanitary land fill site. And indeed there are . . . I think it goes 
beyond simply reports of leaching of chemicals. I think it’s 
already been an established fact that these chemicals are indeed 
leaching into the aquifer. The question then become: how quickly 
and what is going to be done to stop the leaching of chemicals, 
and what can be done to guarantee the future of over 40 per cent 
of Regina’s water system. 
 
So without any further preliminary or preamble, I’d like to 
address the question to the Minister of Environment, and it is: 
what is your department’s involvement with water testing, and 
particularly in regards to the chemical plume that is being emitted 
from the present dump? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I could advise the hon. member that the city 
of Regina is doing a fairly major study on the land fill and the 
effects that that land fill will have on the  

aquifer. 
 
Our department is working with them, not in doing the study but 
in monitoring what the study is showing. So the study that’s 
ongoing will be basically done by the city. We’ll have access, I 
believe, to all of the results that the study will produce. But as a 
department we haven’t been directly doing a study at this time. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Trew: — How long has the testing been going on, Mr. 
Minister? I understand that there is some test wells there where 
you drilled some wells and take samples of water. I’d like to 
know how many wells there are and how long this testing has 
been going on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the city of Regina has done 
some monitoring of the site for many years. The current study has 
been about a six-month period, the exact number of wells I 
couldn’t give you. Their study has a guide-line but our staff really 
are not aware of the exact figure. They likely have it at the office, 
but haven’t got it at the top of their mind at this point. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I was not given a great deal of information, Mr. 
Minister. How many years has the city been studying it? And I’m 
assuming t hat the city is reporting to your department all along, 
as the Department of Environment. And approximately how 
many wells — I won’t hang you on whether it’s 10 or 11 or 12 or 
20 or 21 or 22 — but are we talking, you know, 3 wells, 6 wells, 
a dozen? So my question is, then, how long have the studies been 
going on? And approximately how many wells? 
 
And what’s . . . I’ll throw in a third question in the interest of 
speeding it up. And that is: how often is a water sample taken 
from a well and tested? Is it once a month, once every week, that 
sort of thing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We just don’t have the figures here for the 
number of wells. We could find it out and bring the answer in for 
the member. But we don’t have it at this point. 
 
This particular study has been approximately six months in 
duration. But prior studies go back many years. They list in here 
one study that goes back to 1981 — but there were studies even 
long before that, pretty well as long as the land fill has been in 
existence. 
 
Mr. Trew: — In regards to the information, can I have that this 
evening or tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We can try to get it for this evening. You 
know, there’s not very many minutes in between five and seven 
when you have something to eat. But we’ll do our best to bring it 
back. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, we’ve talked a little bit 
about the studies dating back, you say, to 1981 and, you suspect, 
even further back. Can you tell me how the studies are tied 
together? Or are they all free-standing studies — that somebody 
comes and looks at our water quality and the water problems 
from the dump for six months and then that study disappears? Or 
do you take  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1125 
 

the results from one study and tie them in and build a case for 
building the problem and, indeed, hopefully building towards a 
solution to the problem at the dump? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that they would be tying the studies 
together. Like, they use the information that’s been gathered in 
the past; they try and apply that and go on to do further studies 
and add any new information to the study so that past experience 
is not wasted, and yet new studies are needed because conditions 
do change. In a land fill area in particular, you will have changes 
as the area expands and as different waste products end up in a 
land fill site. So they add it all together and try and come up with 
today’s scenario of what can and what cannot happen at a land fill 
site. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what 
chemicals are leaching into the aquifer from the dump? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that at this point there is no 
indication that anything is actually arrived at the aquifer. There is 
a plume that they’re concerned about, and they are studying that, 
but I don’t believe that it has gone to the point of contaminating 
the aquifer at this point — not in any information we are able to 
gather. That plume is deeper than what normal leaching has been, 
but I don’t believe it has reached the aquifer yet. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Which chemicals are in the plume, and how deep 
and how extended is that plume? But specifically, which are the 
chemicals that you are finding in the present plume that is 
expanding, every hour and every day, from the Regina Dump? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Since this study is being done by the city, 
it’s difficult for us to give you the information you are asking for. 
It might be better if you asked the city. I am advised that the one 
plume is probably not too far from the upper aquifer, but when 
it’s actually in it or not, we don’t know. 
 
One of the chemicals is chloride. They said it was chlorine rather, 
or chlorides. It’s only one of many, like in a land fill area there 
are many things dumped. It’s very hard to isolate and say it was 
any one given chemical. 
 
Mr. Trew: — So it’s safe. What I’m hearing you saying, Mr. 
Minister, is that whatever gets dumped in the Regina dump, it’s 
reasonable to assume that ultimately some of that is going to be 
included in the chemical plume and is going to be leaching? 
 
I’m glad that we’ve got that agreement. I wish that the plume was 
not there; indeed, I wish that the dump had been at a more 
environmentally safe site, as I’m sure you wish the same and so 
does the city. But we have an established problem. Can you tell 
me how quickly the plume is spreading, either in a year-to-year or 
month-to-month basis? How great an area does that chemical 
plume cover now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe that we’ll have to wait until the 
study is far enough along to have that kind of information. It’s 
being studied, but to this point we haven’t been able to arrive at 
any given area that was  

covered by the plume. The plume would start from the top and 
taper down to a narrower point at the bottom. But just how much, 
we’re not sure. 
 
Mr. Trew: — So we’ve had studies going on since at least 1981 
and likely before that. And we have no idea of how large an area 
this plume covers and extends out from the dump site itself? Is 
that what you’re telling me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well the plume that you refer to has only 
recently been identified. That’s the concern that caused the city of 
Regina to move into the study that they’re now doing. Prior to 
that time, I don’t believe there was a plume, so it just fairly new 
on the horizon. It was spotted by a consultant, and they’re now 
doing a fairly major study to come up with an area and the 
dangers that the plume is going to have for the aquifer. That 
would be for the A zone, not the . . . it won’t go down through to 
the second one. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m told, and I have read, that 
there is now a great deal of doubt as to whether the two layers of 
aquifer are indeed separate. In fact, there is increasing evidence 
that they are not as well separated as previously thought. So, 
indeed that once the top aquifer becomes contaminated, it’s only 
a matter of time until it finds its way into the second aquifer. Of 
course the volumes of contaminants are going to greatly affect 
this. 
 
But I’d suggest that after six years of study, it’s time we had a 
handle on it, and it’s time we knew just how bad the problem is 
and how we’re going to cope with it. My question is: have you 
contemplated stopping this, you know, containing this chemical 
plume? Have you contemplated that in any way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member indicates that this has been a 
problem for six years. that’s not the case. I indicated to you that 
the problem was identified, and that’s six months ago. And that’s 
when the current study was undertaken. 
 
So as soon as the city was aware of the plume, then they started to 
address it. And until the study is well advanced, it would be very 
difficult to put in place a method of dealing with it. You have to 
know what the soil is made up of in the area where the plume is 
occurring, what depth the plume is reaching, what chemicals 
you’re dealing with — then we’ll start to assess and recommend 
something that will have to be undertaken. But we couldn’t do 
that at this time. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, when did you find out that there was 
indeed a chemical plume there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We had indications of it from the city about 
the time that the study was beginning; that was the reason that the 
study was begun. So, probably like you and many others, our 
department received considerable new information at the time of 
the public meeting that was held about, what, five, six weeks 
back. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Have you gotten around to considering the 
potential impact on the city’s water supply of this  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1126 
 

chemical plume? And do you have a contingency plan for our 
water supply if indeed this . . . If it’s just been six months that this 
chemical plume has developed, I would suggest to you, sir, it is 
moving very, very fast, very rapidly. I think it’s a bit of a 
misnomer for you and I to argue that the plume has only been 
there six months; it may have only been confirmed six months 
ago, but indeed the plume has been there much longer than that. 
 
My question, though, still relates to the city water supply. Have 
you a contingency plan if 40 per cent of our water gets polluted 
very quickly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s primarily a city responsibility. It’s a city 
dump, and a city responsibility. So a contingency plan to find 
available water for the city of Regina would not be fore my 
department to do, but rather for the city. 
 
The study that was begun six months ago was what identified that 
there was a plume. Prior to that the plume may have been there; 
we don’t know. You know there are many things that happen 
underground that you don’t see, and especially in a land fill area. 
 
So the study is new. The study is addressing the concern of that 
plume, and as soon as we’re far enough along with that study, or 
the city is far enough along that we con get enough detailed 
information to make some decisions, we’ll start to make those 
decisions. But to start to try and make the decisions of how to 
remedy it at this time would be premature. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Some additional questions, Mr. Chairman, to 
the minister with respect to the water situation in Regina, I’d like 
to put to him this afternoon: (a) have your department officials or 
have you yourself kept up with the land fill site issue to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would say, yes, my department have been 
keeping up with it and the information that’s available; yes, I’ve 
been keeping up to it. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Were you or your officials at the public 
meeting on June 11 which discussed the new options for site 
selection for the land fill site as well as discussing some of the 
issues that were raised with respect to the plume of leachet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — From the department we had a group of our 
people at the meeting. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — In that case, Mr. Minister, you must know that 
as a result of that meeting the consultants put forward, the 
officials there, the contention that both the Regina aquifer and the 
Condie aquifer are not, in effect, two separate aquifers protected 
by barriers. But, in fact, the contention they put forward is that 
they are connected directly, and that the contamination of one 
aquifer will seriously lead to the contamination of the other in 
fairly short order. 
 
With that information now put forward, if you weren’t aware of 
it, can you tell this Assembly specifically what your department 
plans to do with regard to a contingency plan if this system 
polluted? 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe there is a suspicion that the two 
aquifers are very closely tied and may indeed be one, but I don’t 
believe that that has been confirmed by the consultant. It’s a 
suspicion he has, but I don’t think he’s confirmed it. 
 
And I believe the position is the same as I gave the hon. member 
behind you, the member for Regina North, that for us to move 
now to put in place a contingency plan to deal with that or to 
provide other water sources would be wrong. You should at least 
know what the problem is before you try and put in methods of 
dealing with it. If the city sees it seriously, and that there is need 
for a different source of water, that is the city’s responsibility, not 
the Department of Environment. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — You indicated to the member from Regina 
North earlier that you are not aware of the plume of leachet 
reaching the water supply to date. Do your officials know — do 
they have any projection as to when this may happen — that the 
leachet would reach the first water supply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s still part of the ongoing study. No, the 
decision of how long that may take to occur has not been made at 
this point. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The officials do not have any projected guess 
— doesn’t have to be calculated in a scientific fashion — but 
would they not know whether it would reach this water source 
within a week, a month, five years, 10 years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, they advised me they don’t have that 
information as yet. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — When will they have the information, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s part of what the study is supposed to 
give us, is the information that would indicate the speed at which 
that plume is progressing towards the aquifer. We don’t have the 
exact depth of the plume or the length of time that the plume will 
take to continue on down till it reaches the aquifer. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — When is the study supposed to be completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, as you know, this study is done 
entirely by the city. The information that we get would be very 
similar to what you would get from the city. The indications are 
that there would be at least an additional six months to complete 
the work, and then possibly two to three months to write the 
report following that, so we’d be looking at nine months, 
probably, or a little more, before the study would be available. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Would your officials provide some assurance, 
or some assurance to this House, whether the safety of those 
wells will be there for the next nine months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think it would be very difficult for the 
department to give any assurances. But based on what the city is 
telling us, it appears that there’s no immediate 
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1127 
 

problem. The city is not indicating, at this time even, that they 
intend to move to a new location for the landfill, which again 
must indicate that they’re not greatly concerned. They are 
somewhat concerned, but not greatly concerned, about the plume 
that has been located at this time. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Will the minister give us his assurance that the 
Department of Environment officials will work in co-operation 
with the city of Regina with respect to a contingency plan if the 
water supply is irrevocably polluted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My department has been working with the 
city in a consultative process back and forth since the time that 
this first study began. If there were a need for a contingency plan 
for water supply, then my department would likely work to some 
extent to assure that any new water supply would be suitable for 
human consumption. 
 
But it’s more liable to be the water corporation that would work 
with them to make it available. So it wouldn’t be the Department 
of Environment as much as water. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — It’s becoming better and better known 
throughout the city of Regina and Saskatoon and other urban 
areas that a caucus meeting that was held post-October 20 
election of ‘86, of your caucus, concluded a strategy which would 
punish urban voters for having voted NDP in the last election. 
 
What has happened, we have seen in our budget debates and so 
on, with the retraction of budget commitments, retraction of 
election promises to urban areas that elected NDP MLAs, and we 
have seen retractions in the tune of tens of millions of dollars of 
commitment. 
 
With respect to the water supply, Mr. Minister, this city we’re 
sitting on right now is the capital city of our province. It is one of 
the ten provincial capitals in the entire country. In a capital city, a 
provincial government, by definition, expends a few extra dollars 
to provide things like funding for transportation, funding for 
parks, and funding for other amenities which will attract tourists, 
which will attract people to the capital from outside the province 
and from within, and also to provide funding for basic services 
that can be enhanced to the point where Saskatchewan residents 
can be proud of the capital city. 
 
If this water supply is polluted, that we’re talking about — the 
well supply under the city land fill site — will you work as a 
minister to ensure that the capital city of our province receives 
some funding for an alternate water supply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The Department of Environment does not 
fund most things. The member started off by making some fairly 
wild statements in this respect. He said them quietly, but he was 
certainly a long way off base. 
 
Now far be it from me to say that because they have NDP MLAs 
that we need to punish the cities. I think that’s enough 
punishment in itself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’ll be working very closely with the city 
to see that the city is looked after and that the residents of this city 
are looked after. And, you know, I have a home here in this city. 
Many of our members do. I thick we’re all concerned that the 
City of Regina and its residents have good water, and we’ll 
continue to look at and deal with that subject as the question 
becomes more serious on the horizon in the future. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Minister, as you indicated that we were 
off-base with respect to what we we’re trying to do in terms of 
speak up for the people who we represent. You intimated that we 
were off-base because we, as MLAs from Regina and other urban 
areas, are speaking out for constituents that we all represent 
collectively. 
 
I’d just like to tell you that the city of Regina has never suffered 
any government like its suffering now with the provincial 
government. And as a member of the constituency for Regina 
North West, I am quite indignant about the fact that this 
government has taken a specific course to punish urban voters, 
whether it’s in Regina or Saskatoon or Moose Jaw. I think that 
that is a very severe course to take by any government. 
 
A government should be working to unite the people, not to 
divide people. We all agree on that, except there seems to be a 
problem with respect to your government, because some of you 
on that side may agree with that contention, but your actions 
clearly show the opposite. 
 
The city of Regina, Mr. Minister, is spending about $29 million 
upgrading it’s Buffalo Pound project, upgrading it’s water supply. 
Has the department talked to any of the city officials and 
conducted any studies, or are aware of any studies the city’s 
conducted with respect to this project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member continues to use the rhetoric 
that we’re not interested in the cities. I don’t know how many 
elections, but I think probably four elections, that the now leader 
of the Opposition promised the city of Regina that they were 
going to do something for the city’s water supply, and nothing 
was done. 
 
(1600) 
 
We came into power in 1982, and during our first term of office 
dealt with the city’s water supply, spent considerable numbers of 
dollars to improve the quality of water, and every time I take a 
drink out of the tap in my home, I say, thanks very much for the 
change, because the water was not really fit for human 
consumption prior. So that concern, I think, is only in the 
members mind, and it’s not really factual as far as it deals with 
life in the cities today. 
 
As it relates to the new proposed project that the city is now 
talking about, my department has a person who is allowed to sit 
in as an observer on the meetings of the committee that are in 
process and who are discussing that project. So we keep very 
close to it, we know what the discussions are, and the department 
has co-operated up to this point to try and do what they can. 
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1128 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Does that co-operation extend, Mr. Minister, to 
working with your colleagues on the government side to provide 
some funding assistance to the capital city’s water project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — To the best of my ability, funding has not 
been a question at this point. They aren’t far enough in their study 
to even begin to ask for funding. And when it does come forward 
it wouldn’t come to this department. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — When the city raises the question of funding, 
the $29 million cost, will the minister give us his assurance that 
he will do what he can to work with his colleagues to provide 
some funding for the $29 million cost, approximately, for a water 
supply, enhanced water supply, for the capital city of our 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I can’t deal with hypothetical issues. The 
cost of this proposed project, or initial discussions on a project, 
are very tentative costs. You have no idea yet of what the costs 
may be, because the decision on what direction the city wants to 
go are not final. So until we reach that point, to put any figure on 
it is really not a realistic approach. 
 
When the time comes that the real costs are determined, then the 
appropriate departments can take a look at it, but at this point we 
aren’t along the way far enough to make that kind of choices. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So you’re telling us this afternoon that if the 
capital city of Saskatchewan undertakes a water project, a water 
supply project for it’s residents and for people who visit here, 
including MLAs from outside the city that work here, that you 
will not give any assurance to us that you will talk to your 
colleagues and do the politicking that’s necessary to assist the city 
of Regina in it’s requests for funding, assistance in funding for 
this project. Is that what you’re telling us today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m trying to tell the hon. member 
something, but I don’t think he’s listening. I’m telling you that 
there is no indication at this time of what the cost may be. I’m 
also telling you that the Department of Environment is not a 
funding agency. So if there is funding needed it will have to come 
from other departments of government. 
 
When the request comes forward from the city for a given project 
and an approximate price is projected and a time frame is 
projected, that’s the time that the governments generally look to 
see what kind of financial assistance should be provided. We’re 
not at that stage at this time. So the comments that the member 
makes about us not being willing are not very realistic. You can’t 
be willing until there is a project to discuss. Hypothetical projects, 
we can’t deal with. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well this hypothetical project, as the minister 
says, and I quote, “hypothetical project, “ is not a hypothetical 
project. I was informed that the project will cost in the vicinity of 
$29 million, plus or minus a couple of million. And that’s not a 
hypothetical figure. That’s the cost of the project. 
 
I will be asking not only the Minister of Environment, but I  

will be asking all the other ministers of the Crown the same 
question: will you give this Assembly, will you give the people of 
Regina and the citizens of this province, your assurance that 
you’re interested in funding the project in some fashion on a 
cost-sharing basis; that you will work and discuss this issue with 
your colleagues in cabinet and caucus to obtain their support for 
the project, or will you not? Simple question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I can guarantee to the hon. member that 
every issue that comes forward that deals with the needs of 
people gets a good hearing, gets good consideration, and will get 
fair treatment when it comes forward to my colleagues and I for 
decision. But at this time it’s not there. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well the minister has indicated that we’re 
off-base again; that during previous scenarios and election 
campaigns that the NDP has promised a guaranteed water supply 
for the city of Regina . I might add that, Mr. Minister, in 1982 we 
promised, if we were elected, to provide the capital city of Regina 
with an adequate and safe water supply. 
 
What we’ve seen with this government since 1982 is a 
government that has been directly responsible for water rationing, 
that has been responsible for possibly . . . not responsible for, but 
we have a water supply now that is possibly being contaminated 
— 40 per cent of our water supply. This is the legacy you leave 
us in this province. 
 
And finally, I asked the minister whether he’s going to give us 
some assurance that he’ll work with his colleagues to try and 
provide some funding program to the residents of the capital city 
of this province so we’ve got a decent water supply. And now he 
refuses to give us the assurance that he’ll work with his 
colleagues. 
 
Well I think the people in this city, Mr. Minister, are going to be 
quite upset with that response; in particular in my constituency 
where we have a fair number of people who are very concerned 
about the health quality of our water supply. 
 
So I ask the minister whether or not he will recant and give his 
assurance to this House that he will speak with his colleagues and 
try to provide some funding assistance to the city of Regina for 
this major water supply project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well the hon. member is again making 
statements that he could have a lot of difficulty supporting in fact. 
You promised, I believe as early as 1971, that you were going to 
do something with Regina’s water; then in ‘75 and ‘78 and in ‘82. 
But it was promised by this government in 1982 and delivered 
during the very first term that the water quality for the city of 
Regina has been greatly improved, and at considerable cost to the 
provincial government, considerable cost to the city, and 
considerable cost to the federal government. 
 
I think our track record speaks for itself when we come to dealing 
with the city of Regina and it’s need for water. When they had a 
problem, we addressed the problem. 
 
The question that you now raise is not really far enough advanced 
to say that we even have a proposal from the  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1129 
 

city. It’s in discussion stages, yes. But there is nothing finalized 
by the city as to what they would want. So for you to come 
forward today and say: will you guarantee that you’ll put money 
in? I believe that any government that would operate on that base 
would be very foolish. You begin to make decisions when you 
have very factual requests and information before you as a 
government and as a cabinet. When that day comes, I can assure 
you that this government and this cabinet are going to take a very 
serious look at the needs of the City of Regina. And our track 
record has shown that we have responded to the needs of this city 
and any other community around the province when the time is 
right. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Minister, what I am hearing is that if 
indeed what has been discovered recently, that the Regina aquifer 
and the Condie aquifer are not two distinct water sources or 
stratums, but in fact there is no separation between the two, and 
that if this plume of leachets infiltrates and pollutes one, it’ll 
pollute both, your department has not put together a contingency 
plan in co-operation of the city of Regina; your government is not 
committed to providing any assistance with respect to funding an 
enhanced water supply as it stands right now, can you please tell 
me what your department will do? Will you put together a 
contingency plan, and when will it be ready for us to review? 
Will it be during the course of these estimates, for example? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member keeps coming back to the idea 
that theirs one aquifer. That’s not really the case. It’s a case of 
two aquifers. There’s some indication that water can get from one 
to the other the normal process of ground water moving. And at 
this point as the city wells have been monitored and they’re 
monitored on an ongoing basis regularly, there’s no indication of 
any contaminant in the Regina aquifers. 
 
So we really have no problem to address at this time. The city is 
doing a study, as I indicated to the member. That study started 
approximately six months ago and it will be finished within the 
next nine or so. So the city is addressing what they see as a 
possible contaminant. 
 
Until the time that the study is complete and the indications of the 
circumstances, the severity of the possible contamination, all of 
those things are known, you can’t really as a Department of 
Environment step out to make corrections. We’re working very 
closely. We’re monitoring what the city is finding. And as the 
project proceeds, I’m sure that we can deal with the issue in time 
to protect the Regina aquifer. So the member is in a hurry for a 
decision on an issue that’s been there for many, many years. The 
city has had the land fill for many, many years. And the 
government over the ages have let that land fill continue to be 
used. Until such time as we see the results of this study, we’re not 
prepared to make decisions on which direction we should go, 
because we want to make the decisions with the best possible 
information in our hand, so that we make the proper decision for 
the aquifer and for the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well I appreciate the minister’s concern. As an 
MLA, as a member of the Legislative  

Assembly, my responsibility is not just to those people who voted 
for me but to all people residing in my constituency, and in 
co-operation with all members, to represent all the people of this 
province. 
 
What I’m a little concerned about is that the government, the 
Department of Environment, is not doing as good a job as it 
might with respect to a possible contingency plan if the water 
supply is polluted. All I’m asking the minister is whether he will 
initiate with his department officials a contingency plan with the 
city of Regina in the event the plume of leachet that is leaking 
toward the water supply indeed reaches there. 
 
(1615) 
 
And if it reaches there, according to the consultant’s reports, there 
is no connection between the Regina aquifer and the Condie 
aquifer. There are two distinct aquifers, no doubt about that. But 
all studies to date have indicated that there was two separate 
aquifers. Now we find out that there are two separate aquifers, 
two stratums, that are joined. And if this plume of leachet reaches 
there, we could be in a potential problem. 
 
My responsibility and my obligation to my constituency and to 
the people of this city is to raise this issue with you and to ask 
you and your officials whether (a) will you start working on a 
contingency plan in the event the aquifers are polluted? and (b) if 
that is the case, what contingency will you follow in terms of 
funding? And a separate related issue with respect to water 
supply, will the minister not get approval today, but at least be 
willing — give us assurance that he will be willing to talk to his 
colleagues regarding the funding of the water supply system in 
Regina in the event that it is indeed going to cost $29 million, 
which would be a very heavy burden for the taxpayers of this 
city, the capital city of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member talks about possible 
contaminants. And there’s always possible contaminants in many, 
many areas, not just here. You can’t put contingency plans in and 
spend millions of dollars for Regina, or for any other town, until 
there is proven to be some problem. 
 
If there is a beginning of a leachet arriving in the aquifer, and we 
start to see something in the ongoing monitoring of our wells that 
provide for the city, then we could start to move in that direction 
of the city and the government discussing alternative water 
sources. 
 
We aren’t at the stage at this time. There is no identifiable 
problem with the city of Regina’s water at this time. So the 
member is raising a flag. I don’t believe that we can proceed to 
deal with that until such time as the plume does show whether or 
not it is going to be a problem to the Regina aquifer. 
 
The study is ongoing, as I’ve indicated to you. We’ve worked 
with the city; we’ve asked them to do the study to begin with. 
And we’re continuing to work with them. And as we get 
information, we will try and address the concern. 
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1130 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t think you have a 
clear understanding of what the terminology “contingency” 
means. I’m sure you have a contingency plan if you spill soup on 
your tie; you’ve got another tie to put on. That’s a contingency. 
You don’t plan for it to happen, but if it happens, hopefully 
you’ve got another tie — although I haven’t seen many different 
ties on the member lately. 
 
What I’d like to do with the minister is just read out, from the 
Canadian Senior Dictionary from the Clerk’s table, the definition 
of contingency: 
 
contingency: 1. uncertainty of occurrence, dependence on change. 
2. an accidental happening, unexpected event, or chance. (or) 3. a 
happening or event depending on something that is uncertain. . . 
 
All I am asking the minister and his officials in the Department of 
Environment; in the event of something uncertain happening — 
as we’ve talked about, the line of questioning with respect to the 
aquifers being connected, the plume of leachet polluting them, in 
the event of that uncertainty, and we hope it doesn’t happen — 
but if it happens, are you prepared to give us your commitment 
today that you will at least talk to your officials so that they can 
commence putting together a contingency plan with the city? I 
don’t want to know what the contingency plan is right now; I 
don’t want to know what the costs are; I don’t want to know 
who’s going to be heading it up. All I want is your assurance as to 
whether you will put a plan together, of contingency, with your 
officials and with the city of Regina in the event this uncertainty 
happens. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I suppose we have already done that, for the 
hon. member. We’ve been taking water samples to be aware 
immediately of any problem occurring. And my officials have 
been meeting with the city of Regina on an ongoing basis, 
reviewing any concerns that the city has. And when the time 
arrives, the contingency will be in place. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — That’s terrific. So you’re saying now that the 
contingency plan is in the process of being put together; is that 
correct, Mr. Minister? The Minister agrees in the affirmative. 
Okay, I thank you very much for that. Took a long time for us to 
get to that, but I appreciate getting there, as we all do. 
 
What I’d like to do, Mr. Minister, is ask you a question about the 
proposed land fill sights that are put forward by the city. You 
indicated earlier, your officials attended the meeting of June 11, 
which was sponsored by the city. Could you please indicate to the 
House this afternoon what your officials have concluded about 
the future sites of the land fill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m afraid we haven’t made a decision on 
where the city should put its land fill, nor should we. The city 
should make that decision. Once they give us an area that they 
want to use a land fill, then we’ll require an environmental impact 
study and we’ll review that study and see whether or not we can 
license the area that they propose. But it’s their decision, no ours. 
We’ll be glad to work with them as they go through the process, 

and it’s not an easy choice. The city is finding it most difficult. 
They’ve identified something like 25 possibilities. They narrowed 
it to 10, and I don’t know if they’ve gone any further than that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well I’m pleased to hear that the minister has 
provided me with an answer that I had a good handle on, and I 
wanted to just test him to see if he was getting proper advice from 
his officials. And I must commend the officials; that is the right 
answer. 
 
What I’d like to do, Mr. Minister, now is ask you a question 
regarding the environmental impact statement that will have to be 
done with this new land fill site. Will you give us an assurance 
that the environmental impact statement that will be done when 
the site is chosen by the city in consultation with the other groups 
and organizations, that this will be an environmental impact 
statement that will not be like the one on the rail line relocation 
which you had no jurisdiction to pass judgment on, but in fact 
that you will provide close guide-lines to the city to undertake 
that environmental impact statement so that all concerns related 
to the new land fill site are . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — When we get that proposal from the city of 
any given site, or if it comes down to a choice between two or 
three, we will have them give us in an environmental impact 
study a comparison and a recommendation of which site of the 
three they would choose, and for what reasons. And I can assure 
you that we’ll follow The Environmental Assessment Act to the 
letter. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Supplementary to the 
member for Regina North West. Am I to understand that you are 
having ongoing discussion with the city regarding a new dump 
site at this time, you or your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My department staff have an ongoing liaison 
with the city to be sure that the process they are following in 
selecting a site is properly done, and provide information 
wherever it’s asked for to help the city be informed of all of the 
area that we may have some knowledge about . So yes, we work 
very closely, and as they work towards a selection of a site, we’ll 
continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Back to the present site for a few 
moments. The question of rainfall and the effect that that has on 
leaching is a concern to myself, and a couple of other people have 
brought it to my attention. Do you have any indication of what 
rainfall does to the chemical plume? Does a heavy rainfall 
automatically lead to further leaching, or does it not? What’s your 
test results showing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member asks a question that really we 
wouldn’t have an answer to at this time. The study is ongoing. 
The amount of rainfall and the type of soil that is concerned — all 
of those things would be a factor that would be involved in the 
decision of whether or not rainfall was causing it to move faster, 
or same speed, or whether it was diluting it or what process that 
would be. I think you’ll have to wait for geological  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1131 
 

studies, geophysical studies — all of those studies of the 
movement of water through the ground — before we can really 
make any definitive statement as to what effect rainfall would 
have. At this time, really, we don’t have an answer for that 
question. It will be interesting when we do have. 
 
Mr. Trew: — With the present study, the six-month study that is 
going and being undertaken at this time, are those geophysical 
studies being . . . are they a part of the ongoing study? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe they would be part of the study, but 
I couldn’t tell you just to what extent the study will be in that 
area. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Do you have any indication at this time how much 
further the present dump can be used. . . . How many years into 
the future the present dump can be used? I know it’s getting to be 
quite a mountain right now, but are we talking five years, 10 
years, or longer than that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — At this time, no, we don’t have anything that 
really would tell us how much longer they could use the present 
site. The ongoing study that they’re doing now would be part of 
that kind of decision making. But the answer that will be 
forthcoming is not far enough advanced really to give you an 
answer to your question. 
 
Mr. Trew: — But I think I understood from a question the 
member from North West asked you, about nine months from 
now that study will be complete and then the collection of the 
data should be sufficiently advanced that some of those answers 
will start to be coming out. Is that accurate? 
 
Okay, the minister nods in the affirmative. Thank you for that. If 
— back to the chemical leaching for a minute — if indeed it is 
becoming a problem in a fast manner, that is to say the problem is 
growing quickly, quicker than perhaps we would like to think it 
is, is your department familiar with bentonite or any other 
solution for containing the chemical plume? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We are aware of bentonite as being one 
possible solution, but it . . . really there’s no answer; no one 
method has been zeroed in on at this time. It will take an 
engineering decision to be made by people with some expertise in 
that area. 
 
And I believe, once the study is complete, that the city and our 
department will likely be looking for the best possible 
engineering firm to give us a recommendation of the solution. It 
won’t be a simple solution; it’ll likely be a fairly major 
engineering project. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to turn to the old 
city dump now — Mount Pleasant, which is situated just off of 
Ring Road and smack dab in the middle of Regina North 
constituency. I guess I have many of the same concerns that I 
have with the present dump that is in use, in that this dump is an 
old dump that has been covered over and grassed and indeed is a 
lovely recreation facility — right in the centre of our city. It looks 

very nice on the surface, but my concern is: what is happening 
down below? 
 
Is your department doing any testing of the old Mount Pleasant 
dump site to see if there is any leaching of chemicals or anything 
else into the aquifer from that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The ongoing monitoring that we do is 
through the monitoring of the wells that are tapping that aquifer. 
The city may be doing some ongoing monitoring, but we are not 
directly involved in that, just the well monitoring. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Are you saying you’re unaware of any testing that 
is going on at Mount Pleasant? And in your answer you turn to 
some well testing. What is the nearest well testing to Mount 
Pleasant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My staff advise me that there are some wells 
on 9th Avenue North, so they’d probably be as close as any to 
that area. But it’s the wells that are monitored are the city wells, 
all of the city wells. Samples are taken on a regular basis and 
checked to see whether there’s any contamination occurring 
anywhere. And up to this point in time those tests are proving that 
the water is good. 
 
Mr. Trew: — So we’re talking a good half mile from the dump 
to . . . Just a minute, did you say 9th Avenue North or 12th? 
There’s wells on 9th Avenue North. Can you tell me where on 
9th Avenue North those wells are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’re having some difficulty with that. It’s 
really information that the city would have more than we would 
because they bring the water samples to the department. So I’m 
having difficulty identifying the location of those wells. If the 
member is really concerned, you could ask the city and they 
could provide it fairly easily. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, I’ve asked some serious questions 
about an old city dump that was in use at the time that DDT 
(dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) was used by everyone, 
everywhere around the city. and I just name DDT as one example 
of a chemical that has been banned for quite some time now 
because of its persistence in deadliness, not only to the animal 
kingdom but, indeed, to human beings. And indeed, it would 
seem very logical that there is DDT and other contaminants in the 
Mount Pleasant Park area — underneath the land, of course. 
 
But my concern is that some of this may leach into the aquifer. 
And as we mentioned earlier, when 40 per cent of the city’s water 
comes from an aquifer, we have to be concerned about that. Will 
your department undertake to do some testing to see that indeed 
in this — I can hardly call it ancient — but in this old and no 
longer used dump site, that there is not the same chemical 
leaching, chemical plume coming out of the Mount Pleasant area 
that there is out of the dump that is presently in use? Will you 
undertake to do that testing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The staff advised me that it’s the city’s 
responsibility to monitor. But we will undertake to check with the 
city to see what monitoring they are doing and  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1132 
 

what results they are getting that may be of use to the member. 
We couldn’t have it immediate, but we can undertake to do that. 
 
Mr. Trew: — You are the Minister of Environment; therefore, I 
submit it is your responsibility to look after the environment, Mr. 
Minister. The city can indeed do the testing, but I think you 
should be insisting that the testing is done. And we’ve got a 
potential problem, as late as approximately seven or eight months 
ago, according to what you were telling me earlier — and I’m not 
arguing that — as late as seven or eight months ago we didn’t 
even know that there was a chemical plume coming out of the 
existing sanitary land fill. 
 
I think that it is indeed very timely that we should check the old 
Mt. Pleasant site. Let’s get it established. If there’s no chemical 
plume coming out there, and it’s sealed over top and doesn’t 
seem to be leaching out of the bottom line, then indeed the case 
may be laid to rest. But we should have that assurance. And you 
are, I point out, the Minister of Environment, and I believe you 
have the responsibility and the duty to see that those tests are 
performed. Will you do it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I indicated to you in my last answer that we 
would do that . We would see what the city has done, get a 
reading on what those tests are showing, and report back to you, I 
don’t know what more you could ask. I guess you don’t have to 
tell me I’m the Minister of Environment. I know that. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Minister, in your previous answer I 
indeed heard you say to me you were going to check and see if 
the city had done any testing. And I had no assurance from what I 
heard, that you were going to pursue it beyond that. I thought it 
was a case of, if the city had done some testing, that was great, 
and if they hadn’t, well that was also great. And that’s not 
acceptable. That was the point I was making. 
 
I am aware that . . . at least after the time we have spent talking to 
you as Minister of Environment, you certainly should be aware of 
it by now. If you weren’t before, you know you’re the Minister 
by now. 
 
I want to turn my questioning to another problem that is coming 
up. This is a problem that has been with the city of Regina since 
long before you were the Minister of Environment, but it is now 
about to become, I believe, double the problem. And that is of air 
quality. And I’m referring to specifically the heavy oil upgrader, 
for which I’m delighted that that upgrader is being built, and it is 
part of the megalopolis of Regina. We welcome the economic 
initiative of it, but the smell of prosperity is pretty — will be 
pretty rank. 
 
It is my understanding that the sulphur dioxide emissions are 
going to be significantly increased — that is the allowable 
maximum is going to be significantly increased. Can you tell me 
what the present allowable sulphur dioxide emissions are and 
what the allowable maximums will be, once the upgrader comes 
into being? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that prior to 1984, the Co-op 
Refinery emissions were about 12,000 tons per  

year, of sulphur dioxide. They put in a sulphur plant that would 
reduce that to 1,200 tons. So you know, that’s a considerable cut. 
 
The estimate is that the . . . when the upgrader is in full operation 
we’ll have about 4,000 tons per year. So it’ll be a little more than 
we have now but much less than we had prior to 1984. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, 4,000 tons per year is quite a bit 
more than a little bit more than 1,200 tons. I am less interested in 
what happened prior to 1984 because we were in a decade of 
improving our pollution controls, both to the air and the water 
and the land. And indeed pollution control was becoming a way 
of life — was becoming a way of life. 
 
And now we have a situation were we are going to more than 
triple the amount of sulphur dioxide that is coming into the air, 
And I’d like to point out to the minister that in the years just prior 
to 1982, I believe would be the last of the Uplands expansion — 
but there was a residential area that was filled completely on the 
basis that sulphur dioxide emissions were severely restricted, 
indeed as you point out, down to 1,200 tons per year. Now that 
that housing is complete and it’s too late for these folks to move 
out without the values of their properties dropping, now at this 
time we’re saying, oh well, we’ll just triple the sulphur dioxide. 
And that’s just not acceptable. There must be a better way. 
 
(1645) 
 
Last year, Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding that there was two 
testing sites at the co-op refinery. Am I accurate in saying there 
was two test sites there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised by my staff that the odours that 
you smell are not sulphur dioxide, but they’re hydrogen sulphide. 
They’re two entirely different chemicals, and that’s the one you 
smell that drifts over the city. 
 
The Co-op refinery has been asked by the department to try and 
do a study to come up with the location that that smell is coming 
from. They don’t have a clear idea at this point. They’ve 
undertaken that study and hopefully will have some method of 
solution proposed soon. I can’t give you a date on that, but it’s 
being looked at. 
 
Now it’s fine to say that we’ve tripled the sulphur dioxide, and in 
a sense we have. But if you take 4,000 tons compared to 12,000 
tons that we were having in 1984, I think it would be a little more 
realistic to say that it’s one-third of the emission rather than to say 
it’s a triple emission. So you know, it depends on which end you 
look at. 
 
Mr. Trew: — You’re quite right, Mr. Minister, it depends on 
which side of the floor you’re sitting on, whether it’s one-third or 
three times. I rest my case that it’s three times the emission. And I 
appreciate your officials telling me that it is hydrogen sulphide 
that we smell. 
 
Do you have any quantification of how much hydrogen sulphide 
is coming out? Is it measurable in terms . . . I’m  
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1133 
 

not sure whether you measure hydrogen sulphide by volume or 
by weight. That’s I guess, where I’m running into some 
difficulty. How do you quantify it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that we have two monitoring 
points at the refinery. We don’t measure the hydrogen sulphide in 
tons. We measure it. But what I would tell you is that they are at 
this time exceeding the requirements of our Pollution Control Act 
in the hydrogen sulphide area. The sulphur dioxide is well within 
the requirements of the law, and with the upgrader in place, it will 
still be well within the requirements. 
 
So I think that in respect, they are doing a reasonably good job. 
The other one, we’re asking to improve, and hopefully, that can 
be done. But we’re not just sure of the exact location of that 
release and until we find it, it’s hard to correct. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just want to come back 
to a question that the member for Regina North West brought up, 
and that was of punishing constituencies that have elected New 
Democrats. And I’d like to point out to the minister that there are 
eight members — eight New Democratic Party members in 
Regina. And it’s coincidental, or maybe it’s not — maybe we’re 
all million dollar members. I think that the other seven are 
certainly worth a million dollars each, and I hope that my 
constituents think I am as well. 
 
But the City of Regina has had it’s funding cut by $8 million 
since the past election. And that represents nearly one-third of the 
funds that previously have been transferred from the province to 
the City. 
 
So indeed, I’d suggest to you, you could use this $8 million that 
your government chose not to transfer to the city, you could use 
that $8 million for a water project — the $29 million project that 
the member for Regina North West talked to you about a little 
earlier. My question is: will you use that $8 million that you’ve 
taken from the residents of Regina and put it towards a water 
solution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Let me assure the hon. member that in the 
decisions dealing with the government grants, there was never 
any discussion or any intention of taking grants away from any 
particular point where there might have been a New Democratic 
party member. That subject never comes up in our caucus or in 
our government when we’re discussing where things are going to 
be done. That may have been the way you fellows did things. We 
don’t do things that way. 
 
We deal with the people in the province of Saskatchewan as 
citizens of this country and of this province that need service, and 
we’re glad to provide that service. Now if you as an MLA 
continue to work hard, perhaps you’ll provide some service as 
well, and I hope you will. 
 
My department has taken no money out of anybody’s pocket. We 
don’t give grants. So the question that the member raises is not a 
question for this department. I f you would like to deal with grant 
cuts to Urban Affairs, perhaps it should come forward when 
Urban Affair’s estimates are up. 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m completed my 
estimates with you, Mr. Minister, and thank you for your 
answers. And I thank your staff as well for their part in this 
answer. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, I have a 
number of questions. One of them relates to the item of public 
safety. And I’m wondering if you could give us a breakdown of 
where the 87 staff came from. This was taken into your 
department this year, and I’m wondering where the 87 staff came 
from. Did they all come from technical services, or did some, as 
the footnotes suggest, come from administration? If the 
footnote’s accurate, and I assume it is, then I’d like the 
breakdown of what came from administration and what came 
from technical services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Fourteen staff came from administration and 
73 from technical services. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The technical services in the former 
department had 110, I think. What about the others, the other 20 
or 30 in technical services? What became of those, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member may not have been in the 
House when we dealt with this question before. We did give these 
answers before. But there were 11 early retirements and 21.8 will 
transfer to Sask Power for the power and gas inspection division. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to . . . I did hear portions of the 
comments made by the member from Saskatoon Mayfair. Yes, I 
did hear those comments. I want to add my voice to the concern 
expressed. We had a serious tragedy occur when that department 
was understaffed and overworked. And now we find ourselves 
with apparently 11 fewer people performing the same duties. And 
I want to, Mr. Minister, add my voice to those who expressed 
concern about that. 
 
Those services that are performed are absolutely essential. 
There’s no way in the world that the public can do it themselves 
— no way any member of the public who doesn’t have an 
engineering degree is going to know whether the furnace is 
operating safely or not. Those services are absolutely essential. 
The result of failure to do them, as we found out in a tragic way, 
is death. 
 
And I want to add my voice of concern to those people who have 
expressed the view that the number of people in that section of 
your department is already to thin, and you’ve exacerbated that 
when you’ve reduced the staffing by 11 people, as it turns out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I want to ensure the hon. member that I’m 
concerned that the inspections for gas and electrical be done, and 
done promptly and properly. 
 
The 11 people who took early retirement completed their work 
for the most part at the end of May. I think we have one who has 
extended, like has taken early retirement, who is extending his 
term until a little later in the season after this transfer occurs. 
 
When we get into Sask Power, and Sask Power gears up to 
  



 
July 13, 1987 

1134 
 

handle a job, they may not remain 11 vacancies, and I would 
doubt very much that they would. I think they’ll hire back, but 
because of the transfer process that we’re in we didn’t think it 
was wise for us to try and hire new people on a short-term base 
and then transfer them to Sask Power. We think it’s better that 
Sask Power hire their own people. And indeed in the gas area 
they may have as many people as they need, because they have 
many people now doing gas inspection at the time of hook-up. So 
we feel; that the job can be done better by Sask Power, probably 
at considerable savings to the province, and it will be done at the 
time that the gas connection is finalized. So it’s probably the right 
route to go at this time in history. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


