













































September 25, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 25, 1987 

 

 

2853 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me great pleasure this morning to make an introduction in this 

Assembly to all hon. members of a gentleman who is a previous 

member of this Assembly, representing the Estevan district. He 

is seated behind the rail, and I would invite all hon. members to 

welcome Mr. Ian MacDougall. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Proposed Sale of SGI 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, can you confirm that 

the SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) board of 

directors and their senior management staff met all day in 

Estevan and that you met them there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the board members of 

SGI met in Estevan, and I joined them for dinner last evening. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Let the history books show that the 

Premier has answered his first question in, I think, six years in 

sitting in the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — And you answered it well. Now let’s hope 

this spirit of co-operation continues with the next question. 

 

The supplementary is, Mr. Premier: can you confirm that the 

SGI board of directors reached a decision at the Estevan 

meeting on the proposed sale of the Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance, and can you inform us of what decision you’ve made 

with respect to the public insurance company? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I cannot confirm that the board of 

directors made any specific decisions with respect to public 

participation or privatization of SGI. I will point out, as I did on 

the radio this morning, that I understand philosophically the 

problems with Sask Power bonds that the NDP had and with 

Saskoil bonds and shares and with Weyerhaeuser and other 

items. 

 

You know, the philosophical difference is quite clear. When we 

allow Saskatchewan people to participate, obviously it’s 

popular; it works. So I won’t deny, and have never denied, that 

we don’t look at public participation  

and privatization in government where we can make a company 

stronger and make a national company, as a matter of fact, with 

its head office here allowing us to compete not only nationally 

but internationally. This is the global village we’re in, and if we 

have a strong insurance company, I think we should at least be 

able to look at it on a broad issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, your minister, who has now 

joined us in the Assembly, has told the public and the press that 

a decision will be made by the cabinet before the end of the 

year. Given the constipated process which is at work in your 

cabinet, Mr. Premier, that means that a recommendation must 

have gone forward from the directors to cabinet or must be 

coming forth very soon. Which is it? Do you have a 

recommendation, or do you expect one soon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if I recall, the same sort of 

questions were asked with respect to allowing the people to 

invest in Sask Power and we said, yes, when we come to the 

conclusion that we will allow Sask Power bonds or Saskoil 

shares, we’ll obviously make that decision public. We are 

reviewing all those possibilities, and the public knows that. 

When we do come to a conclusion, we’ll certainly let the hon. 

members know, and we can debate the legislation is there’s 

legislation here in the House; we can review it all as we did 

with Sask Power. I believe it’s fair to say the last Sask Power 

bond issue, or was it fourth or fifth, runned over $100 million. It 

was over-sold. Well people obviously like to think that they can 

invest in corporations here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And secondly, if I would, Mr. Speaker, let me point out, rather 

than have corporations go into the United States or the Japanese 

market to borrow money, they can borrow from Saskatchewan 

people. And the interest goes back to Saskatchewan people so, 

in fact, we make more money when we allow the bonds and 

shares to develop our province, as opposed to just having it in 

the government. That’s why it’s so popular. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, yesterday in Crown 

corporations your Minister of Finance all but admitted that he 

intended to make no announcement with respect to the sale of 

all or part of SaskTel until after the session was over, and any 

opportunity for public scrutiny would be lost. Will you admit, 

Mr. Minister, that that’s all you’re waiting for with SGI, is for 

this session to terminate so you can then make the decision 

when you can’t be subject to public scrutiny? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the hon. 

member knows my philosophical bent better than that, and I am 

proud of the kinds of things that we have done in terms of 

power bonds and shares. And I would be more than happy to 

debate any of those upcoming issues that  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2854 

 

might come to pass in the province. And I would say 

categorically that we would be prepared to announce them in 

the House or outside the House, and at any time, because 

obviously we are prepared to debate them. And the success of 

the power bonds and the Saskoil shares and others, Mr. 

Speaker, are things that we are quite ready to talk about here 

and in full disclosure. 

 

So I would hope that he doesn’t say that we’re waiting for the 

House to close. I mean, it will happen if it’s appropriate time, in 

the House, all the time, because it will come back to the 

legislature at any point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question. Mr. Premier, a scant 11 

months ago you got elected in an election in which you 

vigorously denied the intention to sell any Crown corporations. 

Mr. Premier, since that election your support in the polls has 

plummeted because of right-wing policies such as this. 

 

I say by way of background, Mr. Premier, that you have no 

mandate to be selling SGI or any other Crown corporation, 

given the events of the last year. Will you, Mr. Premier, assure 

this House that there will be no steps taken with respect to the 

sale of SGI without public hearings so that you can at least have 

some semblance of a mandate to do it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to point out 

that the NDP, they’re against the Rafferty project; they’re 

against a trade deal with United States; they were against 

Weyerhaeuser; they’re against the upgrade development; 

they’re against packing plant development; they’re against 

welfare reform, Mr. Speaker. They’re against educational 

reform; they’re against Sask Power bonds; they’re against 

Saskoil bonds; they’re against Meech Lake. Mr. Speaker, we 

could go on and on. We could have hearings on every single, 

solitary thing that the opposition is against. Well, they’re almost 

against any economic development that you would find in the 

province of Saskatchewan or any reform. They’re quite in 

favour of the past, Mr. Speaker. They live way back in the 

1940s and 1950s where they were in control. That’s all they’re 

in favour of. We could have hearings on the past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think before we go any further I’d like to ask 

the hon. members to be careful in their questions, that the 

preambles are not provocative. And I would ask ministers . . . 

Order. Order, please. And I would ask ministers to please try to 

stay on the topic, or we’re going to have a question period that 

will rapidly deteriorate. 

 

Coopers & Lybrand Study 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Minister of Health, and it has to do with the Coopers 

Lybrand study on the Health department, which is part of the 

government’s restraint program. I wonder if the minister is 

aware of that portion of the study prepared  

in June which called for a 25-year future plan for the Health 

department, a plan to be called “tomorrow’s health system,” and 

bearing a recurring annual cost of $1 million. Is the minister 

aware of that plan; what is the status of that plan today; and 

what will Saskatchewan people get in return for a price-tag of 

$1 million a year for the plan alone? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I’m aware of the Coopers 

Lybrand study, as everybody is. It’s been widely discussed in 

the House in terms of the existence of the study and the fact that 

Coopers Lybrand has been looking at various departments of 

government, including the Department of Health. Beyond that I 

have little to say at this point. And has been said by several of 

my colleagues, Coopers Lybrand recommendations, those 

which are adopted by the government, all recommendations of 

Coopers Lybrand will not necessarily be adopted, but certainly 

some of them will have merit, and many of them may well be 

adopted. But that’s all I can say at this point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, to the same minister. In relation 

to some of the aspects of the Coopers Lybrand work that in the 

minister’s opinion may bear merit, I wonder if he could indicate 

whether he thinks the following proposals have merit? Number 

one, regaining control . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. That’s sounds to me like 

it’s going to become a very long preamble if you have several 

proposals, so please put your question. I think you have had a 

sufficient preamble in this one. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I would ask for the 

minister’s specific reaction to the proposal made by Coopers & 

Lybrand that the government regain control over the doctors’ 

fee schedule; that they control utilization of our health care 

system; that they restrict general practitioners in Regina and 

Saskatoon; and that they freeze all new facilities’ construction. 

Does the minister regard those proposals as having merit? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I think I’d like 

. . . I would like to interrupt at this point. It’s a good example of 

a question that could draw about . . . I don’t know how long a 

reply. It actually has five parts to it, and the hon. member has 

asked for an answer to each part, and so I ask the minister not to 

reply that way because I’m afraid I won’t be able to allow him 

to. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is as my 

answer was in the first portion of the question. 

 

Cuts to Saskatchewan Student Bursaries 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Education. Last year, Mr. 

Minister, more than 7,000 students in this province received 

Saskatchewan student bursaries. This year, after the election, 

you cancelled the Saskatchewan student bursary plan, and you 

cut or eliminated the bursaries of thousands of students in the 

course of doing that. 

 

My question to you, sir is very simple. Do you deny that, as a 

result of your changes, the average student in a  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2855 

 

33-week program at the University of Saskatchewan, or the 

University of Regina, borrowing up to $5,900 will not receive 

one penny of bursary or one penny of forgivable loan, and five 

years ago under the NDP they would have received $1,800? 

And further, Mr. Minister, do you deny that a student at Kelsey 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I think the hon. 

member knows that he has been allowed quite a sufficient 

preamble without starting a new topic in his preamble, so please 

put your question. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I’ve put the question. Will you 

answer the question? Do you deny that fact, and do you deny 

that that kind of a cut is highly unfair to students in this 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, in some instances, and 

I’m not sure of his exact numbers, in some instances what he 

says relative to his numbers is mathematically correct; however, 

one ought not to stop there. 

 

The hon. member talks about going back to the NDP days. And 

I don’t know as many young people want to go back to the NDP 

days because the NDP days, Mr. Speaker, are characterized by 

relatively few students getting assistance. He might argue that it 

was better assistance; I would argue such was not the case. 

 

If we could go back to NDP days, Mr. Speaker, and special high 

need students weren’t addressed, which is what we are trying to 

do with or forgivable loans, Mr. Speaker. We wanted to give 

more assistance to more people, and particularly extra 

assistance to people like in these categories: natives, disabled, 

and single parents. And we will stick to that agenda, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — A supplementary, question, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister says that he’s now giving special support to native 

students. Well I want to ask him: do you deny, Mr. Minister, 

that in 1981 a native student in the SUNTEP (Saskatchewan 

urban native teacher education program) program could 

graduate after four years with bursaries and not one penny of 

debt, and yet today in 1987 under your program, they are going 

to get no bursary assistance in their third year, no bursary 

assistance in their fourth year, and they are going to graduate 

from SUNTEP in debt 15 to $20,000. Do you deny that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

is asking if I deny that changes have been made. No, I do not 

deny that. But I will argue, and I will argue vehemently, Mr. 

Speaker, the changes that have made have been very positive 

ones by every measure. Mr. Speaker, whether you talk 

specifically about SUNTEP programs, native students, students 

generally, Mr. Speaker, there is more assistance available to 

more students, point number one. 

 

And point number two and more importantly, Mr. Speaker, is: 

our young people have a post-secondary education system that 

is more accessible to them than it’s  

ever been in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And point number three, they are going to, in the future, have a 

post-secondary educational system that is even going to be 

more accessible because of the creation of a new institute and 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Prebble: — A new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Minister, I want to give you a sample of the average student 

in my riding. Summer contributions, $1,000 this year and 

$1,000 last year from earnings; total allowable expenses in both 

years, $6,000; total allowable needs in both years, $5,000. 

 

My question to you is this, sir: that student last year got a 

bursary of $1,400; this year they don’t get a penny in the form 

of a bursary from your government. Will you admit that that’s 

unfair, and will you now reinstate the Saskatchewan student 

bursary program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. 

 

Status of Manage of Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

minister responsible for Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company. Can the minister confirm that Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company’s transportation manager, a Mr. Rick 

Millar, was fired by the corporation on Wednesday of this 

week, and can he confirm that Mr. Millar was fired with cause? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I will not confirm whether 

or not Mr. Millar is still in the employ of the Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company. 

 

I will advise the hon. member, and I would suspect the hon. 

member already knows, that this particular individual has been 

somewhat ill; he has been hospitalized; he is undergoing some 

fairly severe personal problems. So at this time I don’t think it 

would be fair, I don’t think it would be reasonable, that we 

would bring this gentleman’s name up in the legislature when 

he’s undergoing what I would call a personal crisis at this time. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister 

inform this Assembly whether some of Mr. Millar’s problems 

involve the misuse of Saskatchewan Transportation Company’s 

funds? And if so, can he tell the taxpayers how much of their 

money is involved? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I think I have made it 

quite clear that I don’t feel that it is right. I don’t believe that it 

is appropriate when an individual is undergoing a person crisis, 

when an individual has just been released from the hospital with 

a very, very serious illness, that a  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2856 

 

member opposite of the NDP party who stand in this legislature 

day after day being so sanctimonious and so compassionate, 

and my friend, I don’t believe that you are in order in discussing 

this subject today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you have totally 

ignored the question. The question I put to you is simply 

whether Mr. Millar’s problems involved the misuse of 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company’s funds, and if so, how 

much of the public funds were misused? They have a right to 

know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I absolutely agree that the 

public of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and the 

general public, have every right to know if public funds have 

been misused. And I will give the hon. member by absolute 

assurance that if that question is asked again, after a reasonable 

period of time where I can have some time to investigate this 

matter, after we give some time for this gentleman to perhaps 

get over his illness — and I’m not going to go into the details of 

that — at a later point in time I’d be happy to give you all of the 

details. 

 

Mr. Millar has been fired, or has been terminated for whatever 

reason. I’ll certainly be happy to provide that information to 

you. But I am not about, here today in the legislature, to get 

down in the gutter and start and discuss some of the individual’s 

personal problems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

is Rick Millar under investigation at this point in time? We have 

a right to know; the public has a right to know. Is there an 

investigation ongoing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I have nothing more to 

add to this. 

 

Possible Sale of Hudson Bay Plywood Plant 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

minister responsible for Saskatchewan Forest Products 

Corporation and I would like to know from the minister if he 

can confirm that SFPC has sold the Hudson Bay plywood plant, 

and if so, can he give us the sale price, the names of the new 

owners, and the date on which the sale takes effect? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, I can’t confirm today that the 

plywood plant in Hudson Bay has been sold, but I can confirm 

that there have been various proposals being looked at by the 

corporation in terms of the possible sale of the plywood plant, 

but I don’t confirm today that it has been sold. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, can  

the minister tell the taxpayers whether you’ve had an outside 

independent appraisal done on that Hudson Bay plywood plant 

before you decided to start negotiating and put it up for sale; 

and if an appraisal has been done, will you table that appraisal 

here in the legislature? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Once again, I just confirm, Mr. Speaker, 

that we have been looking at various proposals as it relates to 

the plywood plant at Hudson Bay and, in fact, whatever 

installation Sask Forest Products has, we will look at proposals. 

 

Just to give me a chance for a little commercial here, Mr. 

Speaker, we will look at proposals for the various installations 

which are held by Sask Forest Products at the present time. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the 

same minister and, Mr. Minister, we’re asking about this sale 

because it’s just another example of your government’s 

mismanagement, your incompetence, and your readiness to give 

away to your buddies. 

 

And my question is: I want to know, do you deny that the 

plywood prices today and over the last 12 to 18 months are at 

an all-time high? And do you also deny that the private industry 

have told you that the plant is worth around $10 million in 

today’s market? And I want to know, as well, if you deny that 

you’re selling this $10 million plant for less than $4 million 

without even having sought an alternative bid from anybody 

involved in the forest industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you if that’s good business practice 

and if that’s what you’ve been about? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I will confirm that 

plywood prices operate in a very cyclical nature. They have 

their ups and they have their downs. They are up at the present 

time, I agree with that. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing to be 

gained from a further discussion of what the member’s raised 

today because I have just said there is no confirmation of any 

sale having taken place. There is a confirmation that we have 

been looking at proposals over a period of some time. 

 

Withdrawal of Funding from Port of Churchill 

Development Board 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, in May 

your government signed a communiqué from the western 

premiers’ conference in Humboldt stating, and I quote . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I think we 

should ask everybody to shut down because I can’t hear him 

myself, so would the hon. members please give the opportunity 

to have the member from Humboldt ask his question. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the western  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2857 

 

premiers’ conference in May, Mr. Minister, your government 

signed a communiqué stating, and I’ll quote: 

 

The Port of Churchill once gain received the support of 

western premiers. They urge continuing efforts to take 

advantage of opportunities for expanded activity at 

Churchill. 

 

In light of that, Mr. Minister, why, four months later, has your 

government withdrawn funding from the Port of Churchill 

development board which promotes the expanded use of this 

facility? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we are reviewing the access 

to various kinds of markets and institutions as we are, for 

example, PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute) in 

Humboldt. And we said that we are going to review that with 

the Governments of Alberta and Manitoba. We have the same 

feeling with respect to the Port of Churchill and the cost, and 

that’s exactly what we’re doing. 

 

We have priorities for expenditures in agriculture, and whether 

we want to choose to spend them to a group that will be 

promoting the Port of Churchill, or whether they want to 

allocate them to PAMI, or whether we want to allocate them to 

something else is, I think, a reasonable piece of research and 

some good questions. 

 

So I would say we support the Port of Churchill, but we won’t 

support it at all costs, or any costs, Mr. Speaker. We want to 

look at it carefully with respect to the cost per bushel and the 

number of bushels that can be moved and compared to 

alternatives. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

you will know that Churchill can handle in a normal year about 

1.5 million metric tonnes. At a saving of $20 a tonne, that 

equates to $30 million. A $30 million saving to farmers in 

Saskatchewan, if you pooled it, it is somewhat less — about 

$25 million. The investment that you have withdrawn is 

$37,000. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you not agree that an investment of $37,000 in 

a group that promotes the use of Churchill is a good investment, 

in light of the approximately $25 million return it could bring to 

farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would say to the hon. 

member, you would be the only man in Canada that I know that 

could stand up and substantiate a $30 million savings by taking 

grain to the Port of Churchill. Now I don’t know anybody else 

or any terms of research; I don’t know where you get your 

numbers. But you know that the costs are much higher to take 

into Churchill — you know that; it’s the other way around, 

because when you take it over that muskeg, and you take it over 

the kinds of . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. 

The hon. members may disagree with the answer, and that’s 

their prerogative, but the Premier should have the opportunity 

to give it. 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just say to the 

hon. member: it is a little, it is a little bit presumptuous to say 

that there is locked in 25 to $30 million savings to farmers, net, 

in Saskatchewan, or in the west for that matter, to automatically 

go through the Port of Churchill. Now under the right 

conditions — and they would have to be perfect — under many 

millions of dollars expenditures upgrading the track, under the 

right kind of hopper cars and boxcars to go over that track 

which is on muskeg, at the right time of the year, with all those 

conditions you might relieve some pressure on other ports. You 

might relieve some pressure on other ports. 

 

Now the key is to look at the logistic systems through the St. 

Lawrence and through the west coast, and indeed south, right 

through to the Mississippi, as well as to the Port of Churchill, 

but don’t just say that there’s . . . $3,700 would get you $30 

million savings. I mean, come on, that’s not particularly fair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I repeat once more. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on Points of Order 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day I would like to refer 

to yesterday’s ruling please. 

 

Yesterday a number of points or order were raised before orders 

of the day concerning question period. Most of them were 

disposed of at the time. However, on a couple of matters 

regarding unparliamentary language I undertook to review the 

record. 

 

On page 2809 of Hansard, the member for Saskatoon Nutana 

said: 

 

Is it fair to say, Mr. Premier, that your Minister of Health 

deliberately misled this legislature? 

 

And on page 2810 of Hansard the Minister of Finance accused 

the member for Regina North East: 

 

. . . of falsely and deliberately misleading this House. 

 

Whether implied or direct, whether in the question or statement, 

I think all members know that such words are unparliamentary. 

I refer members to citation 322 in Beauchesne’s as follows: 

 

. . . it is not unparliamentary temperately to criticize 

statements made by a member as being contrary to the 

facts; but no imputation of intentional falsehood is 

permissible. 

 

All hon. members will also be aware that it is a long-standing 

tradition of this House that accusations of deliberate misleading 

or lying are not acceptable in this place. 

 

In view of the other numerous examples of disorderly  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2858 

 

behaviour that occurred yesterday, I will not go through the 

formality of asking those two particular members to withdraw. 

However, I ask all members to make a greater effort at 

maintaining an acceptable level of decorum in question period 

and in debate. 

 

And I would also like to make a comment, if you don’t mind at 

this time, on what I perceive to be a problem here in question 

period. There seems to be a problem as to one side thinking that 

preambles are too long, the other side believing answers are too 

long. I would say that to a degree both sides are correct. 

 

The Speaker could rule very rigidly on this matter. I don’t think 

it would behoove question period if he did that. It would not be 

good for question period. However I believe members can 

self-discipline themselves and know what’s a reasonable 

preamble, and I know hon. members who are answering know 

what’s reasonable length of time to answer the question and if 

they’re on the topic or off the topic. 

 

So I ask hon. members, who I know know the rules and have 

the best interests of this House at heart, to please think of that in 

the coming weeks. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Trade 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, last night 

we had a series of questions about the so-called IIP, the 

industrial investment program, and we sort of both seemed to be 

a bit short of hard numbers, Minister. I wonder if I could leave 

it on this basis: could your staff prepare and send to me a list or 

schedule of grants that have been . . . of applications for grants 

that have been made under that program which have been 

approved, and which have either paid or will be paid when the 

project has matured? 

 

And if that’s acceptable, could that schedule include the 

applicant’s name and address, the nature of the project, and the 

amount of the grant that has been paid or is estimated will be 

paid when the project has matured? And then we could get 

away from that part of the estimates and move on to something 

new. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We would take, as follows, the approach 

to the hon. member. What I will provide to the hon. member is 

the companies that have been approved and have completed the 

qualifications for the grant. I would have a little problem giving 

you the information of those that have applied, that they have 

been approved but they have not met the criteria necessarily. 

 

And the only reason I say that is if they don’t meet the criteria, 

I’m not sure that information should be made  

public, because there’s no draw on public funds, and whether or 

not the company in question would wish that information made 

public. If the company is drawing money, then clearly that 

particular grant should be made public and is made public 

through public accounts. If that would be satisfactory. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, that’s fair enough. I want to now turn to 

the subject of private and public investment in the province, and 

I know from speeches that have been made by ministers of our 

government that you came to power in 1982 with some pretty 

definite ideas about this. 

 

And I think it fair to say that your plan was, in a general way, to 

activate the private sector so that the private sector part of our 

economy would play a larger role in the business of this 

province and increase their investments. And a corollary of that, 

sometimes spoken, sometimes unspoken, was that the 

government investment in the business of the economy would 

be reduced over time. 

 

And we on this side of the House have criticized you during this 

session and in previous sessions and outside this House for 

being very ideological about the question, for being impractical 

about it, for following some right-wing plan that you follow 

blindly and for its own sake, a plan that you follow without 

regard to the practicalities of a situation but in pursuant of some 

demigod of how things ought to be done. 

 

We on this side of the House say that in Saskatchewan, as 

probably everywhere else, a government has to be practical 

about these things, and a government has to encourage a full 

range of approaches to this subject, including the private sector, 

including the public sector, and including other institutions in 

our society such as co-operatives; and that it’s not becoming of 

a government to try and somehow wrench Saskatchewan out of 

its traditional ways, accustomed ways of approaching these 

complex problems that we face, and try and make us over into a 

Texas or an Alabama or some other foreign jurisdiction in 

pursuit of an ideological goal. 

 

Now I don’t want to be unfair to you, Minister, and you’ll have 

an opportunity to stand up and respond to these things, but 

that’s the clear impression that the people of Saskatchewan 

have from the rhetoric that ministers in your government have 

been using for some long period of time, and we’ve heard it 

repeated again in this session. 

 

The figures that are available to us indicate that for all of your 

rhetoric in this area nothing very much has changed in 

Saskatchewan; that the mix between private investment and 

public investment remains about the same; that year over year 

the situation in Saskatchewan has not changed very much; and 

that your goal of privatizing Saskatchewan has to this point 

been a failure. 

 

In other words, for things to happen in this province it is 

necessary for you to take the approach that we advocate, 

namely, that this requires a mix of instruments in 

Saskatchewan. It requires the public sector to be doing what it 

can. It requires the private sector to be doing all that it can. It 

requires the co-operatives of this province to be doing what it 

can, and it requires other institutions in this province to play a 

full part. And it’s not becoming of  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2859 

 

the government to be trying to wrench this situation away from 

the time-proven approach to these problems and introduce on 

our soil a foreign ideology. 

 

Now I have before me statistics, year over year, showing the 

percentage distribution of private and public investment. It 

shows the mix in 1982 when you cam to power as being more 

or less what it is in many other provinces in Canada in 1982, 

and in 1986 being more or less what it is in other provinces. 

 

Now I open up there of course a question of philosophy on 

which we probably differ, and differ fundamentally, and I 

understand that. The question that I pose to invite your 

responses to the things that I’ve said is: would you agree that 

the mix in Saskatchewan between private and public investment 

really hasn’t changed very much over the last five years, 

particularly in relation to what’s been happening in other 

jurisdictions in Canada? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think the hon. member . . . If we talk 

about the specifics here — if you look at public sector 

investment, let’s say over the last five or six years — recently 

we completed the Nipawin power project, began under the NDP 

administration, completed under our administration. That was 

probably the largest capital investment as far as both the public 

and private sector were concerned. 

 

Now we are undertaking the development of the Rafferty 

project, which again is going to be public investment through 

the power corporation — a very large project. Again over the 

last five years, from the public sector point of view, the 

completion of Key Lake, which was a large, large capital 

investment by, I suppose, a mix of the public and private sector. 

You had the completion of the Lanigan expansion which — and 

I’m just going from memory or guess here — we’re talking 

about an $800 million expenditure by PCS at the Lanigan 

expansion. 

 

(1045) 

 

Now what we will pursue as a government is clearly a mix in 

the sense that we are undertaking Rafferty-Alameda. We are 

undertaking fairly extensive investment in rural gas line, rural 

gas distribution system by Sask Power to provide natural gas to 

the rural part of Saskatchewan and not just to the urban part of 

Saskatchewan. That’s a large investment. 

 

We are making a large investment in burying both power 

cables, the power lines throughout the province, again to the 

benefit of rural Saskatchewan. We are looking at, in SaskTel, 

doing individual line services, and that becomes a fairly 

significant capital investment. That’s being done, and that’s 

public investment, and we will continue to do that. There is 

public investment in the area of irrigation which we see as 

important. 

 

Now if you look at that part of it, and I suppose what I could 

say is this, is that we would tend to see the investment by the 

private sector to grow and investment by the public sector to be 

restricted, if you like, to more of the utility-type of concept — 

Sask Power, SaskTel, Sask Water — those types of public 

investments that we will continue to pursue. 

It would be our hope that, let’s say, in the gold mining 

development, now SMDC is part of that. I think we make it 

fairly clear that it would be our hope that we would be able to in 

the future find a vehicle by which SMDC could issue shares and 

allow the people of Saskatchewan to participate in the 

ownership of SMDC. 

 

SMDC and a variety of partners, we hope, will develop Cigar 

Lake, given any kind of stability in the uranium markets, now 

and into the future. So that would be a . . . We would see that 

being maybe more private investment and less public 

investment in that type of thing. 

 

In the oil industry we would see more investment being done, 

or virtually all the investment now being done by the private 

sector, in the sense that Saskoil is now owned less than 50 per 

cent by the government and therefore whatever . . . and then 

they’ve made a lot of capital investment in this particular 

province. 

 

If you look at projects like the Co-op — and while you might 

criticize the Co-op in the sense that government, two levels of 

government, have had to back-stop the Co-op, if you like — but 

I would hope that you would appreciate that a business like the 

Co-op to take on a project of 7 or $800 million is a risk that 

they were not able to justify, low as the risk might have been, 

because of the size of Federated Co-op in Saskatchewan. So 

they had to do that, and we had to back them up on that 

particular thing. 

 

But I would class that as a private investment, or at least it’s a 

movement more towards a private investment than, let’s say, 

Saskoil under your proposal, where Saskoil would build an 

upgrader. In other words, the government would build the 

upgrader. 

 

So I think there’s where your change will be. The change will 

be . . . let me put it this way. Public sector is going to continue 

to invest in Saskatchewan, primarily through utilities. 

Non-utility investment, we would hope to see a larger and 

larger part of that being done by the private sector. And I think, 

in fairness, if we’re to look at any kind of economies of scale in 

larger projects, we’re going to have to seek investment from 

outside of Saskatchewan because there’s just not the type of 

capital here, or the risk capital here, to do some of those larger 

projects. So we are moving towards more and more of the 

private sector in the commercial area and away from the public 

sector involvement in the commercial area. 

 

Now philosophically you say that you want to have more . . . 

the mix should be far more weighted towards the public sector. 

That’s the philosophical difference that we have. We would 

want to see the mix weighted much more to the private sector; 

you want to see the mix much more to the public sector in both 

commercial and non-commercial investment. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now I just simply didn’t say that, Minister, 

and I didn’t say anything that could fairly be interpreted that 

way. All I said was, you’re being ideological about it. You’ve 

been ideological about it in your rhetoric from your ministers 

for the last five years. You’ve been dumping all over the public 

sector, as  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2860 

 

though government ought not to be doing any of the things that 

government had done in this province for many, many years. 

 

We’re not trying to weight things in favour of the public sector. 

What we’re trying to do is be practical and pragmatic about it, 

and not ideological. You’re the one following an ideology. 

You’re marching to the drum of a foreign ideology that has no 

business in Saskatchewan, and that won’t sprout if you plant it. 

It won’t come to seed. It won’t grow, and it won’t harvest. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It won’t take root. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — It won’t take root, the Deputy Premier says. 

 

Now as regards to the upgrader project, Minister, that is a good 

project; there’s no question about it. We’re still looking forward 

to seeing some of the paper on it, but we like the idea, and I 

don’t think anybody on this side of the House has ever indicated 

that we don’t. And no one on this side of the House has 

suggested that we would have done that project by ourself as a 

government, that we would have had a Crown corporation do it. 

 

I think what you’ve done with the Co-op here is a good idea. 

It’s completely consistent with the idea that we’ve been putting 

forward, that it requires a fair and pragmatic mix and an open 

and flexible approach. I have no hesitation in saying that the 

arrangements with NewGrade certainly meet with my approval. 

That’s how we should be prepared to do things in the province 

of Saskatchewan. And when I see you do something like that, 

it’s encouraging, because it seems to me that perhaps in some 

respects you are listening to the ideas that we’ve been putting 

forward for a long time on this question of public and private 

investment. 

 

That project ought to go, and it’s going, and it’s going because 

your government decided to get in there and back-stop it with 

the federal government, as you say, behind the co-operative 

movement in this province. What I object to is all of the rhetoric 

and all of the nonsense about privatization and the introduction 

into Saskatchewan of this right-wing, foreign-based concept 

that has no business in this province. 

 

Now another point that I wanted to pick up on and not just leave 

it unchallenged is the notion that by selling shares in SMDC 

(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) you would 

convert that into a company that was owned by the people of 

Saskatchewan. I don’t have to tell you, of all people on that side 

of the House, that the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan are 

owned lock, stock, and barrel by the people of this province. 

They’re not owned by anybody else. They’re not owned by the 

government. The government has no existence independent of 

the people. The government in the final analysis is the people. It 

is the people. I am an owner of SMDC. I do not become any 

larger owner or any different kind of an owner if I have a share 

certificate in my hand, and you know that to be true. 

 

Now I want to take you back, Mr. Minister, to the industrial 

incentive program and the new program. I think I’m  

correct in describing it as a new program — the industrial 

development grants referred to in your estimates under vote 66. 

And I would like you to tell us how these grants will operate. 

My information is that the program guide-lines for these grants 

are not out. 

 

Now I’m looking at the heading “industrial development 

grants,” and you told me last night that some 85 per cent of 

those would be IIP type grants. And it may well be that the 

criteria for these grants will be the same as the criteria for the 

IIP grants, and if that’s the case, then that will be a simple 

answer. But if it’s not the case, will it work along the same 

lines, or will there be different criteria, and who will these 

grants be targeted towards? 

 

And are there further details in addition to the IIP guide-lines, 

and if so, when can we expect to get them? We’ve heard and 

read criticism from the private sector about this program, and so 

far as I’m aware, those criticism have not been responded to by 

you, criticisms that included the fact that there had been no 

guide-lines published; and other criticisms was that the grants 

were . . . in one case somebody said they were not properly 

targeted, and in another that they were not cost effective. 

 

But perhaps you can . . . I’ve asked a number of questions there, 

Minister, but if you could start at the top of the list and work 

you way down, I’d be obliged. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me deal with your first priority with 

regards to the ownership of various commercial corporations. 

And I won’t dwell on this because I think it is pretty crystal 

clear that we would see the government owning a variety of 

industries and a variety of businesses as being owned by the 

government. And I believe that it’s right and proper that 

government could and should, where possible, divest that 

ownership in government into the people of Saskatchewan who 

look for an investment in that. 

 

What we’re looking at . . . if you really go back to the 

philosophy, even of Crown corporations by your government, 

and if you’re to listen philosophically to the argument advanced 

by the leader of your party, was to the effect . . . Let’s take a 

good example being SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation). The argument, as I understand it 

and as it goes, is as follows: that without the government taking 

a part of the action, through SMDC or whatever, that we would 

not have seen the uranium mines built in northern 

Saskatchewan, certainly not Key Lake. And that was because 

there was some maybe hesitant on the part of outside of 

investors to go into a project like that. They found a 

comfortable level of investment with the Crown corporation. As 

a result, Key Lake was built. 

 

Now, be that valid or not valid — and we don’t necessarily 

have to argue the economics or the reality of that — having 

once built the plant and built the mine, is it therefore necessary 

that the government continue to own it? And perhaps that’s not 

a good example because much of what SMDC does, it does 

through joint ventures, whether it’s the gold mine that was built, 

future gold mines to be build, and that type of thing. 

 

I think what the hon. member . . . and the point that I  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2861 

 

would like to leave with the hon. member, is the following. No 

matter where you are in the world, most of the world is looking 

for investment in their particular jurisdiction. Whether it’s 

Ontario or Alberta or Manitoba, everybody is looking for 

somebody to come in and investment in their particular 

territory. 

 

And we’re no different than they are; in fact, to build large 

projects you need a large amount of capital. And I think 

realistically we come to the view that there is not a large 

amount of capital here in Saskatchewan, certainly not a large 

amount of risk capital. If the people do not have the risk capital 

that live in the province, the question then becomes: should 

government go into that and do the risk capital, put up the risk 

capital? Or should we, on the other hand, bring somebody else 

in, prepared to invest, whether it’s from Japan or from the 

United States or from Ontario or whatever? 

 

I would argue that given the tighter fiscal reality that the whole 

western world is facing today, that the government’s priority 

should be more into the area of social programs and less into 

the area of making capital investment in commercial ventures, 

with the view of somehow you’re going to get a return always 

on that investment. I’m not sure the government’s job is to do 

that, given the fiscal realities of the western world. And I don’t 

think that’s peculiar in Saskatchewan. I think you’re seeing that 

in Alberta; you’re seeing that in other jurisdictions, pursuing 

exactly the same thing. I don’t think it’s dogmatic; I think, quite 

frankly, it’s very pragmatic, in the sense of how do you 

marshall scarce resources? But we can continue on that debate 

all day, I suspect, and all night and for a couple of weeks. 

 

(1100) 

 

Dealing with the second question, when we announced this year 

as we were going through the budget adjustments that we had to 

go through from a fiscal point of view, we also made a cut in 

our department that basically said we have to hold back as well; 

and we did that. The largest expenditure of this department was 

the IIP program, and that was cancelled. Now the program runs 

as such that it takes a year before it’s phased out. At that point 

in time I indicated that I thought that the business departments 

of government should make as concerted effort as other 

departments of government to pull back. 

 

What I also announced at that time is that we had to re-look as 

to what type of a program that we would replace it with. And 

the reason we had to replace it, quite simply, was the fact that if 

we did not, and we just left it to the whims of the private sector 

and the free market, you have to compete against Alberta who 

subsidize a great deal into business, against Manitoba who 

subsidize a fair amount into the business world, certainly in 

B.C. and Ontario, and virtually every province in the country 

has some type of — for lack of a better word — a subsidy 

program to encourage or attract business into their territory. 

And we need that as well. 

 

Now what we looked at with the IIP program, as well the IIP 

program quite frankly was a fairly successful program in the 

sense that it was not tied totally to jobs but also to  

investment. Nevertheless it was universal, and therefore the 

question became: when you had to rationalize your dollars, 

should you have a universal program, or should you have 

something less than a universal program? And that’s what we’re 

looking at today. 

 

We would . . . I think when I announced the cut in the program 

or the dropping of the program last spring, I indicated at that 

time to the public that we were going to look at bringing back a 

program used to attract industry in the province. Now I can say 

to the hon. member, we have looked at a series of these types of 

options, but we have not yet brought that matter before cabinet 

as to what those options would be. We would hope to do that 

later this fall and certainly in the process for next budget year. 

 

It will likely be something relative to IIP in the sense of being 

performance based. It will not be universal in the sense that, I 

think, we have to look at how do we target and what do we 

target. And that will tend to be what economic strategy the 

cabinet decides to pursue on this particular thing. I think it 

would probably be also fair to say that the targeting will have to 

be a little more precise, and I would guess at what you will see 

is something in the field of agriculture processing, of further 

refinement in the resource sector of science and technology and 

of manufacture. 

 

There will be other areas as it relates to tourism and small 

business generally, and a new focus there, but certainly the 

process will be very much oriented that way. One could look at 

the model which is the . . . what we will call for the purposes of 

this discussion, the Manitoba model. The Manitoba model has a 

pool of dollars, I think it’s something like 20 or $30 million in a 

fund that is drawn out of that fund on the approval of Executive 

Council. So in other words, if Manitoba say, we want to attract 

a plant that builds buses or expand the plant that builds buses, 

we’re prepared to go directly into that fund and allocate money 

to it. 

 

Alberta have far richer plans, pardon me, but that has, I think, 

still living or emanating out of the ’70s when Alberta was 

overflowing with cash, so they have a . . . it’s very difficult for 

us to compete against Alberta. 

 

The third dimension that we’re looking at is the western 

development fund that the federal government has announced. 

And because we’re dealing again with finite dollars, we would 

hope to try to dovetail as much as possible into the regulations 

that will be forthcoming on the federal program so that we’re 

not trying to lift what we’re standing on; so that the dollars are, 

in fact, directed in an appropriate way; that we’re not competing 

one against the other, or a person looking for assistance is not 

playing one off against the other. So we would hope to be able 

to co-ordinate it there. We still have not yet taken the decision. 

 

I can advise the hon. member that I would tend to lean towards 

the fund-type operation that exists in Manitoba, maybe 20, $30 

million that we could then allocate out to a project, because I 

think you’re seeing in the modern day, needing economies of 

scale. We need the small companies and businesses, but we also 

need economies of scale with the capacity to market into the 

world their  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2862 

 

product that they produce. So I hope that can explain the 

thinking at this point in time; no decision has yet been taken. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Minister. I’m going to stop 

talking about the earlier subject of the appropriate mix of public 

and private investment and that sort of thing, just disengage it, 

but promise you that we’re going to come back to that at some 

future occasion because I think you’re wrong. I think you’re 

headed in a wrong direction. I think you’re using the wrong 

language, and sending out all the wrong signals, and I don’t 

think you really believe what you’re saying yourself. And I 

think the upgrader project is a prime example of that. It’s not a 

question of the government wanting to own everything or 

anything, it’s a question of what the government has to do in 

Saskatchewan in order to make things happen. 

 

There is a wide variety of reasons; that’s not the only one; there 

may be other reasons. You raise the example of SMDC 

(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation), and there 

were policy reasons for that decision as there were policy 

reasons for the decision to go into the potash industry, and you 

know that as well as I do. And it’s a complex question. But you 

can’t let your ideology get in the way of that, and that’s what 

will be the subject of further debates between you and I and 

other members of this House in the future. 

 

I think it clear from your answer, Minister, that there . . . We’re 

six months into the fiscal year now — are we? — something 

like six months into the fiscal year, almost half of the budget 

year gone, and with the exception of paying out the IIP grants, 

this sum of money that’s to be voted for the industrial 

development grants hasn’t been spent yet, and it’s not, I 

suggest, not likely to be spent in this fiscal year. 

 

Now you may want to consult with your officials and give us an 

estimate of how much the $7 million is realistically likely to be 

spent during this fiscal year, or is it simply a number? It may 

be, if we want to decrease the deficit, that we could decrease 

that item right now to a realistic level and do a great favour to 

the Minister of Finance in so doing, because there’s no point 

having a number on the books and approving an estimate for an 

expenditure which has little or not chance of being made this 

year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well to date about 50 per cent, I’m 

advised, has been paid out. And we . . . This is a legal 

requirement for us to pay this, because the IIP program is cast 

in legislation. And it would be our expectation, our best guess is 

that the — virtually it all, if not all of it, would be paid out by 

the end of this fiscal year, and so we would anticipate the 

number in next year’s estimates to be very, very close to that 

number. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Now, Minister, I’d like to turn to the western 

diversification initiative and say a few words about it first, and 

then get your comments on it. 

 

We’ve been talking in this province about building on our 

natural strengths for many, many years. We used to talk about 

it; the late Mr. Thatcher used to talk about it; Tommy Douglas 

and Woodrow Lloyd talked about it; and we all to some extent 

did it. You’ve been talking  

about it, and if we’re to believe your rhetoric, some day you 

plan to do something about it; but it’s not clear to us what 

you’ve done yet to build on our natural strengths. 

 

And the federal government has been saying the same thing 

through their economic development programs and their 

regional development programs for many years. That’s what the 

regional development or the general development agreements 

and the subsidiary agreements were all about under DRIE 

(Department of Regional Industrial Expansion), where we were 

all going to build upon our natural strengths. 

 

Five years ago the Liberal government appointed federal 

economic co-ordinators in the provincial capitals, and I believe 

that Mr. Wakabayashi and your staff came to Saskatchewan on 

such an assignment, and they were to . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Does the Deputy Premier want the floor here 

now, or is he going to hear me out on this subject? 

 

They were going to provide advice on an ongoing basis that was 

more regionally sensitive. And in 1980, finance minister 

MacEachen’s budget announced a $4 billion western 

development fund. Again, special development initiatives were 

to be selected in consultation with the governments of the 

western provinces. “They will be designed,” and I’m quoting 

here: 

 

They will be designed to address the major economic 

opportunities and constraints which will challenge the 

west during this decade. 

 

Now seven years before that, the then Liberal government, 

federal government, had organized a major western economic 

opportunities’ conference which was part of a new approach to 

national development wherein, I’m quote here: 

 

. . . wherein our goal must be to seek balanced and 

diversified regional economies across the country. 

 

So everybody’s been addressing the same problem for that time, 

at least, and before that, in fact. 

 

But none of these programs have achieved their objectives. 

They’ve fallen far short of their objectives, and as well now we 

learn the $1.2 billion western diversification program will be 

allocated mainly on projects with the same kind of criteria as in 

the past, and we in Saskatchewan have, I think, a degree of 

skepticism about these grandiose plans that emanate from 

Ottawa about how much they’re going to do for us out here in 

the regions or in the boondocks. 

 

In Saskatchewan we have had a commitment for many years to 

put small business at the leading edge of our provincial 

economy, and the western diversification program does address 

the subject of small and medium-sized businesses. And we’re 

glad to see that. 

 

The March 1984 budget introduced a number of measures that 

were aimed at creating the environment in which small business 

would provide the diversification thrust through venture capital 

and your IIP program and your targeted tax cuts. 

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2863 

 

As I tried to point out last night, the indigenous Saskatchewan 

small businesses have not reaped their share of the benefits of 

this approach. They do not feel — let me put it that way, 

Minister — they do not feel that this program has benefited 

them. They feel the program has benefited others, the big boys, 

many of them from outside the province. But at the end of the 

day they’re left asking: what’s it done for me? And the answer, 

I fear, is that it’s done very little for them. I have some 

sympathy for them when they express that point of view. And 

that viewpoint has been put forward by the Canadian Federation 

of Independent Business who has stated . . . Garth Whyte said, 

we’ve tried to bring in the big projects, and they haven’t 

worked out that well. 

 

Now I questioned whether this approach to business 

diversification, and specifically to small business 

diversification, is genuine, or whether what we’re going to see 

under the new federal initiative and your own assistance project 

in Saskatchewan, that we were just talking about, won’t be 

another approach that is oriented towards the big deals, the 

megaprojects, the propping-up of businesses that are already 

large and can already afford to take care of their own 

investment financing requirements. And your friend 

Pocklington is a perfect example of a guy who was able to do it 

himself; no question about that. 

 

(1115) 

 

Now I guess what I come down to is that if you look at the way 

back to the western economic opportunities conference and 

trace it all the way through, we in Saskatchewan have had a 

long series of words and words and words — ideas. And it 

hasn’t been good enough, because on the ground it just hasn’t 

delivered what Saskatchewan business people are entitled to 

have delivered to them. 

 

The $1.2 billion allotted to the western diversification fund 

won’t go very far, Mr. Minister — I think you recognize that — 

because it’s going to be spread across four provinces over the 

course of five years. And even if that were divided equally, and 

I think there is some real question about whether it will be 

divided equally, it would only be some 60 million a year per 

province. 

 

And at the same time that that’s going on, our province will be 

feeling the impact of federal policies such as deregulation in the 

transportation industry, such as the cut-backs and restraint 

measures in relation to efforts to combat the federal deficit and 

elements of the tax reform ideas, and the whole mess in trade 

that Saskatchewan is going to have to grapple with in the years 

to come, with blessed little assistance from the western 

economic development fund. 

 

There’s also a distinct lack of specifics surrounding that federal 

program. Its structures and its operation have been left 

relatively open-ended. And there’s no fixed limit on the grants, 

and there’s no application forms, and there’s precious little 

information. And Saskatchewan businesses just simply don’t 

know what’s happening. 

 

Applications have been formulated and they’re being  

delivered to the office in Saskatoon, but nobody knows what’s 

going on. Now the intention of the federal government is that 

this type of approach will insure flexibility. I think it’s fair to 

say that the very flexibility that’s involved also opens it to other 

influences, even including heaven forbid, political influences. 

 

And finally, Mr. Minister, there is a perception, shared by many 

and shared by me, that the impetus for this kind of a 

development policy, for this kind of a regional or western 

development policy, is primarily an act of political symbolism 

rather than an act of economic reality. And we feel a certain 

degree of skepticism, and we’re reassured in that by the reaction 

that we get from the business community in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I would ask you to comment on those rather 

general remarks that I’ve made — most of which I admit were 

rather critical — and give us as much information about this 

area as you’re able to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member has asked several 

questions, and I’ll try to respond to the basic questions he’s 

asked. 

 

First question was, we are not dealing with small business but 

with big business. Now I suppose, in order for us to debate, 

what we have to do on that is define what we both mean by big 

business or small business. We address that in two ways. One, 

there is a Department of Tourism and Small Business, and they 

have a budget almost twice as large as our budget. Their job is 

exclusively to deal with small business. And of course that 

blends into what is large business. 

 

Now if you look at two or three of the projects — is Hunter’s in 

North Battleford, would you class that as a big business or a 

small business? Flexi-Coil in Saskatoon, is that a big business 

or a small business? And I suppose by Saskatchewan standards 

that would be a bigger business; by Canadian standards it would 

be seen as small business, quite frankly, by comparing to the 

large corporations that exist in other regions of this country. So 

we have to look t that. 

 

I think that however we proceed, however anyone proceeds, one 

should not take the view that small business is the answer to all 

our woes, and the only way that we can diversify or, on the 

other hand, that it’s only going to be big business that can 

diversify. I think you have to have a proper mix of those. 

Business is a business. 

 

Now the hon. member, I think, would say that he and their party 

does not support any kind of big business. I’d like to know how 

he defines that, but if it’s big business, it’s not welcome. So I’ll 

leave that at that. 

 

With regard to the western development fund and the history of 

that. Let me give you an example of the most recent one which 

was the western development fund put out by the Liberals in the 

1980s, late 1970s, to help diversify western Canada. 

 

I think, if you looked at that project, and people looked at that 

project honestly, what you would find was the following. It was 

driven by Lloyd Axworthy, who was the  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2864 

 

only real member of the Liberal caucus and the cabinet from 

western Canada. And quite frankly, the lion’s share of that fund 

was spent in the city of Winnipeg, and for the most part in 

Lloyd Axworthy’s seat, to the detriment of Saskatchewan, 

Alberta, and British Columbia. 

 

And I think anybody would admit that, including Liberals — 

and I’ve talked to many Liberals who have the same view of 

that particular fund. We were left with Hazen Argue to flirt 

around the province very once in a while announcing that he 

was going to build a swimming pool here or something else 

there. And that’s what we got out of it. We got short-changed 

dramatically by that, and I would hope the people of this 

province and this part of the country would not soon forget the 

way that was delivered. Quite frankly, I think it was a 

disgraceful administration of that particular fund. 

 

Now that fund carried on, and what happened is that it was 

driven at the national level and looking always at national 

questions and not at regional questions. Let me give you a good 

example. Ipsco yesterday opened their new caster — $65 

million investment that has now have their work-force up to, I 

understand, around 800 people, where it was down as low as 

250 people at the total down of the oil industry because they 

were pretty much reliant upon the oil industry for what they 

produced. 

 

That project was done with the assistance of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, with absolutely no assistance whatsoever from 

the federal government. And the reason given by the federal 

government — and it doesn’t matter whether it’s NDP, 

Conservative, or Liberal: you get the same type of answer from 

them, and that is: that looking at the national interest, we have 

over-supply in the steel industry and, therefore, to give you 

assistance at Ipsco would further exacerbate our problem in the 

steel industry. And of course that steel industry is concentrated 

lock, stock, and barrel in the province of Ontario. 

 

As a result the national government says, we cannot do 

something in the West because it would impact upon the 

already existing industries in central Canada. Now if the new 

program announced recently is to continue to follow that 

criteria in every way, shape, or form, then I would agree with 

the hon. member; it’s going to be an absolute failure. Because 

what it’s going to do is say, we don’t want to see any 

manufacturing really developed in the West because to do so 

would put stress and strain upon the existing manufacturing 

sector of this country, which for the most part, as we all know, 

is centred again in Ontario and central Canada, but primarily 

Ontario. 

 

So it would be our hope that that would not happen with regard 

to these projects. 

 

Now I would say we have two things going for us that are 

different. I think they have recognized the error of their way in 

looking at some of that stuff, and therefore have to look at 

dealing with a more reasoned approach to it. That’s number 

one. Number two, to say that there will not be political 

involvement when politicians and government is involved, we 

both know that that is not in fact true, and it has not been true 

since the beginning of time, regardless of which political party. 

Now some use it  

more than others; some use it less than others. But we all use it. 

You know that, and I know that. 

 

Now I would say that if we have a Bill McKnight from 

Saskatchewan in charge of that program as opposed to Lloyd 

Axworthy from Manitoba in charge of that program, I would 

hope that we would get a better shake out of the program than 

we got out of the previous program. I would just . . . two and 

two would say that. 

 

So I would hope that we would be able to play that lever and 

play that card to our advantage. And I’m sure others will look at 

different ways by which they could play it equally as well. 

 

So having said that . . . But let’s get down to the nub. I think, of 

your question, and that is: how do we diversify the western 

economy? And we have all, as governments, attempted to deal 

with that particular question over the last 50 years. We go back, 

and I think we both agree the West has been always cast in the 

role of hewers of wood and drawers of water, and that’s 

something we’ve always tried to be able to move away from. 

 

Now if we’re going to realistically say how do we build (a) on 

our strengths, and build something that can last. Then I think we 

have to look and say, okay, where is the economy of (a) this 

province and this country going, and what is happening in the 

world. 

 

For us to build anything only to serve Saskatchewan, with but a 

million people, we’re not going to see anything of very large 

scale built in this province other than for our resources and the 

development of our resources and the sale of our resources. So 

it seems to me that what we have to do is try to arrange trading 

patterns, however we might arrive at those, whether it’s 

bilaterally with United States, or multilaterally through GATT 

(General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), or bilaterally with 

Japan. However it’s going to be, I think we must be far more 

cognizant now of the world out there than perhaps we were 

before. And I think that’s a matter of the country growing up, 

quite frankly. 

 

So that is one area, I think, we have to be keenly interested in. I 

think, number two, we have to go back to saying, I think, two 

basic things. You cannot move away from agriculture and the 

agriculture sector. I think there should be concentration on the 

agriculture processing sector, and that is something you just 

have to stay with and stay with. 

 

Further refinement of our resources, whether it’s a heavy oil 

upgrader, whether it’s a Weyerhaeuser type project where you 

can use the lumber to make fine paper as opposed to fence 

posts, that type of thing, then you can pursue some 

manufacturing sector. But the manufacturing sector, which we 

have made some strides forward in, that is one that you have to 

develop with a fair degree of care, a fair degree of care in the 

sense that it must be financed in a way, and with enough 

investment, in a way that it can weather the ups and downs. 

And it also must have a marketing arm capable of dealing with 

the world market out there and the ups and downs and the 

changes in the world market. 

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2865 

 

So I would hope to see the federal initiative now being directed 

towards, one, agriculture and agricultural processing; two, 

further refinement of natural resources; three, some help to the 

science community, particularly in Saskatoon, that has shown 

some fair growth over the last five years and over the last 15 

years; and some specific manufacturing that we can do that can 

have and hit into niche markets whether in Canada, in United 

States, or other parts of the world, but I think primarily into 

Canada and United States because it’s difficult to manufacture 

and export into Japan, or manufacture and export into very 

competitive, the EEC (European Economic Community) in 

Europe. 

 

So I think that would tend to be the direction I would like to see 

us take. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I want to respond. I want to respond to one 

point that you made, Minister. I think that what Lloyd 

Axworthy did when he was minister responsible for western 

Canada was wrong, was just bloody wrong. It was wrong for 

him to take all that money that ought to have been available to 

businesses right across western Canada and put it into his seat 

in Winnipeg — wrong, immoral, and he ought to have been 

fired from his job for it; he ought to have been removed 

entirely. 

 

And if Bill McKnight administers this western economic 

development fund in anything like the way that Axworthy did 

his job, then he should be kicked out of the cabinet. He should 

lose his job also because he would be wrong. 

 

And, Minister, it just can’t be that you believe that the 

administration of those grant programs have a political content. 

If you think that, you’re wrong, and you shouldn’t be in the job 

that you’re in. You should be fired from your job if that’s what 

you believe. 

 

Surely these grants ought to be administered against a set of 

criteria and administered fairly and objectively. And the people 

who qualify for them should get them; and people who don’t 

qualify for them shouldn’t get them, regardless of what kind of 

a contribution they’ve made, regardless of what kind of a party 

card they’re carrying. And even if they’re on your executive, 

Minister, they’re not any more qualified for an industrial 

incentive program grant than I am, who have never been on 

your executive. 

 

Now I think that you agree with what I’ve said, but if you don’t, 

then you shouldn’t be sitting in that chair trying to administer 

that department. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I want to turn to another subject area, and I 

have a number of questions in them, and I think I’ll ask these 

one at a time. It concerns your trade program. 

 

Trade is a subject that I know that you’re very interested in 

from speeches that you’ve made in this House and 

conversations that you and I have had. And we recognize fully, 

and I recognize fully, that trade is essential to the  

economy of Saskatchewan. You have made a great deal of your 

endeavours to build better economic ties internationally and to 

aid Saskatchewan companies to find new markets. And I’m not 

about to launch into any kind of a criticism of that, but I do 

want to say that I am unable to understand what you’re now 

doing in light of that history. 

 

The entire trade programs branch of your department has been 

decimated, and I think that unless there’s some explanation for 

it, it must be a totally contradictory move, a totally 

contradictory development. On the one hand you are strong 

trade proponents, and I give you that as a fair description of 

your philosophy — you, Mr. Minister — and yet at the same 

time you’re stripping away from Saskatchewan business any 

help as they try to develop their international trade connections. 

 

And what we’ve seen in this budget is that the three programs 

are eliminated, three programs that were the backbone of your 

trade development policy — first, the Aid to Trade program; 

second, the market development fund; and third, the trade 

opportunities program. Now I want to deal with those in order. 

 

First of all, let’s look at the Aid to Trade program. In 1985-86, 

1,095 projects were approved under that program, providing 

about $570,000; and last year, ’86-87, there were 590 projects 

approved, providing slightly less than $400,000. Now obviously 

it was a popular program, and I’m given to understand that in 

many respects it was an effective program. And my question, 

Minister, is that you are not concerned that Saskatchewan 

business, in particular smaller manufacturers, will be adversely 

affected by the decision to eliminate that program? And do you 

not agree that these smaller companies could have utilized this 

money to assist them in venturing out into the export market, 

and in that way increasing our trade? And really are they not 

doing what we need the most to enhance Saskatchewan trade? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me address the two questions you 

raised. With regard to the political cards, I don’t think that is 

anywhere close to what I was saying. What I was saying is this, 

and I think the Leader of the Opposition when the new 

government came in in 1984 was very critical of the formation 

of the cabinet because all the cabinet ministers with key 

economic portfolios resided in central Canada, or not in western 

Canada. I think the history of this country has tended to be that 

much of the largess of government in assisting business has 

gone to Ontario and Quebec, with very little of it going to the 

West, and what we got was chicken-feed relative to what 

central Canada got. 

 

So at least with the $1.2 billion fund, and everybody would like 

to see it higher, at least now that is specific to western Canada. I 

think the government has indicated that it’s not going to be 

apportioned on a one-quarter, one-quarter basis to each 

province. And I don’t think that it would be fair to say that, and 

certainly talking to the federal government there’s not an 

intention of saying, are you a card-carrying member as to 

qualify for a job or qualify for this grant. I don’t think that is 

going to happen, and I would want to see . . . all I indicated with 

McKnight  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2866 

 

is that I think with McKnight we’re going to get a fair shake, 

where we certainly did not get a fair shake with Lloyd 

Axworthy. And I would rather deal with a Saskatchewan 

member than I would deal with a Lloyd Axworthy. And that’s 

all I’m simply trying to make on that particular point. 

 

The second point with regard to our approach towards 

international trade, there’s two things that I think you have to 

look at with regard to international trade. One is, if you look 

realistically at the numbers for trade by our province and by our 

country, Saskatchewan lives on exports, and therefore we have 

to pursue the export dimension of our economy and what we 

produce. 

 

We export roughly half of what we export into the U.S. market, 

and half to the rest of the world. Now that’s about 50-50. And 

one would argue that if that was the national average, that 

would be very good, because the national average is not that. 

The national average is 78 per cent is exported into the United 

States, and the remaining 12 per cent into the rest of the world. 

Ontario which is the largest of all exporters, exports 90 per cent 

of what they export into the United States, and but 10 per cent 

into the rest of the world. 

 

Then you look and say, how do you approach the rest of the 

world? And the rest of the world is very, very large for a 

province like Saskatchewan. How do we get into (a) the Pacific 

Rim, which is very large? How do we get into Europe which is 

very large? And how do we maintain our markets in the United 

States within the small businesses? 

 

Now we still have in our trade vote, what? — about $180,000 

less money than we had last year. And that’s simply saying that 

we have to rationalize like everybody else has to rationalize. I 

can say that the government is reviewing its entire Aid to Trade 

program. And I think maybe if you went through some of the 

people that were qualifying, some of the stuff that was paying 

out again maybe got too loose in the sense if you had to 

priorize; should we be giving $15,000 to this company to go to 

a trade show in some part of United States; was it better to 

spend that 15,000 there or tighten it up so we’re perhaps a little 

more targeted, not unlike what we’re talking about in any grants 

we might have to incentives? 

 

I can assure the hon. member that we see this as a high priority 

in government, and we will pursue the international dimension 

in a continued way that we are now. And that means that we 

have to put offices out into the various parts of the world. We’d 

like to have more, but clearly we have to put offices out into the 

rest of the world. And hopefully we could co-operate in the 

future with the other four western provinces in our trade offices 

around the world, that would allow us to better utilize the sparse 

dollars that we have, to maximize our chances in the 

international markets. And that’s a long process and it’s a 

difficult process, but it’s clearly one that we are committed to. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — To some extent I think your answer applied to 

the other two areas that I mentioned in addition to the Aid to 

Trade program, namely the market development fund, which 

was to help exporters of agricultural and food products, and the 

trade  

opportunities program. Both of those programs were well used, 

I think, in ’86-87 and in ’85-86. 

 

And as you have said today and on many other occasions, your 

government puts a great deal of emphasis on diversification of 

agriculture and the further processing and marketing of 

agricultural products. And it seems to us that the elimination, 

the specific elimination, of the market development fund flies in 

the fact of that priority. 

 

The trade opportunities program was created to help exporters 

expand their markets while providing career opportunities for 

Saskatchewan graduates. And you paid, under that program, 

part of their salary and their travel costs, and that program also 

was used in ’86-87 and ’85-86. 

 

As I said when I began this remark, Minister, to some extent 

you touched on those programs, but could I ask you more 

specifically whether the areas covered by those programs are 

now dead or whether they’re to be subsumed in a new program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me address a couple of those. One, 

the market development fund was primarily involved with 

agriculture, and what we are proposing to do is have that 

strengthened in the Department of Agriculture where it’s far 

closer to the farm community and to the spin-offs coming out of 

the farm community. So you’re going to see that much more 

focussed in the Department of Agriculture. 

 

With regard to the trade opportunities program, that program 

was introduced by myself, so I take a fair degree of interest in 

that program. I believe it is something that deserves more effort, 

for this reason: that it takes a long time perhaps to reap the crop 

from that type of dollar. But what we are doing is trying to get a 

situation where we can have students graduating from 

university that are able to obtain experience in the international 

markets of the world, hopefully that they would come back and 

become involved in the companies employing them, and 

therefore advancing our knowledge of trade and understanding 

of the world market. So that will not be eliminated; in fact, it 

will be significantly developed, I would hope in the near future. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Minister, could I refer you to your estimates 

under the heading “Business Development Grants.” The amount 

estimated for that grant in the last fiscal year was slightly over 

17 million. This year it’s 9,500,000, which is a cut of almost $8 

million. What’s the story with respect to that cut? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That falls under the Department of 

Tourism and . . . the hon. members, that falls under the 

Department of Tourism and Small Business. I would ask that 

. . . I hope that you would pursue it in that area. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 

have some questions as well for the minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, in looking through the estimates under subvote 3, 

under trade development, I’ve noted a . . .  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2867 

 

under the 1987-88 year you’ve indicated an expenditure of $1.8 

million, and under the ’86-87 year you’ve indicate 1.9.1 note as 

well a decrease in person-years of 4 person-years. I’m 

wondering if you could give us a breakdown of the employees, 

who they are, and their salary range. As well, Mr. Minister, 

under subvote 4 I’ll be asking some questions in terms of 

person-years, and who has left, and if you could perhaps get 

your officials to get that information for us. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Can you be specific as to what you want 

there? 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I would like to know who has left, in 

terms of the employees for last year to this year, what their 

salaries are, and what their positions were? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Subvote three and vote four? 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Subvote three and subvote four. 

 

An Hon. Member: — All right. I’ll undertake to get that. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Okay. I’m wondering as well if you 

could give us a breakdown under both subvote three and 

subvote four of the other expenses. I note in ’86-87, 1.1 million; 

’87-88, estimated 1.043 million — if you could give us a 

breakdown of those expenses under subvote 3. And as well if 

you could — I note under subvote 4: ’86-87, 1.6 million; 

’87-88, 866,000. And I’m wondering if you could give us the 

specific breakdowns of the expenditures under those subvotes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’ll undertake to get that information. 

It’s not here, and so they’re going to have to go back to the 

office. So I wonder if the hon. member would put the list down, 

if he wants to complete the list, so that we don’t have to keep 

running, and get the entire information. Do you understand 

what I’m saying? You’ve asked a series of questions; I’ll 

undertake to get that information for you. But are there other 

areas of information that you wanted as well, so I can get that 

without them having to then run back and try to redo the same 

job? 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, we would like as well for 

last year the total breakdown . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

That’s fine; we’re willing to wait. And you’ll be bringing those 

back for last year, as well as for this fiscal year? 

 

An Hon. Member: — You bet. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — If I could, I’ve got some questions 

regarding the trade offices. Your government has directed an 

awful lot of expenditure to trade promotion and established 

trade offices throughout the various areas of the world. And I’d 

like to know if you could, for the year of 1986-87, give us the 

total amount of money directed towards these offices for 

commercial operations, residential accommodations, salaries of 

your representatives, anything that you may have expended in 

terms of personal service contracts, employment contracts, in 

the trade offices in London, Vienna, Hong Kong, and Minot, as 

well. 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — London is not under our department. It’s 

under, I believe — it’s not under us — in Executive Council. 

Vienna is under Agdevco. That question should be properly 

posed in Crown corporations. Minot office has been closed in 

this budget year, and so I’ll undertake to get you the 

information with regard to Hong Kong. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I would ask . . . Mr. Minister, you 

indicate to me that the trade office in Vienna is not under your 

jurisdiction? 

 

Mr. Minister, in terms of promotion and the amount that your 

department spend for advertising, I note in ’83-84 you’re 

spending a total of approximately 19 per cent of your budget; in 

’84-85 it increased to 20 per cent of your budget; in ’85-86 to 

23.4 per cent of your budget. And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, 

if you’re feeling that your department has garnered the kinds of 

benefits from these amounts of advertising that you would have 

expected when you forecasted these amounts and when you 

spent these amounts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — You have to . . . I mean that’s always a 

debate at budget finalization time. The advertising, of course, is 

for outside of Saskatchewan — promotions for outside of 

Saskatchewan to (a) assist in the selling of Saskatchewan 

manufactured or produced product, or seeking to encourage 

investment back into our province. And so I suppose it becomes 

somewhat difficult to perhaps say that the money has always 

been spent in the right way. 

 

The thing I can say to the hon. member is the amount that we 

spend, let’s say, relative to what Alberta would spend, or B.C., 

or Manitoba even would spend, and certainly Ontario and 

Quebec, is minuscule as to what they spend on those type of 

promotions. So that while it is still a fairly significant amount, 

part of the function of this department is to try to encourage 

sales outside of the province, trying to attract investment into 

the province. And you can do it by promoting, and you can do it 

by sending people out. 

 

If you simply sit back and do nothing, the world is not going to 

run to us, and the world is not going to come zooming into 

Saskatchewan. You have to go out and try to promote yourself, 

and that costs money, but I think it’s something that we have to 

undertake to do. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just want to say, we 

all understand that Saskatchewan needs to be exposed to the 

rest of the world in order to have our economy grow. But I also 

want to say on behalf of the small-business people in this 

province that we don’t believe it’s worked. And I also want to 

tell you that the money that your department has expended in 

this province has certainly not been aimed to Saskatchewan 

people and Saskatchewan entrepreneurs. And I think if you will 

be honest with yourself and look at all of the economic growth 

indicators that are published across this country, that you will 

have to agree that the small-business people in this province 

have a reason to be upset with your government. 

 

You have been standing up here and debating philosophy with 

the members on this side. You talk about your desire  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2868 

 

to see free enterprise involved in the economy in this province, 

and that’s all fine. And we on this side of the House expect that 

as well. But I tell you what we don’t expect. We don’t expect 

your kind of open for business philosophy, the Peter 

Pocklington and the give-away to Weyerhaeuser, to continue, 

nor do we appreciate that kind of conduct from your department 

and your government. 

 

You, I’m sure, would understand what small business in this 

province could do were they given the $20 million that you 

gave to Peter Pocklington. We’ve talked about private and 

public and corporate ventures, joint ventures, but in the case of 

the Pocklington situation what you’ve done is, you’ve taken 

public funds, given it to private enterprise. And I would suggest 

to you, Mr. Minister, that the money you’ve expended there 

could have created an awful lot more jobs had you directed that 

to the small-business community, which you didn’t see fit to do. 

 

We believe, and the record of this government has been, in joint 

funding. But I can’t for the life of me understand why you 

would give a millionaire, a Peter Pocklington millionaire, 

money that belongs to the people of this province in order to 

create the few number of jobs that you’ve created. 

 

We’re pleased to see those jobs. We are. But I tell you, if you 

divide the amount of public funds that you’ve given by the 

number of employees, the amount of money that the city of 

North Battleford had to inject in order to get that particular 

operation to come to their city, the investment per job ratio is a 

woeful and a sad, sad specimen. And it’s not the kind of 

development that the people of this province can afford. And 

that’s one of the reasons that you’re sitting with almost a three 

and one-half billion dollar deficit that you’ve built since 1982. 

 

And I would also want . . . You’ve mentioned Weyerhaeuser, 

you’ve mentioned the development. Well, Mr. Minister, please 

to understand that the people of Prince Albert have seen 

through you. And they saw through you prior to the election of 

‘86, and not very comfortable with the fact that you gave away 

one-quarter of a billion dollars to an American firm. 

 

You’ve talked about markets and you talked about the $91,000 

a day that the PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) assets 

were supposedly losing. But you haven’t stood up in this House 

and indicated to the people that the pulp and paper industry in 

North America was on a downturn. And you haven’t stood up 

and indicated that you knew — or if you didn’t know you 

should’ve known — that there was going to be an upturn in that 

industry. And you should’ve known that the PAPCO assets, 

whether privately owned or publicly owned, were going to 

generate profits. But that’s the kind of rhetoric . . . you spent 

hundreds of thousands of dollars telling the people that the 

PAPCO assets were a waste, losing money; you did open for 

business and the like, on and on and on. 

 

But what you’ve done is you’ve forgotten your friends, or who 

should be your friends, the small-business community in 

Saskatchewan. And I’m afraid, Mr. Minister, outside of the 

board of directors of the chamber  

of commerce who represent a number of business people in this 

province, you’ve forgotten the downtown Saskatchewan, the 

downtown Moose Jaw, the downtown Swift Current, and 

Yorkton, and Estevan, and Elbow. You’ve forgotten about those 

people. And what you’ve done because of your incompetence, 

you’ve gone to them and you’ve asked them to pay higher 

taxes. You’ve heaped the gas tax on them. There’s been an 

increase in their business tax because of revenue sharing, an 

increase in their property tax because of revenue sharing. 

 

And I just say, Mr. Minister, that your performance has been 

dismal. And I would ask you how you expect the business 

community who for the most part I would suggest didn’t 

support you in 1986 and won’t again in 1990, or whenever you 

have the courage to do it — won’t be supporting you the next 

round. 

 

And I want to ask you, what do you say to them in light of the 

expenditures to your big-business friends? How do you 

condone that and how do you explain that? I would like to 

know what you’re saying when you’re out campaigning, and if 

you ever do get out there and talk to those folks. I’d like to 

know how you condone that and how you condone your 

actions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, one would . . . we just went 

through what I thought was a fairly informed debate with the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview, and then we come back to 

the rhetoric of the so-called token business man within the 

NDP. Let me say a couple of things. One, is that you hobble 

around on your horse saying that there’s $250 million given to 

Weyerhaeuser. I mean the member from Regina Centre, while 

we were 17 points behind in the polls, swung the wrong way on 

this one which allowed us to move up in the polls to the point 

where we won the last election, quite frankly. So we can argue 

whether Weyerhaeuser was good or bad in the last election. My 

question is that it was good. 

 

The success of the Weyerhaeuser project . . . and I can’t really 

believe a member from Prince Albert standing up and being 

totally opposed to a $250 million investment in his city to 

manufacture paper to create a lot more jobs, and that investment 

being made by a company and not by the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You come back to the view that what was right is when there 

was a pulp mill in Prince Albert, that you had to as government 

go in and buy the entire amount. It was brought in by Ross 

Thatcher. It was built by the Liberals, not by you. It was a joint 

venture. 

 

(1200) 

 

But when the opportunity presented itself, what did you do? 

You stepped in and bought it 100 per cent, so that the 

government could own it — at a very inflated price. It was a 

very poor investment by anybody’s standards. You absolutely 

built nothing. You simply bought what was existing, what was 

there. There was nothing new added, nothing new added. And 

now a new project comes on that doubles the size. And what the 

government will do is get back the $250 million we sold that 

project for with a very good return of interest on it during 

period of  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2869 

 

pay-back, plus a new project. 

 

Now if that doesn’t make economic sense, if that’s not called 

building and development, then I don’t know what is. Now 

that’s what the member looks at. The member sits and says, you 

shouldn’t give $20 million to Peter Pocklington. We never gave 

no $20 million to Peter Pocklington. I defy you to look through 

the books and see whether or not Peter Pocklington got no $20 

million. 

 

There was more money given to Intercontinental Packers to 

expand the red meat industry than there was given to, or 

assistance to Peter Pocklington. So what you’ve got is more 

jobs, more expansion in Intercontinental. So now we really 

come back to the key question. Is it okay to help Gainers build a 

plant, or not okay to help Gainers build a plant but okay to help 

Freddie Mitchell build a plant? I mean, really, what is the 

difference if both of the are going to build, if both of them are 

going to create new jobs, if both of them are going to process 

the red meat that we need to process in this province? Why is it 

that you’re against Gainers and in favour of Freddie Mitchell? 

 

I suspect that if you probably compared net worths of Freddie 

Mitchell and Peter Pocklington, they’d probably both be fairly 

close to the same, I would guess. So what are you interested in 

— in the personality, because you don’t like Peter Pocklington? 

I mean, if you get down to that, that is a strange, strange way to 

try to develop something. That is a strange way to develop 

something. 

 

The member opposite has simply picked up the NDP brochure 

as to how to argue on this particular issue and he’s given it 

word and verse. We’ve heard it a thousand times before. And I 

would have thought the token business man — I don’t know 

what kind of business you’re in — but the token business man 

of the NDP could have done better than that. You saw the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview, at least he’s a lawyer so you 

give him credit for that, he asked legitimate and decent 

questions and real questions in everybody’s view — better than 

simply getting into rhetoric like the member from Riversdale. I 

would have thought the NDP would have been able to come up 

with a little bit more than simply the old rhetoric. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I most certainly would 

like to respond to some of the comments by the minister and I 

want to tell him as well that he’s probably insulted about 20,000 

small-business men in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, what you have 

done is shown clearly where the PC party is in terms of small 

business. You would rather talk to an entrepreneur from New 

York than a little business man from Yellow Grass. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I’ll tell you, I’ve operated retail in this 

province since 1970, and a lot of my small-business colleagues 

have been around and have watched the administration that you 

guys have thrust upon them. And  

they can compare the difference and their bottom line from 

when the NDP were government and when you big business 

tycoons came in and decided to load money on Pocklington. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — And do you want to know the difference 

between Freddie Mitchell of Intercon and Pocklington? I’ll tell 

you the difference. Pocklington came from Alberta, took 

Saskatchewan tax dollars, a Tory hack, ran for the leadership 

under the free enterprise banner, no government subsidy, came 

in and took $20 million of Saskatchewan people’s money. 

Freddie Mitchell and his family have operated a legitimate 

business in Saskatchewan for many, many years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — And I want to tell you, when you take 

Freddie Mitchell’s tax dollars and give them to one of your 

Tory friends from Alberta to compete against him, I say you’re 

going in the wrong direction. And I would suggest to you that 

Freddie Mitchell would say you went in the wrong direction as 

well. And I’ll bet you did a lot of back-stepping when you went 

to Saskatoon and talked with Freddie Mitchell. 

 

I think clearly the minister stands up and he talks about a token 

business man. Well let me tell you, Mr. Minister, if you 

compared the gross of my business to about 50 other businesses 

in Prince Albert and in Moose Jaw, and if you’re telling those 

people that because they don’t have a gross of billions and 

millions of dollars that they’re able to net a decent wage in 

order to feed their family and to clothe their kids, and if you’re 

telling all of those small-business people that they’re token, I 

tell you, Mr. Minister, you better go out and you better start 

explaining what a legitimate business is to them. 

 

Because I’m telling you what you are — you’re a token 

minister of a token government who purports to represent the 

small-business community but you don’t represent anything but 

multinationals and millionaires and the kind of Tory hacks that 

are associated with your political party. You don’t need to stand 

in this legislature and insult legitimate business people in this 

province. And I tell you, your remarks of today are going to go 

to a lot of small-business people in this province, and I’m going 

to see to it through my communications budget that it gets out 

there so that they know what you really think about them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I am telling you, I am 

saying to you today that the small business community are 

understanding that the New Democratic Party is a party that 

believes strongly in the aspirations and the things that they want 

to see. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — They believe strongly that they have the 

right to make a living for their families in this province. And 

they believe strongly that they don’t have to compete  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2870 

 

with a multimillionaire, a Peter Pocklington, and see your 

government give their tax dollars to bring him in to compete 

with a company that is employing hundreds of peoples, the 

Intercon Packers — that’s what they don’t believe. And they 

believe that the New Democratic Party would do it fairly and 

honestly and openly, and without the kind of politics that you 

guys have been thrusting upon the people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — My colleague from Saskatoon suggested 

a little earlier that if you don’t carry a PC membership you 

don’t do well under this administration, and I tell you I believe 

him. And if you don’t think the small-business community 

believes him, why don’t you call a by-election in Saskatoon that 

has got the highest income level of most ridings in this 

province? Call an election in there — a by-election. Tell the 

Premier to get up and call a by-election and see what the 

business community, and what the middle- and upper-income 

people, are starting to think of your government. 

 

I tell you why you won’t do it — because you haven’t got the 

guts, you haven’t got the courage. And I would suggest to you, 

you’ll probably wait until the Deputy Premier takes off to his 

job in the CN so that you’ve got a chance of winning one and 

losing one. But I don’t even believe they’re going to win that 

one because I tell you, you look at the poll results in 

Saskatchewan and they’ve had enough of you, and it’s because 

of the deals like the Weyerhaeuser and the Pocklington deal. 

 

You people aren’t business people. You couldn’t entice 

business. You got Paul Schoenhals running the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, and he’s amassed almost what — 

$700 million debt? That’s your kind of business. You guys are a 

dismal display. You aren’t a business orientated political party; 

you’re a patronage orientated party, that’s where you guys are 

at. 

 

And I tell you, you’re going to find out over the course of the 

next three years who your friends are, and you’re going to find 

that there aren’t as many, and every day and every day you’ll 

find less and you’ll find less. You’re going to find out that the 

business community aren’t going to accept remarks like the 

minister opposite when he talks about a small business man 

being a token business man. 

 

Have you any idea how many people you insulted? Do you 

care? Do you care? I tell you, Mr. Minister, that’s the problem 

with your government: you haven’t got enough vision to 

understand that there are many small-business people like me in 

this province who don’t desire to be millionaires but desire to 

feed their families and have enough to retire on. And what 

you’re doing since 1982, is you’re taking away their retirement 

through increased taxes, lower grosses in their stores, which 

means lower bottom lines. That’s what you’re about. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I’m going to close by saying that I’m not 

going to forgive you. And you want to know that there are 

hundreds and thousands of people in this province who aren’t 

going to forgive those kind of callous and uncaring remarks. 

The Minister of Human Resources and you have very much in 

common — your mouth flaps  

before you think, and it’s going to cost you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, I would challenge the 

member opposite to take his speech and take the speech of the 

member from The Battlefords and send it to every 

small-business man in the province of Saskatchewan using his 

communications dollar. I would encourage you to do that. I 

knew you were foolish, but I did not think you were that 

foolish, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now let’s get back to . . . The NDP say, we are in favour of 

small business- the NDP. They had a chance for 11 years in 

government, and what did they do for small business, and what 

do they propose to do now. Well let’s see. We had 22 per cent 

interest rates that was hitting the consumer, the home owner; it 

was hitting the farmer; it was hitting the small-business men. 

And what did the NDP say? Don’t . . . That’s not our fault. We 

haven’t got the money to help you there because we’ve got our 

agenda building potash mines and buying PAPCO and buying 

farm lands. So that’s what you did there. 

 

Now the second thing that the members of the NDP say: here is 

what we will do for small business. We will increase the 

minimum wage to $6 an hour. And I’ll tell you there’s going to 

be a lot of business men out there cheering and cheering — yes, 

we’ve got a $6 or a $7 minimum wage — NDP policy. And if 

you think that small business likes to see $6, $7 minimum 

wage, then I think you’re out of touch with the small business 

community. Clearly the people in Kindersley that I talk to, 

when they hear that they want a $6 or $7 minimum wage, they 

say, hold it, hold it, that’s not what we wanted in small 

business. That’s not what we wanted in small business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members in the business community in 

Kindersley then hear the NDP say: we are going to reduce the 

work week to 32 hours. Does the small business want to see the 

work week reduced to 32 hours? Not very likely. Thirty-two 

hour work week and a $7 minimum wage? And they say the 

small-business community is going to support the NDP. You 

people have not had the support of small business since 1944, 

and you’re not going to get the support of small business now. 

 

Now the member opposite said we only give money to big, 

multinational corporations and nothing to the small business. 

This department doesn’t deal with small business, the Tourism 

and Small Business does. 

 

Now let’s go through the list of ones that the industry, the 

department that deals with big business, who they assisted 

through the IIP program. Now we’ll go through this list and see 

how big they are: 60 Minute Photo PA Ltd. Now you should 

know that one — 60 Minute Photo PA. Is that a multinational 

corporation? Is that a legitimate small business in the town of 

Prince Albert? I would think it is. 

 

How about Accu Agricultural Implements of Senlac, 

Saskatchewan? Is that a multinational corporation? Is that 

something that is . . . somebody from way afar, and not a small 

business? They were helped. 

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2871 

 

Ace Fibreglass (& Urethanes) Ltd. of Saskatoon. The member 

for Riversdale probably knows those guys. Is that a 

multinational corporation? Is that somebody that is a 

multinational corporation and the head of some corporation? 

 

How about Ad-Ventures Ltd. of Saskatoon? Is that a 

multinational corporation? How about . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. We may not agree with what 

the minister is saying, but let’s give him some courtesy in being 

able to be heard in this House, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — How about Apex (design) Graphics 

Ltd., Broadway Avenue, Saskatoon? Is that a multinational 

corporation? Is that some giant firm? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. If the member for Moose Jaw 

North wants to ask his question, I’ll be glad to recognize him if 

he would stand after the minister has sat down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — How about Appel Printing of North 

Battleford; is that a multinational corporation? They got 

assistance under the IIP program. Armor Elevator Limited of 

Saskatoon; is that a multinational corporation? Artemia Canada 

of Chaplin, Saskatchewan? How about Atlas Concrete Ltd. of 

Yorkton; is that a multinational corporations? Is that a small 

business in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

(1215) 

 

I’m going to give this . . . I’ve got 45 pages of this I’m going to 

read into the record just to show you that these are not all 

multinational corporations. 

 

How about Auto-Tronic Controls Limited of Estevan; is that a 

multinational corporation? They got assistance from the 

government in this particular program. How about Autotran 

Swather Limited of Loreburn, Saskatchewan; is that a 

multinational corporation? It’s a farmer who is expanding his 

agriculture concept into building swathers — a Saskatchewan 

guy, on the farm, building swathers. And that’s what they refer 

to as a multinational corporation. 

 

How about Bailey Bros. Seed of Milden, Saskatchewan — 

Bailey Bros. Seeds of Milden, Saskatchewan? There’s a giant in 

the league with Cargill, I bet you. Battleford’s Machine Shop 

Services of North Battleford; is that a multinational 

corporation? How about Bay Trail Plastics Limited of 

Humboldt, Saskatchewan — the member from Humboldt — is 

that a multinational corporation? Big Sky Steel Fabricators, just 

south of Saskatoon; is that a multinational corporation? Is that 

something that we should or should not be doing in the province 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

How about Blackline Sports of Saskatoon; is that like Nike or 

Adidas? Is that a multinational corporation or is that a local 

small business in the province of Saskatchewan? How about 

Blackline Sports of Saskatoon; is that a multinational 

corporation? Or how about Brake and Drive Systems of Regina; 

is that a  

multinational corporation? 

 

Brandt Industries of Regina; Brandt Industries, for anybody in 

the agriculture community know that Brandt Industries have 

been manufacturing farm equipment for some period of time. 

Are they a multinational corporation, are they headquartered in 

Saskatchewan, and are they a Saskatchewan family operation? 

Clearly they are. Those are the people that were helped. 

 

How about Bridge City Transmission in Saskatoon? Is Bridge 

City Transmission in Saskatoon a multinational corporation? 

Not very likely. 

 

Now here’s a big one. Broadview Meat Markets of Broadview, 

Saskatchewan. Broadview Meat Market. Did the IIP program 

help those? Is that a big multinational corporation? Broadview 

Meat Markets where they’re processing beef in Broadview, 

Saskatchewan, Canada? Hardly. 

 

Brown Industries of Drinkwater, Saskatchewan. Drinkwater, 

Saskatchewan; is that the home of a branch plant company out 

of New York, in Drinkwater, Saskatchewan? How about Butte 

Manufacturing of Ogema, Saskatchewan? Is that a 

multinational corporation in the words of the member from 

Prince Albert-Duck Lake? 

 

Now here’s one from Prince Albert. Campbell Printing Ltd., 

Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. Now is that in the league with the 

largest printing companies that you have seen in the world? Or 

C & C Custom Sleds (Ltd.) of Radisson, Saskatchewan. 

Radisson, Saskatchewan. If we have this many branch plant 

facilities in this province of Saskatchewan, well then I think that 

most of the world be rushing to us. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Name one that’s not a Tory? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Name one that’s not a Tory. There’s not 

very many people in the business world that are not Tories or 

Liberals. There’s very, very few who are NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Here is the Carlyle Observer, limited. 

Now the Deputy Premier should know the Carlyle Observer. 

Now is that like the New York Times or the Washington Post, or 

a large printing concern that we might see around the world? 

Not very likely. 

 

How about Caroline Mills of Saskatoon? Is that a massive grain 

company or processing company? Here’s another one, 

Christopher’s Photo Lab of Foam Lake, Saskatchewan. Another 

head office or another branch plant of a great multinational 

corporation. 

 

Here’s one for Click Photos of Dalmeny. Now is Click Photos 

of Dalmeny a small business, or would you class that as a big 

business too? 

 

Now here’s Commercial Industry Manufacturing Ltd. of 

Humboldt, Saskatchewan, Canada. Now I ask the member from 

the Quill Lakes, how many multinational corporations are there 

in Humboldt, Saskatchewan,  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2872 

 

Canada? Craig Inkster’s men’s wear, Watrous, for the member 

from . . . Creative Touch Millworks Inc. of Saskatoon; Custom 

Printers of Yorkton. 

 

Here’s another big, big one — David S. Jessiman of Lucky 

Lake. He’s not even incorporated. Now does that make him a 

multinational corporation or not? Dean Smith Acres Ltd. of 

Swift Current, Saskatchewan. 

 

I’ll go through the list and continue through this list. I’ll read 

them all. Here’s a big one for you — Develcon Electronics of 

Saskatoon; now that’s a larger operation. They expanded; they 

have built a large number of jobs in Saskatoon. They are, in 

fact, a multinational corporation. They are a multinational 

corporation, the first one in this list that I’ve read. But they are 

also headquartered in Saskatoon. Their head office is in 

Saskatoon; their research facilities are in Saskatoon. And we are 

to say somehow we should not give money to Develcon 

because it’s a big bad dirty multinational corporation. That’s 

what we would understand if we were to listen to the member 

from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 

 

How about Dor-Lite Manufacturing of Moose Jaw, Canada. 

Now is that a multinational corporation, I ask the member from 

Moose Jaw? It might be, he says. The member from Moose Jaw 

says it might be. 

 

How about Dowie Quick Print Ltd. of Yorkton, Canada. Tory, 

says the member from Quill Lakes. 

 

How about Dyna-Fab Industries Ltd. of Watson, Saskatchewan? 

Now is that a multinational corporation? Dyna-Fab Industries of 

Watson. Now is that a . . . the member from Quill Lakes says, 

yes, we helped get that established. Well they qualified under 

the IIP to expand. The members opposite are against that, 

because listen to the member from P.A.-Duck Lake. He has said 

every dollar that we put into small business or to business in 

this province went to multinational corporations. 

 

Oh, here’s a big one — Elite Eavestroughing Ltd. of Regina — 

Elite Eavestroughing. Is that a bad company by your standards 

as well? Is that another one of these big, bad, dirty corporations 

in the province of Saskatchewan? Pro-media Enterprise Ltd. of 

Gravelbourg, Saskatchewan — Gravelbourg, Saskatchewan. 

Now is that a big boy as well? Now I can go through this list, 

but I won’t because the time will continue on and continue on. 

 

But let me go back to the question of the member from 

P.A.-Duck Lake. What he said was this, and I think this is fairly 

fundamental, is that there is a big difference between Freddie 

Mitchell and Gainers, and that we should not support Gainers 

because Gainers doesn’t pay tax in the province of 

Saskatchewan. That is absolute hog-wash, and you know it. 

That’s what you said. That’s the first thing. 

 

The second thing that the member said is that if you’re from 

Alberta you’re not welcome in Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You’re not a Canadian. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — You’re not a Canadian. Is it okay for the 

Japanese to come in and invest? Is it okay for the  

Americans to invest in central Canada, in Ed Broadbent’s 

riding, in the billions of dollars? Is it okay to do that, but we 

don’t want anybody from Alberta investing in Saskatchewan. 

And then you call yourself a Canadian. No, we don’t want 

American investment. Japanese investment is okay, but none 

from Alberta, thank you very much. What kind of a Canadian, 

what kind of an attitude is that? What kind of an attitude is it for 

an NDP to say: nobody from Alberta who is prepared to invest 

in this province, no, they are not welcome, thank you very 

much. 

 

You take that attitude out to the business community, and I will 

tell you exactly what the business community will say to you. 

They will say the same thing they’ve said to you and your party 

for the last 40 years in this province: no, thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, the list that you used and 

referred to and were speaking from for four or five minutes, I’m 

going to be asking you some questions about those later, but I 

want to make some comments in terms of your remarks about 

interest rate and banks. And as well, I’d like to take a couple of 

minutes about minimum wage. 

 

You, Mr. Minister, are as aware as everybody else in this 

country that the banking institutions are those that are 

supporting your particular party, both provincially and 

federally, with thousands and thousands and thousands of 

dollars. And there’s a reason why; there’s a good reason why. 

Because you’re the guys that support the high interest rates. 

You, the old line parties, have supported the banking 

institutions for years and years and years, and you know it. But 

I want to say, Mr. Minister, that’s all fine and dandy. We’ll 

leave that alone. 

 

Let’s talk about minimum wage for one minute. I want to talk 

about minimum wage and the middle-income wage-earners who 

used to be able to shop in small businesses in this province, who 

used to have some disposable income. And you know the record 

as well as I do. I want to talk about those people who have been 

relegated to the role of unemployment and finally to social 

assistance, and now who have no money to go in any spend in 

those small businesses and make those small businesses 

flourish. That’s what you’ve done, and that’s your record. 

 

You don’t need to go back to the ’70s or the ’30s. What you 

want to do is look at what you’ve done to small business. And I 

say, Mr. Minister, if you had treated small business in the same 

fashion that you treated Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington, 

you would have been on the right track. 

 

You didn’t list 250 people on that particular list. And I say to 

you, if you had given each one of those people, those business 

people, the $1 million that you gave to Weyerhaeuser of 

Tacoma, Washington — and you probably could have because 

you gave them $250 million worth of assets — it may have 

created a different picture, and those little businesses would 

have invested in this province and created employment, and lots 

of  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2873 

 

employment, a lot more than what we’ll get out of the new 

paper mill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — We welcome that new mill, I want you to 

know, and we appreciate those jobs. But I want to tell you as 

well, if you would have turned the profits that that corporation 

is making now back into the building of a paper mill, you 

wouldn’t have had to give away one-quarter of a million dollars 

of assets, and those jobs could still be there. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you today to file the document that you were 

reading from. I’d like to have a list of those businesses. I’d like 

to have a list of the amounts that each of those businesses were 

given. And I tell you, I’d almost as well want to know how 

many of those have got memberships in your political party. 

But I’m not going to ask that. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, you’ve been unfair to small business 

in this province. You’ve got a double standard. There’s a 

standard for Pocklington and Weyerhaeuser, and there’s another 

standard for local Saskatchewan businesses. And I say at the 

expense of local businesses in this province, you’ve been 

treating your buddies very, very well. And I think it’s unfair. 

The business community thinks it is unfair. And I simply say to 

you in closing that you’re going to pay for it at the polls 

whenever the next election comes up. 

 

I’m asking you again to table that document that you were 

referring to with the amounts that each one of those businesses 

received under that grant program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That question was asked by the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview in a meaningful way, and I undertook 

to provide the entire list to the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview, and if the member from P.A.-Duck Lake had been 

listening he would have known that. 

 

Now the member talks about banks. He starts out by talking 

about banks. Well let’s talk about banks for a while then. You 

say that banks are mean, nasty, dirty villains, is what I hear you 

saying. And it is only the banks that like the Liberals and the 

Conservatives. Is that what you’re saying as well — that the 

NDP are firm and strong; that you should not have truck nor 

trade with the banks of this province? Is that what the member 

is saying? Because that’s exactly what I heard the member 

saying. This government has brought in . . . 

 

(1230) 

 

An Hon. Member: — Come up out of the trees. He said no 

such thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Now, we will pursue that. You dropped 

it. We will pursue that. 

 

The member from Indian Head-Wolseley, the minister 

responsible for Tourism and Small Business, when you  

get into his estimates, he will tell you exactly what we’ve done 

for small business. When interest rates were 22 per cent you 

turned your back on small business. What did this government 

do? 

 

This government assists small business to write down that debt 

to 8 per cent. Now you ask any business man in this province 

whether he would prefer and whether he can function with 8 per 

cent or with 22 per cent. If one party gives him 8 per cent and 

the other one lets it go to 22 per cent, he will support 22 per 

cent. You are kidding yourself. You are kidding yourself. 

 

Minimum wage. The member said he was going to speak about 

minimum wage, but then he sort of said nothing about 

minimum wage because you know full well your party supports 

6 or $7 minimum wage. That’s exactly what you want, and I 

will tell you that the small businesses of this province can ill 

afford 6 or $7 minimum wage. We take that position that if 

something divides this party from that party, this side of the 

House from that side of the House, it has been that. And it has 

been thus for the last five, six, seven, eight, or nine years, and 

will continue to be that way for some time. Anybody that stands 

up and says we should have, we should have a minimum wage 

in this province of 6 or 7 per cent are wrong, wrong, wrong. 

 

Now you talk about taxing business. Go over to Manitoba, the 

only province, the only province in this country, and what kind 

of a tax did they put on? They put on a payroll tax, or a business 

payroll tax. And how does that business payroll tax work? Well 

it says to business, if you have more employees, then you’re 

going to pay more tax — not based on whether you make any 

money or not, not based on whether it’s viable or not; we will 

tax you according to how many employees you got because 

anybody that’s got more than five employees is big business by 

NDP standards, by NDP standards. 

 

So you want to have minimum wage, you want to let interest 

rates float, you want to have minimum wage at seven bucks, 

you want to tax them on a payroll tax, you want to have . . . you 

want to throw the banks out of the province altogether. You 

don’t want to deal with banks, that’s what you’re saying. That’s 

what the member opposite is saying — the banks are mean, 

ugly, and dirty, and they do nothing for our economy. That’s 

what the hon. member is saying. 

 

How many business men deal with banks and require banks for 

their assistance? For the member opposite to sit down and blast 

the rhetoric that they’ve been blasting for 40 years in that party, 

you’re no different than you were in the ’60s, and no different 

than you were in the ’50s. And I tell the hon. member, keep 

going, keep talking that same line, and we will continue to have 

the support of small business and big business in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — You won’t continue to have it very long, 

Mr. Minister, if your only policy is to misrepresent what the 

opposite side says. Mr. Minister, I think it’s indicative of the 

bankruptcy of this government that your only response to some 

questions from the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake is to 

misrepresent the NDP  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2874 

 

policy. If you had any programs, if you had a single success 

story, I think you’d talk about it. You don’t. You insist. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — You insist, Mr. Minister, in not talking 

about your own record but about the record which you . . . but 

about the programs which you attribute to us. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to get to one of your flagships in the 

last term of office — real success story of yours. I would like if 

you would tell us what the status of the Husky Oil upgrader is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can say to the hon. member that the 

lead agency dealing with the Husky upgrader is the Minister of 

Energy and Mines, and that’s the way estimates has 

traditionally worked. And when you went through estimates 

with the Minister of Energy and Mines, those questions were 

posed. 

 

So what I would suggest to the member from Regina Centre, to 

go back and read Hansard, if that’s too much for him to do. 

And that question was asked and that answer was given to that 

particular thing. 

 

Now the hon. member says we’re not proud to talk about the 

record of building in the province of Saskatchewan. I’ll tell you 

that we are proud to look at the record that we’ve been building 

in the province of Saskatchewan. Let’s start with them and we 

will go through them for the hon. member. 

 

We are very proud that we, along with the Co-op and the 

federal government, were able to build a heavy oil upgrader in 

the city of Regina. The member opposite is against that. When 

the member opposite was in government, did they even consult, 

did they even ask the Co-op, what about the Co-op doing it? 

No, you weren’t interested in that. You were interested in doing 

it with Saskoil so we own it, so we could own it. 

 

And the member from P.A. says, we’re against everything 

Weyerhaeuser does. We aren’t. We’re quite proud of what 

Weyerhaeuser is doing — $250 million investment in the 

province of Saskatchewan. We’re interested in Phillips Cable 

that now manufactures cable for Sask Power right here in the 

province of Saskatchewan, rather than importing it. We’re very 

proud of Marubeni-Hitachi that are building turbines for the 

new Rafferty project down in the south-east part of the 

province. We are very proud that that is being built in the 

province of Saskatchewan and not imported in from Japan some 

place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We are very proud of what has 

happened in the city of North Battleford. We are very happy as 

to what’s happening in the city of North Battleford where 

Hunter’s is now building and manufacturing recreation vehicles 

that otherwise were imported from British Columbia or United 

States into Saskatchewan and the rest of Canada to be sold. 

They’re now being built right here in the province of  

Saskatchewan. 

 

And we’re very happy with the processing of red meat. We are 

very happy that there is five times more investment in the 

manufacturing sector. We are very proud that there’s twice as 

many people working in the science and technology field. And 

the list goes on and on and on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are proud of our record of building and 

diversifying our economy and we will continue to diversify this 

economy and build this economy into the 1990s and beyond the 

1990s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, once again we have you talking about anything but the 

question put to you. You talk about our record; you talk about 

our platform, but y you didn’t answer the question. 

 

Mr. Minister, with respect to the Husky Oil upgrader — it 

matters not who the lead agency is — the fact is, if it’s built, 

there would be significant sums coming to your department, 

and you will be involved, Mr. Minister, and you have been 

involved. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, do you know anything about the Husky 

Oil upgrader, and if so would you share it with us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I indicated to the member opposite, and 

the member opposite full well knows, full well knows that in 

estimates you ask the department that’s involved in a particular 

project to respond. The next thing you’re going to know is 

you’re going to want to ask me questions on Education or on 

Social Services or whatever, and that’s not the job of the 

Department of Economic Development and Trade. We take on 

projects; we have brought forth many projects. 

 

Here’s another one though, while I am on my feet, Mr. 

Chairman. And we’re going to read some of the NDP 

resolutions, and how business will like them. 

 

Be is resolved that a New Democratic Party advocates 

union membership as a condition of employment on 

government-funded construction projects, including 

anybody that receives contracts to provide services to 

those contracts. 

 

Now what you’re saying, as a party, and small business out 

there is: small business, if you are going to provide anything to 

government or any government project, you must unionize your 

shop if you only have two or three people working for you. 

That’s what you’re saying. 

 

Now you can say, the members opposite, that they’re attracting 

small business. They’re going to let the interest rates go higher; 

raise the minimum wage to $9; force them into unions; 32-hour 

work week; payroll tax; and you keep the list going. And I can 

read some more from your policy statement here, read some 

more. And you say that somehow that is going to attract 

business for the province, let alone attract people to your party. 

And nobody can invest in the province if they don’t come from  

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2875 

 

Saskatchewan, and nobody should be allowed to invest if they 

have a Tory membership or a Liberal membership. 

 

That is shameful. You have an incredible lack of understanding 

of business, the member from Regina South. I always knew 

that. I hoped the member from P.A.-Duck Lake would bring 

some sunshine to your party. He obviously has not. You are still 

the same. You’re back in yesterday. You understand Crown 

corporations. You understand nothing about business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I want to say, Mr. Chairman, the day is not 

totally lost. There is a point of agreement between the member 

and I — we agree that the member from Regina South — all of 

those comments are true about the member from Regina South. 

It’s heartening to see that you have just enough integrity not to 

make such comments about the member from Regina Centre, 

about which they’d be patently false. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — On a serious note, Mr. Minister, it’s in a 

way sad to see a minister such as yourself, who once had so 

much promise, behaving in such a fashion in this legislature. 

Mr. Minister, you display incompetence, and you display a 

tiredness which I’m afraid has become a trade mark of this 

government, Mr. Minister. You don’t want to talk about the 

issue; you want to talk about some platform which you attribute 

to us. 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is a trade mark of a government that’s 

bankrupt of any new ideas, bankrupt of any energy, desperately 

clinging onto office until the next election comes. And that’s all 

it’s going to be. 

 

Mr. Minister, with respect to Husky, all we got from the 

Minister of Energy was a comment that there might be a 

meeting sometime in the near future. You would almost 

certainly, Mr. Minister, be involved in any such meeting. Have 

you been involved in any such meeting, Mr. Minister? Has 

anything at all happened with this great marvellous project? Has 

anything at all happened, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I am sorry about the referring to the 

member by his wrong seat. The member from Regina Centre, 

that classic champion of business, small or otherwise. How I 

could make such a mistake from the member from Regina 

Centre. 

 

With regards to the question, with regard to Husky upgrader, I 

can advise the hon. member of two things. One, to somehow 

indicate just like you did before that you sit there already poised 

to be . . . there’s something wrong if Husky is built. I’m sure 

that’s the way it sits, just like you were in Weyerhaeuser, just 

like you were in everything else. 

 

Husky is being pursued by the Minister of Energy and Mines. 

The Minister of Energy and Mines is doing a very good job in 

that field, and I have all the confidence in the world with the 

member from Swift Current. 

The member from Regina Centre stands up — he makes the 

same speech for the last five years. And I remember going 

through these estimates last year. I remember last year going 

through these estimates and the member from Regina Centre 

saying, you people are bankrupt of ideas, and just wait until this 

impending election in 1986, and you’ll be over there, and we 

will be back running the government, and most of you will not 

be back. That’s the rhetoric you used in 1981, before the ‘82 

election; that’s the rhetoric you used in 1986 before the next 

election. You’re still using the same rhetoric today and today 

and today. 

 

The member opposite talks about . . . why does the member not 

get down and deal with reality? As we saw the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview asking logic and reason questions, we got 

into a legitimate debate. How can you get into a legitimate 

debate — how can you get into a legitimate debate with the 

member from Regina Centre or the member from Prince 

Albert-Duck Lake who have nothing, nothing but rhetoric to 

stand up and blab out their rhetoric and blab out what they’re 

against? They never had a new idea in their life. 

 

And what really concerns me — what really concerns me about 

you folks over there is I expected that from you. I mean, I’ve 

. . . nine years, I’ve learned that. I would have thought 

something better from the token business guy within their party, 

but that’s what he is. I was impressed by the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

But let’s go now to the leader, your new leader. And what did 

he bring up? Here is the guy who is the critic in Economic 

Development and Trade. And we’ve been doing these estimates 

for two days, and what has he contributed? He stood up for half 

an hour, for half an hour and read a speech. The Leader of the 

Opposition had to get up and ask the questions, and the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview had to get up and ask the questions. 

Talk about someone who has no ideas. He’s got good rhetoric. 

We all concede that to him, we all concede that to him, but not 

any questions. 

 

And you guys are sitting there copying him. Don’t ask 

legitimate questions; don’t get into what makes the economy 

go; just stand up and give rhetoric and give . . . 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, order. Order, order. 

Order, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I know that it’s Friday 

afternoon and we are all anxiously waiting for the 1 o’clock, 

and we’re getting a little bit over exuberant. I think we should 

try to do a little bit more in terms of decorum in this Assembly, 

and I’m talking to both sides. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I understand, Mr. Chairman, that the 

Lieutenant Governor is here to deal with some private Bills. I 

move we rise, report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

  



 

September 25, 1987 

2876 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 

 

At 12:49 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 01 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities 

Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the 

Briercrest Bible College 

Bill No. 03 — An Act respecting Our Lady of the Prairie 

Foundation 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:51 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:52 p.m. 

 


