


















































October 22, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 October 22, 1987 
 

3433 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Estimates 

 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Gardner, from the Standing Committee 
on Estimates, presents the first report of the said committee, 
which is as follows: 
 

Your committee met for organization and elected Mr. 
Gardner as chairman and Mr. Koskie as vice-chairman. 
 
Your committee considered the estimates of the 
Legislative Assembly, Legislative Library, and Legislative 
Counsel and Law Clerk, and adopted the following 
resolutions: 
 
1. Resolved that item 4, subvote 26 of vote 21, Payments 
to the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation of 
$116,600, be deleted. 
 
2. Resolved that the committee recommends that the 
provision of funds under subvote 26 of vote 21 for the 
property management corporation be considered by the 
Board of Internal Economy before inclusion in the 
estimates in the future. 
 
3. Main estimates to March 31, 1988: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 
twelve months ending March 31, 1988, the following 
sum: 

 
For Legislation — $3,870,000 

 
4. Resolved that towards making good the supply granted 
to Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the 
public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1988, 
the sum of $1,296,400 be granted out of the Consolidated 
Fund. 
 
5. Resolved that this committee recommend that upon 
concurrence in the Committee’s report, the sums as 
reported and approved shall be included in the 
Appropriation Bill for consideration by the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by member 
from Moose Jaw South: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 
Estimates be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
today, on behalf of my colleague, the member for Saltcoats, 
introduce a group of students from Churchbridge. And I want to 
have the Assembly welcome them in the usual manner, and I 
will be meeting with them later on after question period. 
 
And I hope that their stay here will be informative and that they 
will have some questions of me later on, because I’m prepared 
to discuss a few things that happen here. And I hope you have a 
good time while you’re here in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

United States Trade Subsidies 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, just two weeks ago you 
blindly agreed to the Mulroney deal on trade, the secret deal on 
trade. Now the United States has shown its true colours by 
offering oilseeds, wheat, and milk at bargain basement, 
government-subsidized prices to our most important customers 
— the Soviet Union, China, and India. 
 
We haven’t even ratified a deal and already the Americans are 
breaking it. I think Canada has been stabbed in the back by the 
American government, and I want to know why you think 
Canadians should trust the Americans to do any different in the 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think . . . I believe it 
would be a good idea if the hon. member would do his 
homework if he’s going to talk about export subsidies into 
various countries. 
 
In our contact with the U.S.D.A., the United States Department 
of Agriculture, in the foreign ag service, we find that there are 
long-term commitments to China, and at the end of the sale in 
August there was a modest amount of money and a very small 
amount of grain to the U.S.S.R. In the last part of a long-term 
contract, there was subsidized 65,000 tonnes, at $38.36 on a 
new kind of technology that loads fumigated wheat, which is a 
new method, and they were trying to convince the Soviet Union 
to buy some of that wheat. 
 
And I’m advised by the Canadian Wheat Board this morning 
that India is not even in the market. So it’s a bit of a tempest in 
a teapot, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition says that the United 
States is into heavy export subsidies and it’s . . . India isn’t in 
the market. There is some new technology that they’re trying to 
convince the Soviets to use, and the Chinese have long-run 
commitments that they have to live up to. 
 
Now I can say, Mr. Speaker, that the Canadian market share for 
world export wheat is up from 17 per cent to about 20 per cent, 
up over the last three years. The United States share is down. I 
can say that, with only 5 per cent of  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3434 
 

the world production and us having about 20 per cent of the 
world market, that we’ve been doing well. And secondly, Mr. 
Speaker, that the federal government has been encouraged by 
me and others to maintain our market share and maintain the 
price for producers. And that’s exactly what we should be doing 
bilaterally and multilaterally in our negotiations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker . . . I’m going to 
make a new question, new question. Even Joe Clark says it’s 
against the principles of the agreement. I have here the official 
document signed by Canada and the United States earlier this 
month. These are actual elements of the agreement which you 
have decided to support this deal. And I’d like to quote to you. 
It says: 
 

Each party has agreed to take into account the export 
interests of the other party in the use of any export subsidy 
on agricultural goods exported to third countries, 
recognizing that such subsidies may have prejudicial 
effects on the export interests of the other party. 

 
Mr. Minister, if that doesn’t mean no new 
government-subsidized grain sales, just what does it mean? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP are so blinded by 
their hatred for Americans that they can’t even foresee the 
future for Canadians of having long-run, bilateral or multilateral 
trading agreements with lower tariffs. I don’t know why you 
should be so hateful — so hateful. 
 
I will say to the hon. member that the biggest world trading 
problem today is in international subsidies associated with 
agriculture commodities. That’s the multilateral problem all 
over the world — Europeans subsidize, Americans subsidize, 
we do, Japanese, others. It’s unfair, and we want to deal with it 
on a multilateral basis. 
 
To do that, Mr. Speaker, one of the ways you can is take it to 
the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), take it to 
multilateral trade negotiations, encourage others to reduce their 
subsidies. We’ve got the President of the United States, the 
President of France, the Prime Minister of Canada and others to 
agree to phase out of subsidies. 
 
The second thing you do is to cut bilateral agreements with 
countries, one at a time, to say, we will agree together to reduce 
the subsidies and not subsidize into each other’s markets, and 
agree to take that strength into a world forum to reduce the 
subsidies. 
 
Now he is saying, Mr. Speaker — and I have to say, I disagree 
— don’t talk to them; take your toys and go home; just play 
here, because they won’t play internationally when we’re 
cutting a bilateral deal. I say, you stick with the bilateral, and 
you stick with the multilateral, and you don’t just hide and 
pretend it doesn’t exist as a long-run problem. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, it’s time 
that you stick up for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s the issue. The Mulroney government, 
just like you, are showing absolutely no backbone with the clear 
violation of the trade agreement. And the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, Joe Clark, indicated that there was a breach of the spirit 
of the free trade agreement. 
 
And so I ask you: what good is a free trade agreement if United 
States can go forward and absorb our markets and we can’t do a 
thing . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — With your approval. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — With your approval. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear, it’s very 
clear, Mr. Speaker, that members of the opposition, the NDP, 
don’t want a trade deal at any price, so they’ll jump on any 
rumour that they can arrive at — any rumour at all. If there’s a 
rumour that there is a subsidy, or if there’s a rumour that there 
has to be this, or if there’s a rumour that there has to be that, 
they’re the first to jump on it. They don’t check for details. 
They don’t even find out that India isn’t even the market for 
trade, but they are saying the United States has a big export 
subsidy to India. I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the case. 
And if they want to jump on the rumour, they can. If it was a 
perfect deal, they wouldn’t buy it. 
 
I remind the hon. member from Quill Lakes, remind the hon. 
member, yesterday the typical tactic yesterday was that Bob 
White fills the centre-fold of the Leader-Post and saying, vote 
for free trade, or against it. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, 
when asked if he should have a vote in his union to take it out 
of the international union, he says, no, don’t vote because . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, clearly the Saskatchewan farming 
community knows that the Premier is now a spokesman for 
Ronald Reagan and not for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask you, Mr. Premier: are you aware 
that the U.S. government has offered a government subsidy of 
more than $200 million to the Russians if they buy American 
grain? And are you aware that this week’s sale of wheat feed 
grains and dried milk to India not only was subsidized by the 
U.S. government but the Reagan administration arranged a 
50-year, no-interest, $300 million loan to India through the 
world bank to cinch the deal? 
 
I ask you: if free trade deal won’t prevent that kind of 
double-dealing by the Americans, what good is the deal,  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3435 
 

and what is our Saskatchewan farmer to expect? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP even confuse . . . 
the NDP even confuse, if they would listen . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Just listen for a minute. You even 
confuse foreign aid programs with export subsidies. The P.L. 
(Public Law) 480 program has been around for a long time. 
And that allows us and others, Americans, Canadians, to help 
third-world countries. That’s not an export subsidy. 
 
These people are even against us and Canadian farmers for 
helping people in Ethiopia because it’s an export subsidy. 
They’re confused everything. They don’t care if it’s the truth. 
They don’t care if it’s rumour. They’ll jump on the first tempest 
in a teapot just to say they’re against trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to these people opposite, they can 
hate Americans all they like, they can hate other Canadians all 
they like, they are blinded by their philosophy, and they are 
afraid to stand up for the real truth and the real potential for 
Saskatchewan farmers, and that is to export internationally, 
including the United States, without tariff and without duty. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I want 
to ask, are you aware that Joe Clark, Minister of External 
Affairs, stood in parliament and, on the very issue of the sales 
by the United States of grains to other countries and our 
markets, indicated that the Americans were breaching the spirit 
of the free trade agreement? Are you aware of it, and what will 
you do about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, that’s my whole point. The 
NDP brings up a rumour, they bring up a rumour, and then they 
expect the minister to respond to a rumour. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
The Premier is attempting to answer the question. He can’t if 
he’s loudly interrupted by members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
fact that you would at least have the opposition sit in their 
places while we respond to their questions, even though they 
are rumours. 
 
The point is, if you don’t like the truth, then the whole world 
can listen to you babble about the fact that you can’t come up 
with anything that’s factual. The point is, you can raise rumour 
after rumour after rumour on the trade deal because you’re 
against it philosophically. Not if it’s a good deal or not for the 
country, but because you’re against it. 
 
When the opposition raises a rumour, any cabinet minister is 
going to say, I will go look at the rumour, if this  

is the case and if this is the case, then we’ll deal with it. In the 
case of India, it’s not accurate. And for you to say that it is, is 
just categorically wrong. So if you want to build on rumours, I 
mean it’s a tempest in a teapot. What you’re into is a tempest in 
a “trade-pot” because you’re against trade, period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grain Transportation Subsidies 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also 
to the Premier with respect to the matter of free trade, and it has 
to do with that section in the first part of the agreement 
suggesting the elimination of certain parts of the Western Grain 
Transportation Act. 
 
And the Premier, I’m sure, will know that that will have some 
significant bearing on a number of agricultural commodities in 
western Canada, most particularly rapeseed, and could have the 
affect of putting the western rapeseed industry at a competitive 
disadvantage, not vis-à-vis the United States, but vis-à-vis 
eastern Canada because the reduction of the subsidy is only on 
westward movement and not eastward movement. 
 
Will the Premier give us his indication as to whether or not that, 
in his view, will require some kind of adjustment mechanism in 
the wake of this proposed treaty, and if so, what kind of an 
adjustment mechanism would he have in mind to offset that 
competitive disadvantage for western Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the modification to 
any transportation subsidy in the agreement is targeted towards 
commodities that we would send into the United States and 
particularly rapeseed and canola oil and canola meal that go into 
the United States. 
 
I can say at the outset, without agreement those kinds of 
subsidies would be subject to countervail and subject to U.S. 
law because they say it’s a direct subsidy and yet you’re putting 
it into the United States market and it’s subject to an action — 
either a countervail action or anti-dumping action or something 
of the same, with or without a bilateral trade agreement. 
 
When you have a bilateral trade agreement, and it is — let’s 
assume that it was perfect, and you had the same laws on both 
sides, you can’t cheat on it. You have to play by the same rules. 
Now you can cheat, but there’s a penalty. If you want to 
subsidize an industry and then expect to export into the other 
man’s market, he’s going to say, no, that’s not fair, and you 
agreed not to do that. 
 
And that’s the point with respect to subsidizing transportation 
goods, any other goods, through transportation subsidies into 
the United States market. They’re subject to countervail today. 
If we want to have complete and assured access to the U.S. 
market, we don’t subsidize transportation into that U.S. market. 
 
Now in terms of going across the country, we have a Crow rate 
and a transportation system, as the United States has the 
Mississippi system, which allows them to get their goods out of 
the country into the rest of the  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3436 
 

world. We can apply our transportation rates out of Canada, 
east or west, using the Crow rate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, a 
number of Saskatchewan farm organizations are very concerned 
about the point that I have just raised. I take it from your answer 
that you are not sympathetic to the point. 
 
Are you indeed saying that those farm organizations that 
believe an adjustment mechanism to compensate for this east 
versus west anomaly or discrimination, that no such adjustment 
mechanism will be forthcoming upon the recommendation of 
your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The hon. member, if he has a proposal on 
east-west transportation and the problems with the Crow rate as 
it applies to east-west transportation, I’d like to see it in some 
detail. 
 
The only concern that I have heard — and I would certainly like 
to hear this concern — the only concern that I have heard is that 
there would not be the competitive capacity to export into the 
United States if you didn’t have the Crow rate between here and 
Minot, or here and Seattle. 
 
And my argument is, and the argument that I get from 
consumers in the United States and people that produce and 
compete with us, is the Crow rate is a subsidy regardless of 
whether there’s a bilateral agreement or not, in the eyes of 
countervail. So you can’t . . . If you’re going to export into 
another man’s country, you’ve got to play by the same rules or 
be subject to the countervail. 
 
If there’s something else that’s east and west with respect to the 
transportation and/or subsidies, I would like to hear it from the 
member, and I would be glad to go over it with him or anybody 
he cares to bring to my attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, let me quote to you the rumour that you 
talk about with regard to the statement by Mr. Joe Clark, who at 
least is saying something on behalf of the farmers of Canada. 
Mr. Clark said this action by the United States, while it does not 
breach the treaty, is not consistent with the spirit of the 
agreement. That’s the rumour you talk about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I say, Mr. Premier, that under the export 
enhancement program in the two-year period beginning 1985, 
the Americans spent $1.5 billion, and starting next month the 
United States has approved the expenditure of $2.5 billion in 
the next year — more than tripling that amount. When will you, 
Mr. Premier, start standing up for the Saskatchewan farmers 
and stop defending the United States of America which is 
taking away their markets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, let me say that 
the Canadian Wheat Board and the Canadian government has 
increased the Canadian farmer’s and the Saskatchewan market’s 
share of the world market at the same time the United States has 
been doing this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — He’s saying that . . . And he says over 
there, well not for long. He doesn’t have any confidence in 
himself or Saskatchewan farmers or Canadians. He doesn’t. All 
right. That’s his problem. Again . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or the wheat board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Or the wheat board, as a matter of fact, 
Mr. Speaker. And they don’t want to listen. As soon as I get on 
my feet they bark from their place. I would ask the new leader, 
can you keep them quiet so we can have a reasonable debate, 
and particularly the members that might like to learn something 
about agriculture. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, with respect to those export subsidies, 
you have to be able to document where they’ve made inroads 
and where they’re actually making a difference — where 
they’re not, Mr. Speaker, because our market share is up. The 
hon. member stands and said, oh, well this has caused this 
problem and this has caused this. All he’s doing, all he’s doing 
is standing in his place and saying, I’m against trade with other 
countries; I’m against trade with United States. We can’t trust 
Americans. We can’t trust Europeans. Yesterday the member 
from Quill Lake says you can’t trust the Chinese. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Statements by Canadian Wheat Board Official 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Premier. The Premier rather clearly doesn’t accept the words of 
Joe Clark. He prefers those of the . . . President Reagan’s 
administration. Will he perhaps accept the words of some other 
people? Now I want to quote the words of John Morriss, a 
senior official of the Canadian Wheat Board, and who reads as 
follows, who quotes as follows: 
 

The (meaning the United States) are blanketing the world 
with their subsidies, and no consideration is being given to 
our interests. We feel they are practically targeting our 
markets. They may be preaching friendship in the free 
trade deal, but they are getting worse. 

 
Now do you agree with Mr. Morriss? Do you agree that the 
United States is preaching free trade and stealing our markets, 
or do you believe they’re lily-white, as you now suggest, and 
that the United States government is acting in an honourable 
way in marketing their grain? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Mr.  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3437 
 

Speaker, finally . . . Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in all respect to 
the Leader of the Opposition, finally they’ve figures out what’s 
going on in world agriculture: subsidies, international subsidies. 
I mean, finally! What have we been saying in this legislature for 
the last five years and across the country? International 
subsidies and protectionism are wrecking the world — and 
these people, no, that wouldn’t do anything close to it. And 
we’re saying, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We are saying, and have been, we should 
deal with it multilaterally and bilaterally. All I’m saying to the 
hon. member today is, I would not wreck a bilateral trade 
agreement that reduces tariffs and subsidies in the face of 
multilateral problems. We deal with third-party countries; the 
United States deals with third-party countries. This is a bilateral 
agreement, not a multilateral agreement, and we take this 
bilateral agreement as consistent with GATT, and we take it to 
other countries and say, this is the way you should perform. 
These are the things to do. You are saying, scrap the whole 
thing because United States is still subsidizing to third parties. 
 
Well we’re saying, I don’t like that; I never have. I don’t like 
their subsidies; I don’t like their farm Bill. I’ve said it time and 
time again, but I’m not foolish enough to say, take up your toys 
and go home and don’t deal with them. You deal with them 
head-on, and you have the courage to go to the people, and you 
tell them, this is how you deal with it. Now they may not like 
that, Mr. Speaker, but that’s the truth, and that’s what the 
people should know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
problem with you, Mr. Premier, is you don’t want to deal with 
anyone head-on. When it comes to the Americans, you want to 
deal with them head-down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I ask you, Mr. Premier, can you defend 
an agreement wherein the United States promises not to export 
grain in a manner which is prejudicial to Canada — and that’s 
the intent of the agreement — after they continue to do just that, 
and after they continue to budget $2.5 billion for their export 
enhancement program making clear to everybody, everybody 
who is not hoodwinked by Reaganomics, that they intent to 
continue to do that and to savage our farmers while you stand 
by and clap for the Stars and Stripes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP do not like 
Americans. The NDP do not trust dealing with their neighbours. 
The NDP says that they don’t want to deal with subsidies and 
protectionism, but they don’t want to go to a bilateral 
agreement, and they don’t want to go to a multilateral 
agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just say this: the Prime Minister of Canada, 
with a great deal of effort on his part and for premiers across the 
country, has finally got the President  

of the United States to agree to take agriculture subsidies to 
zero in 10 years. Now that’s never happened before. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, and the opposition laughs 
when you make progress. They stand there and laugh in their 
place and say, when the president does this or when a prime 
minister agrees to this, they laugh. When the President of 
France says we should reduce it, do you laugh? No, you want to 
try and fix it. That’s what you try to do. 
 
We’re saying, bilaterally and multilaterally you get countries to 
agree to reduce their tariffs and their protectionism. And you 
say, surprise, surprise, United States has export subsidies. Well 
we know that. We’re trying to get them to change it. You’ve 
just figured it out. You’ve just figured it out, and it’s about time 
you figured it out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cuts in Grants to Cosmo Day Care Centres 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Education, and it deals with one of his department’s recent cuts, 
a cut which symbolizes just how uncaring and short-sighted this 
government has become. 
 
Mr. Minister, you recently cut a $1,300 a month grant to the 
Cosmo Day Care Centre for special needs children in Saskatoon 
and to a similar day care centre in Lloydminster. These day 
cares provide special help for children with speech 
impairments, learning disabilities, and behavioural problems. 
and the loss of your grant has meant a cut in staff who can work 
with disabled children and a cut in staff salaries at this unique 
day care centre. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: can you tell taxpayers why your 
department, which spends $65 million a month, and over a 
million dollars a year on one single agency, Dome Advertising, 
for advertising alone, why your department couldn’t find 
$1,300 a month to provide special help for learning-disabled 
children in day care? Can you explain to us, Mr. Minister, how 
it comes to be that your priorities are so misplaced and 
discriminating against the disabled preschoolers of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of the 
details that the member has raised, and I would take notice of 
the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the hon. members 
to please be silent. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3438 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 41 — An Act to 
amend The Provincial Auditor Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
spend a few minutes on The Provincial Auditor Act, no. 41, 
today, and indicate to the Minister of Finance that in the last 
three or four weeks in Public Accounts some very revealing 
things have come to the fore which concerns us considerably, 
Mr. Speaker, as to what has happened in regards to the 
presenting of this Bill. 
 
This morning again it was revealed to the Public Accounts 
Committee by the Department of Finance that never at all have 
they considered the cost effectiveness of private auditors. They 
weren’t asked, neither did they consider it. And yet, Mr. 
Speaker, they put forward a Bill wherein the Minister of 
Finance clearly indicates to this House that it’s not within the 
purview of the Provincial Auditor, but that this Bill will make 
better use of private auditors, their expertise, and therefore 
would be more cost-effective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s rather ironic that the Department of Finance, 
who prepared this Bill, have never even considered — they 
didn’t analyse it, they didn’t consider it, and therefore they are 
not aware of any grounds whatsoever that this Bill will be 
cost-effective and the hiring of private auditors will be 
cost-effective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few years ago in this House a Bill was presented 
by the government opposite wherein the member from 
Kindersley spoke very clearly and eloquently, let me say, 
because I went back into the records and read what he had to 
say at that particular time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was a good speech. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, I will admit to the Deputy Premier, he 
made a pretty good speech on what he considered the role of the 
auditor to be. And he indicated, Mr. Speaker, in his speech at 
that time that the final responsibility of the auditing of the 
government books must rest with the Provincial Auditor and 
that the Provincial Auditor must be given the authority and the 
leeway to do his particular job. 
 
Since that time, Mr. Speaker, what have we seen? Well even 
before that, Mr. Speaker, what did we see? In 1982 the total 
staff of the Provincial Auditor was 72 individuals. This year he 
will be down to 49 individuals. What the government opposite 
has done, although in words they’ve pronounced that they want 
the Provincial Auditor to be able to function adequately and do 
his job, what they do if they don’t like what he says, they 
simply cut his staff. Then the Minister of Finance gets into this 
House as he presents Bill 41 and he says, well, but the final 
authority will still rest with the Provincial Auditor. 
 
If he doesn’t like what the private auditors have done or if he 
feels that they haven’t done their job, then he can go into that 
particular department and he can examine. But what do they 
do? They cut his staff. They go and cut his  

staff to make absolutely certain that he will not have the ability 
to examine those private auditors’ report in any detail. They say 
on the one hand that they want the Provincial Auditor to have 
the final say, but on the other hand they make absolutely certain 
that he doesn’t have sufficient staff to carry out his duties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is very clear, it is absolutely clear what 
has happened in public accounts and what we have heard in 
public accounts, what the Provincial Auditor has said, and what 
has come about in the last three or four years . . . this 
government is intending to make sure that the Provincial 
Auditor does not get sufficient staff to carry out his 
responsibilities. 
 
I remind the members opposite and particularly the Minister of 
Finance, that the Provincial Auditor is an employee of this 
Assembly. He is an employee of this Assembly. He has been 
given a certain mandate and that mandate is that he is to 
examine all the books of the Provincial Auditor. It is his duty to 
make sure that the provincial government is held accountable 
for all of its expenditures. And it’s incumbent therefore upon 
the provincial government to make sure that there is sufficient 
staff in the Provincial Auditor’s department so that he can do 
his particular job. 
 
What they have done, Mr. Speaker, first of all, what the 
Minister of Finance has done is illegal. What he has done so far 
is illegal, because the law of the land states that the Provincial 
Auditor shall be responsible for examining the books of the 
government, except those that have been exempted, and there 
are a few in the Crown corporations that have been exempt. 
 
What the Minister of Finance has done this year — and he’s 
making the Act retroactive to January 1 in order to cover his 
illegalities — he has said, well we’re going to put into effect 
private auditors. We’re going to let them do the work in certain 
Crown corporations without having the authority to do so in 
law. 
 
So the Minister of Finance is simply saying, I don’t care what 
the law is, I’m going to do what I want to do, and I don’t care 
what the Provincial Auditor says. I don’t care what the laws are, 
we’re going to do it. And they have done it. They have hired 
private auditors. The private auditors are doing the work, 
although it’s illegal at the present time to do it. And the 
Minister of Finance has simply said, oh, well I’ll correct that. 
I’ll simply pass an Act which I’ll make retroactive, and 
therefore everything will be legal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a very dangerous precedent being set in 
this. First of all, what the Minister of Finance and the 
government opposite are saying is simply this, well we don’t 
care really what the laws are because we will change the laws 
retroactive. We’ll do what we want to do, and then retroactively 
we will change them. That’s a dangerous precedent for any 
democratic government to set. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor, as I have 
indicated, is an employee of this Legislative Assembly. And 
what the provincial government has done by ignoring the 
mandate that has been given to the  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3439 
 

Provincial Auditor, they have insulted every member in this 
particular House. Because the Provincial Auditor gets his 
authority from us, he doesn’t get his authority from the 
executive branch of government. 
 
Therefore Bill 41 that is before us authorizes the government to 
go ahead with private auditors. And let me say, Mr. Speaker, 
that we are not opposed to private auditors. They were here 
before ‘82 when we were the government, but it was done 
strictly according to law. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, the Minister of Finance, in 
his speech in second reading indicated that the role of the 
Provincial Auditor would not be diminished. I wonder how the 
logic of that fits in what he has been doing. If the role of the 
Provincial Auditor is not going to be diminished, and if he still 
is going to be the overall supervisor of the books of the 
government, how then does the Minister of Finance explain to 
this Assembly two thins. First of all, that he has substantially 
reduced the staff in the Provincial Auditor’s department so that 
he cannot function properly and cannot carry out his job; and 
secondly, how does he explain that the Provincial Auditor has 
absolutely no say whatsoever in the changes that are being 
recommended to the House today. 
 
Now I say to the Minister of Finance that that simply doesn’t 
wash. What he is attempting to do, I believe, is retroactively 
correcting an illegality. And as a former attorney general, I 
would have . . . or minister of justice, I would have hoped that 
he would have more appreciation for the law than he presently 
seems to indicate. And that concerns me considerably, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As I’ve indicated, before the Minister of Finance came back 
into the House, I want to make it very clear to him that we are 
not opposed to the hiring of the private auditors. But, Mr. 
Minister, do it within the law — do it within the law. You have 
no right, according to the law of the land, to presently employ 
private auditors as you’ve admitted that you’ve done. That is an 
illegality, and I think you should apologize to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to this House for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing that concerns me is this. When the 
Crown Management Board was questioned in public accounts 
as to why they didn’t provide the Provincial Auditor with the 
information that he had requested, their answer simply was this. 
That the vice-chairman of the board or the board of . . . pardon 
me, the board of directors of Crown Management Board had 
instructed them not to provide that information to the Provincial 
Auditor. And it’s interesting to note that the Premier of this 
province sits on that board. 
 
The Premier of this province sits on the board and, I would 
assume, because the board . . . the Crown management was 
instructed by the board of directors, that the provincial Premier 
agreed with them in not abiding by the law of this land, in 
telling the Crown Management Board not to provide that 
information to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And therefore I say again, not only did the Minister of Finance 
break the law, but the Premier of this province  

has ignored the law that presently exists. 
 
(1445) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that again is a dangerous precedent that we 
simply cannot accept on this side of the House. As I’ve 
indicated, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor must have 
considerable leeway. He must have adequate staff in order to be 
that watch-dog of the government. There is too much, Mr. 
Speaker, too much in today’s governments of hiding the facts 
from the people. 
 
The government said, it’s fine when you’re in opposition; you 
want everything disclosed, and, you know, you can make 
eloquent speeches about what laws should be passed. And I 
remember the Minister of Finance, the present Minister of 
Finance, when he was sitting on this side of the House, and I 
remember the member from Kindersley when he was sitting on 
this side of the House, and all those speeches could be quoted 
back to them as to what they think the role of the Provincial 
Auditor should be. 
 
And I commend them, Mr. Speaker, for the Act that they 
brought in in 1983. I comment them for it. But then at least the 
Minister of Finance should abide by that Act. And I would 
expect that the member from Kindersley, who’s now a member 
of the Executive Council, would have urged the Minister of 
Finance, and the Justice minister, that he would have urged the 
Minister of Finance . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He did. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well, I hear the Deputy Premier saying he did. 
So what I’m led to believe now, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
Minister of Finance ignored the advice that he got from the 
Minister of Justice, that he didn’t listen to the Minister of 
Justice and went ahead anyway and broke the law — and broke 
the law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I’m saying to the members opposite is that I 
think the society out there is demanding, is demanding that 
there be full disclosure and accountability to the people of this 
province. And we’ve seen too much, we’ve seen too much of 
what’s happening with Pioneer Trust, for example, where we 
don’t have full disclosure. Principal Trust, again we can’t seem 
to get full disclosure. There are so many things, Mr. Speaker, 
that are hidden from the public that we don’t seem to get 
answers to, that it’s imperative that there be a watch-dog on the 
government and that watch-dog is the Provincial Auditor. 
 
But you cannot expect the Provincial Auditor to do his job if he 
doesn’t get substantial . . . doesn’t get sufficient staff, and if the 
government will not co-operate with him in providing him the 
information that is required. 
 
The Minister of Finance said in his second reading address, well 
if the Provincial Auditor isn’t satisfied in the reports that are 
made available by the private auditors then he can examine the 
reports. But, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t going to help the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
As I indicated before, twofold, twofold reasons. One, if he  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3440 
 

doesn’t have the staff he can’t do it. Secondly, if he can’t look 
behind that work that is being done, if he can’t look at the 
actual work that the private auditor should have done, and if he 
can’t examine those, how is he going to inform the public 
whether or not the statements that are being made available by 
the private auditors are all inclusive as they have been in the 
past, the work that was done by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that I think he would be well 
in reconsidering the Bill that is before us, not so much in 
regards to the hiring of private auditors but in regards to the role 
that you have established for the Provincial Auditor, the 
diminished role. 
 
The private auditors, Mr. Minister, are going to dance to the 
tune of the people that pay them. And you can very, very, very, 
very easily . . . very, very easily . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, it’s exactly, because you can limit the requirements — you 
can limit the requirement of those auditors. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Obviously you haven’t read the Bill. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes I have read the Bill. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well then you don’t understand it. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, I do. I’ll tell you, I’ll tell the Minister of 
Finance, what I don’t understand is how he . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I’ll say to the Minister of Finance, if you 
understood the laws of this land then you wouldn’t act illegally 
I would hope. If you know what the laws of the land are why 
would you act illegally? And if you have been advised by the 
Minister of Justice, as the Deputy Premier indicated here, if you 
were advised by the Minister of Justice why then didn’t you 
accept his advice? Why then . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We did, Herman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes. Oh, did the Minister of Justice indicate to 
you that you could act illegally? Oh . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order, please. Question and answer period is over. The 
debate continues. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, what I’m getting from the Minister 
of Finance is that he would . . . it seems to me, if I can interpret 
what he says correctly, he was advised by the Minister of 
Justice to ignore the law and do something illegally. That is a 
frightening situation because the law of the land says — the law 
of the land says that the Provincial Auditor shall examine the 
books of the government except for those departments or 
Crown corporations that are exempt. 
 
You indicated in this House and outside the House, Mr. 
Minister, that you have hired private auditors and they are at 
work at the present time doing auditing in Crown corporations. 
You indicated that. Now I say to you, if that is true then you 
have broken the law and you are not permitted at this particular 
time . . . and that is the only  

reason that I can see why you have made this Bill retroactive to 
January so that you can correct what you are presently doing 
that is illegal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the Minister of Finance, when he 
does his summation of the Bill in second reading, will clarify 
some of those things so we don’t have to go through those in 
detail in third reading. The . . . obviously the Provincial Auditor 
didn’t agree with him; obviously the Provincial Auditor does 
not agree with the government, and also, Mr. Speaker, from 
what we can gather, the Finance department had absolutely no 
say in analysing the cost effectiveness of private auditors, and 
yet they presented a Bill that the Minister of Finance says will 
be cost effective. I don’t know where he gets his information 
from if he doesn’t get it from his officials. 
 
I’m saying to the Minister of Finance that this Bill will do 
irreparable harm to the role of the Provincial Auditor. It 
diminishes substantially his particular role. I don’t think that he 
can function as an effective watch-dog to make sure that there’s 
full disclosure by the government and that they are held 
accountable for their actions and for the expenditures that they 
make in any fiscal year. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I oppose this particular Bill and will 
have further questions on details on various clauses in third 
reading. Thank you very kindly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to clarify 
so that the hon. member who just took his seat has a better 
understanding of what is before the legislature, because 
obviously his decision to date to oppose this Bill is based on a 
misinformation or a misinterpretation of the legislation. 
 
Let’s keep in mind what the legislation does. It still allows the 
Provincial Auditor to be able to go in and do audits on Crown 
corporations if he is of the view that it’s not done properly. The 
only requirement is that he now must rely on qualified private 
sector auditors, which I don’t think anyone finds offensive. and 
secondly, that if he does not view that their work is being 
properly done, he still has the option to go back in. 
 
It’s very interesting that when the Provincial Auditor, who had 
opportunity to review it, subsequently came back and said, well 
if that’s the interpretation, I have no difficulty. And I hope the 
hon. member understands that. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, to say that private sector auditors can 
now be manipulated — as the hon. member has just said — I 
frankly think there’s a slur on the profession of the chartered 
accountants of this province. And I know that they will be quite 
shocked, Mr. Speaker, to have that slur on their professional 
integrity brought to the floor of this Assembly. I believe that it 
would be proper, Mr. Speaker, for myself to let the 
Saskatchewan Association of Chartered Accountants, or the 
profession, know of the view of members opposite as to their 
professionalism. 
 
Thirdly, with regard to the use of auditors prior to the passage 
of the legislation, I indicated publicly that one firm was in error, 
got in to do it. They lasted about two  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3441 
 

days before it was brought to their attention, and they moved 
back, and that was subsequently it. And, Mr. Speaker, to 
balloon that up into some great avoidance or breach of the laws 
of the province of Saskatchewan, I think is drawing a very, very 
long bow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me put on record — because I’m sure that the 
public and the new members opposite will be quite interested in 
knowing the position of the soon-to-be-crowned leader of the 
opposition. And I’m going to quote from Hansard on April 2, 
1981, and it deals with An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Oil 
and Gas Corporation Act. And this is the member from 
Riversdale, and his justification for using a private sector 
auditor. 
 

We need to access to audit functions . . . 
 
And I hope that the press is aware of this, because we’re going 
to see from time to time highly contradictory positions between 
the new leader and what members are saying in the House. 
 

We need to have access to audit functions and C.A. 
(chartered accountant) functions on an ongoing basis. I 
think it’s safe to say that if you combine the two and were 
able to have professional outside counsel available to 
advise you on a regular basis, the economics would pretty 
well justify what’s being done here. 

 
That’s in defence of using a private sector auditor for Saskoil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he goes on that that policy of using outside 
auditors is firmly established for the New Democratic Party. 
And he says that in some cases the: 
 

. . .proliferation of Crown corporations (this was under the 
NDP administration) may require a different kind of (I’m 
sure there’s a degree of humour in the words) a nuance, 
involving, if you will, a degree of financial accountability, 
perhaps not directly through the provincial auditor, but 
through mechanisms such as the Crown corporations 
committee. 

 
Mr. Speaker, he goes on, and this is from Hansard, and he says 
on the use of private sector auditors that: 
 

. . .it’s not a black and white situation when it comes to 
how best to control public funds. The fact is that in the 
Saskatchewan legislative scene, we have a mechanism 
which is more or less unique to the legislative 
parliamentary situation, and that is the Crown corporations 
committee. 

 
And he goes on and on and on, and I could go for several pages. 
And he rails against, at the time, against a massive Provincial 
Auditor’s bureaucracy. And even at that, and I’m quote the new 
leader of the opposition: 
 

. . .and even at that you would never be able to just run 
through the family of Crown corporations plus the 
big-spending departments and tell me how intelligently he 
(the Provincial Auditor) can do the  

audit, and more importantly, how intelligently we, as 
members, could handle the job. It can’t be done. 

 
It can’t be done, says the member from Riversdale — it can’t be 
done. 
 
So that the hon. member and their opposition to this Bill is 
rather hollow, Mr. Speaker, that they can say from their seats 
that they’re not against private auditors, even though they stand 
up and question their professionalism and attack their 
professionalism. And they’d vote against this Bill that the 
Provincial Auditor himself has said with that interpretation he 
doesn’t have a problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he goes on about the need for private sector 
auditors with Crown corporations; they’re competing against 
private enterprise corporations, and he goes on that: 
 

. . .it is absolute madness to argue that one should come to 
the Provincial Auditor of the Saskoil and get all the 
financial detail and somehow not put that corporation at 
risk in the competitive world. 

 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I quote those only to indicate to the members 
opposite that please be honest in your position. I mean, you 
attack the private auditors. You’ve attacked the legislation, 
you’re opposing the legislation which allows private sector 
auditors, and at the same time the Leader of the Opposition, or 
the new leader of the opposition says, it has to be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we will see a very close analogy when he 
says he’s prepared to look at privatization, and time after time 
we see the absolutists over there against privatization say that 
they’ll fight it to the death. And we’ll be watching with a great 
deal of interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve indicated, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill is fair. The Bill is 
retroactive for one fundamental reason, Mr. Speaker — it is 
necessary for the new auditors to be able to do the books for the 
whole year, Mr. Speaker. It’s very simple, it’s very 
straightforward. And to attack the retroactivity, frankly, is 
foolishness. It has to be done so that they can do the audit for 
the full fiscal year of the corporation. It sounds to me, Mr. 
Speaker, as a rather logical and rational position to take. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the argument has been a rather spurious one from 
the opposition’s point of view, I think one that will be shocking 
the professionalism of the chartered accountants of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and I will be most interested to pass on 
to the chartered accountants and their profession the views of 
hon. members opposite. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 
the Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 
(1509) 
 

Yeas — 28 
 

Muller Pickering 
 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3442 
 

Duncan McLeod 
Andrew Berntson 
Lane Taylor 
Smith Swan 
Hodgins Hepworth 
Hardy Klein 
Meiklejohn Martin 
Toth Sauder 
Petersen Swenson 
Martens Baker 
Gleim Neudorf 
Gardner Kopelchuk 
Saxinger Britton 
 

Nays — 18 
 

Blakeney Prebble 
Brockelbank Koskie 
Tchorzewski Thompson 
Rolfes Upshall 
Simard Solomon 
Kowalsky Anguish 
Goulet Hagel 
Calvert Lautermilch 
Van Mulligen Koenker 
 
The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 
Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 42 — An Act 
respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the Enactment of The Provincial Auditor 
Amendment Act, 1987 be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 43 — An Act to 
repeal The Public Utilities Review Commission Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I have spoken at some length on 
this Bill already, so this afternoon I would like to just wrap up 
my comments on the Bill. This Bill is a Bill that repeals the 
legislation that established the Public Utilities Review 
Commission in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is a Bill of betrayal inasmuch as the 
establishment of a public utilities review commission in the 
province of Saskatchewan was a major election promise of the 
PC government in 1982. They promised it and established it 
with a great deal of fanfare, with lengthy debates in the 
legislature; and we have the minister, the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the present Minister of Finance, making 
statements along these lines with respect to the Public Utilities 
Review Commission. 
 

I suggest to all hon. members that it’s a tremendous start 
(“it” being the Public Utilities  

Review Commission) to a long, fruitful relationship 
between the people of Saskatchewan and the new 
Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
Well today, Mr. Speaker, I wonder what’s happened to that 
long, fruitful relationship between the PC government and the 
people of Saskatchewan. And what’s happened to that 
relationship is witnessed and evidenced in this Bill that repeals 
the Public Utilities Review Commission. That’s how this long, 
fruitful relationship was seen by the PC government, or is seen 
by the PC government in 1987, Mr. Speaker. So we have here 
another promise made by the PC party and reneged upon by the 
PC government — another broken promise by the PC 
government. 
 
We looked at, we reviewed the history of PURC in our earlier 
comments, that showed that on a number of occasions the 
government had overruled decisions of PURC, notwithstanding 
the fact that the Premier had said that PURC would have the 
final decision. When the crunch came, when it became 
politically inexpedient for the government to overrule PURC, 
they chose to go back on their word, to go back on their word 
that PURC would have the final decision, and overruled PURC. 
 
(1515) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we may not have agreed with some of the 
decisions that PURC made. We may not, the opposition may 
not, have agreed with some of PURC’s decisions, but that is 
beside the point. The point is, this was a PC election promise, 
and it’s another PC election promise broken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also an example of the PC government being 
very willing and finding it very easy to overrule and axe or cut 
back on public watch-dog agencies that are designed to monitor 
government and make government make more open. And we 
have seen one example after another in this legislature, and 
when the legislature wasn’t open prior to June 17, when we had 
that long waiting period while the government dribbled out 
cut-back after cut-back, affecting hundreds and thousands of 
lives in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
While the government was doing that and cutting back and 
axeing on watch-dog agencies, the public were watching very 
closely. And this is an example of one of those watch-dog 
agencies. This agency was designed to provide for public input, 
public input into the setting of utility rates. And now what do 
we see? We see this agency not marching to the government’s 
tune. We see this agency making decisions that the government 
doesn’t agree with, and so the government comes forward and 
abolishes, brings forth an Act to abolish PURC. And that’s the 
way this government, Mr. Speaker, treats public watch-dog 
agencies that are there to protect the public. 
 
And we have suggested alternatives to the government because 
we believe that the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
have spoken out and have said they would like open 
government with respect to setting utility rates. They have said 
that they would like public input into setting utility rates, and 
we believe that that’s the opinion  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3443 
 

in Saskatchewan at this date. And, therefore, we’ve asked the 
government to come forward with alternatives, with alternatives 
to the Public Utilities Review Commission, inasmuch as the 
commission itself may not have been the perfect way in which 
to achieve the result of input by the ordinary person and input 
by the public. 
 
But the government has failed to come forward with any 
alternatives. It’s made a promise, a promise for open 
government, a promise for a Public Utilities Review 
Commission, and what is it doing in 1987? It’s axeing the 
commission; it’s closing its government doors; it’s closing its 
cabinet doors, and there will no longer be a commission that is 
open to the public, with respect to the setting of utility rates. 
 
They’ve made this promise, and they haven’t come forward in 
this legislature, in this Assembly, with an alternative, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s been no alternative Bill setting up an 
alternative method to achieve those results, to achieve the 
results of openness of government. Nothing has come forward, 
Mr. Speaker, nothing whatsoever. It is perfectly clear that this 
government chooses not to be accountable for its decisions, Mr. 
Speaker. It is against open government, and it reneges on its 
promises. It is also perfectly clear that it has no qualms about 
axeing agencies that don’t follow their political line. 
 
And obviously the PC government found itself in a bind 
because it had created this commission with a great deal of 
fanfare, and this commission became a thorn in its side. It didn’t 
like the decisions it made, and it had to overrule it. 
 
This was the government, Mr. Speaker, that campaigned on 
“open for business.” Open for big business is probably a more 
accurate interpretation. And this commission was giving large 
industrial users, for example, big business, a break. But the PCs 
knew that the votes were on the farms, and the PCs knew that 
the votes were in the homes, and therefore this commission 
became a thorn in its side, and it became politically inexpedient 
for the government to follow some of the decisions of the 
Public Utilities Review Commission. And that’s why they 
overruled it. That’s why they overruled it — totally 
machiavellian and expedient on their part, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
why they did it, because it was politically inexpedient, 
notwithstanding they had said the commission would have the 
final word; notwithstanding the fact they said that — they chose 
to overrule decisions of the Public Utilities Review 
Commission. 
 
As I said earlier, we may not have agreed with those decisions, 
but it was their promise to have a commission, it was their 
promise to let the commission have the final word, and it was 
their promise that the setting of utility rates would be open to 
the public. And it is clear from what has happened since then 
that the public does want this input. They do want an openness 
with respect to the setting of utility rates. 
 
But no alternative has come forward; no alternative at all, Mr. 
Speaker, none whatsoever. They failed to come forward with 
any suggestions whatsoever. And for that reason alone it is 
impossible for us to support a Bill that  

abolishes a commission that is designed for open government 
when this government comes forth with no alternative to meet 
that end result. 
 
There’s absolutely no question, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill 
abolishing PURC is a Bill of betrayal. It betrays their 1982 
election promise. It’s another election promise by this 
government that is broken, another election promise reneged 
upon. It betrays their election promise of 1982. They betrayed 
their promise to let the commission have the final say by 
overruling decisions of the commission. 
 
They are prepared to axe watch-dog agencies that don’t march 
to their tune. They are prepared to axe them when it becomes 
politically expedient for them to do so because they don’t like 
the decisions the agency has made, notwithstanding, Mr. 
Speaker, that they’ve repeatedly said in this Legislative 
Assembly that this agency would have the final decision and 
this agency would be the answer to all the ails of the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And in spite of the fact they know, as we do, that the people 
want public input into setting utility rates, they have not come 
forward with an alternative. And for those reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, for all those reasons, we cannot support this Bill, and 
we will be voting against it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1532) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 28 
 

Muller Duncan 
McLeod Andrew 
Berntson Lane 
Taylor Smith 
Swan Hodgins 
Hepworth Hardy 
Klein Meiklejohn 
Pickering Martin 
Toth Sauder 
Petersen Swenson 
Martens Baker 
Gleim Neudorf 
Gardner Kopelchuk 
Saxinger Britton  
 

Nays — 16 
 

Blakeney Prebble 
Brockelbank Koskie 
Tchorzewski Thompson 
Rolfes Simard 
Solomon Kowalsky 
Anguish Goulet 
Calvert Lautermilch 
Van Mulligen Koenker 
 
The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 
Whole at the next sitting. 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3444 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 44 — An Act 
respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Public Utilities Review 
Commission Repeal Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Koenker that Bill No. 19 — An Act to 
amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to speak to this Bill today. I’m a little dismayed and in 
wonderment at the lack of involvement by members on the 
other side of the House. But I can understand it, the reason for 
their silence, and I think it has nothing to do with the length of 
the term that they might be home telling their constituents 
about. And I would assume that would be their line. And I say 
that, Mr. Speaker, because I think they’re looking for an excuse 
not to speak to a Bill that is going to put yet another unfair tax 
upon Saskatchewan people, a Bill that’s going to indicate again 
that the Premier and his colleagues have betrayed the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, it would be a very difficult situation to 
be on the government side and to return to a riding and try to 
defend to your constituents, to defend a Bill that totally betrays 
promises that were made in 1982. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, every one of these members that were there 
in 1982 were out campaigning behind the man now the Premier, 
campaigning with pamphlets like the one I hold in my hand 
with the Premier’s face, and now the Premier. Headline saying, 
“Eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax” — a promise, Mr. Speaker, 
that was betrayed. 
 
And the member from Meadow Lake says, give that back. I’m 
sure he wishes he had the thousands of them that were spread 
across this province, because where nobody could be looking at 
them now, because it indicates again that the Premier of this 
province can’t be trusted. 
 
The Premier of this province betrayed every taxpayer. The 
Premier of this province betrayed every citizen of this province 
when he put this commitment before the people in 1982 to 
eliminate the education and health tax by 1986. And I say to 
you, Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t happened. It shows what this 
Premier is made of. The people of this province have been 
betrayed. 
 
I said again that the back-benchers have betrayed the people of 
their constituencies by not speaking against this Bill and by not 
indicating to the people in this province that they’re willing to 
not follow blindly leadership of a Premier that is betraying 
people of this province, but standing up and defending the 
rights of the people of their constituency. 

Mr. Speaker, through the course of my remarks I want to make 
it clear to the people of this province that the members on this 
side of the House are not supportive of the kind of betrayal and 
the kind of government that their Premier has delivered — the 
members of that side of the House. 
 
And I want to speak about some of the reasons that the Premier 
has betrayed the people by increasing and producing this Bill 
and putting it before the people of the province. Why has the 
Premier gone back on his word to eliminate the E&H tax? Why 
has this happened? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s because this province has been run by an 
uncaring, incompetent, and callous government. They’ve 
squandered resource revenues that were available to the people 
of this province, that would have allowed us to maintain the 
delivery of health care services that we had come to expect in 
this province. And how did they do that? They threw away 
hundreds of millions of dollars of oil revenue that could have 
been used to keep the level of taxation in this province lower 
than what it is and that would have eliminated the need to go to 
the people and increase the E&H tax from 5 to 7 per cent. 
 
And I’d like to make a comparison, Mr. Speaker. Even in right 
wing British Columbia led by Bill Vander Zalm under the 
Social Credit government, they’ve reduced the E&H tax from 7 
to 6 per cent because they understand that it’s an unfair tax and 
that it burdens lower income people unfairly. 
 
But what about this Premier, and what about this government 
— what’s his commitment to those people? I’ll tell you what his 
commitment is. He brings in a budget that doesn’t eliminate that 
tax, as he had promised. It increases from 5 to 7 per cent that 
tax that the people of this province realize is so unfair. 
 
They’ve lost money through the potash resource that we have in 
this province; oil revenues been gone; the Manalta Coal, the 
give-away of an asset of the people of this province that’s now 
costing the power corporation of Saskatchewan thousands and 
thousands of dollars more. 
 
And how much more is to come if this trend continues? Will we 
be looking at 10 per cent E&H tax in this province? The past 
record of this government indicates that there may be no ceiling 
in terms of the taxation that we can expect from the Premier and 
his band. Why, Mr. Speaker, in a province that has so much to 
offer its people and has so much that can be delivered to those 
people, do we find ourself in a situation where we see cut-backs 
in services and massive tax increases? 
 
One of the reasons I suggest to you, and I say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, one of the reasons is because this government 
has been incompetent. We in Saskatchewan were fortunate 
enough to have 11 balanced budgets in a row delivered to the 
people of this province through this legislature, and I say, Mr. 
Speaker, because we had competent leadership. 
 
But what’s the record since 1982? A deficit forecast of $219 
million, actually 227 million; ’83-84, 316 million forecast, 
actual 331 million; ’84-85, 267 million forecast,  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3445 
 

actual 379 million; ’85-86, 291 million, actual 584 million. 
 
And then we come to the big whoops, prior to the election — 
1986-87 forecast, $389 million. The Finance minister and the 
Premier and the cabinet and the back-benchers were telling the 
people of this province that they had almost gotten things under 
control in relative terms, relative to their abilities. But what do 
you get? When they deliver the trust, when they deliver the 
actual deficit figure — 200 per cent out — $1.235 million, a 
billion two. 
 
Those are some of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I would 
suggest we’re looking at an increase in the E&H tax. I say it’s 
unfair. It’s a betrayal of the people of this province, and I say, 
shame on this government. 
 
The level of corruption in this province I believe is unparalleled 
to anything that Saskatchewan people have ever experienced. 
Patronage — we’ve got George Hill; Paul Schoenhals, former 
cabinet minister; Sid Dutchak . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — How much? Sid Dutchak, 7,000 a month. 
George Hill — who knows? Who knows? Because this 
government won’t disclose his salary. We figure around 
200,000. Paul Schoenhals, 100,000 a year, taxpayers’ money. 
 
And maybe we should speak about the potash corporation, 
because the losses that that corporation has incurred is one of 
the reasons we’re seeing an increase in this tax. A former 
cabinet minister, defeated by the people of Saskatchewan — or 
by the people of Saskatoon — hired at $100,000 a year to 
manage a corporation with which he has absolutely no 
qualifications that I can see. Taxpayers’ dollars, hiring an 
unqualified former cabinet minister. And then they’ve got to go 
to the United States to find someone qualified to run the 
corporation, but after it’s amassed hundreds of millions of 
dollars of debt. I say shame on the government, and I say if they 
had run this province properly we wouldn’t have had a situation 
where we have to have increases like this that are hurting 
lower-and middle-income people as severely as they are. 
 
Tim Embury, former cabinet minister, but on government 
payroll; Gordon Dirks, another defeated cabinet minister, on 
government payroll. And that’s why the E&H tax has been 
increased. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, a guarantee from this government means little. It 
meant little in 1981 when they were campaigning to form 
government. It meant little in 1982 when they were 
campaigning. It meant little since then and it meant nothing in 
1986. We can go through a list of the promises that they’ve 
made and that they’ve broken, E&H tax being one of them. I 
say the people of this province have experienced a very unfair 
government and I say they’ve been betrayed. 
 
And now they go to the business people of this province  

to raise another 2 per cent of E&H tax — the business people of 
this province being made the taxman of an incompetent and 
uncaring and unfair government. I can see reasons why these 
members might want to sit in this legislature as opposed to 
going to their ridings to try and defend this legislation because I 
would suggest to you it’s hard to defend the undefendable. And 
I think that’s the kind of a job that they have when they go back 
to try and explain why their families have to pay another 2 per 
cent on a refrigerator they might purchase, or another 2 per cent 
on a car that they might purchase, or another 2 per cent on a 
stove they might purchase. 
 
I say, shame on this government. You don’t deserve the respect 
of the people of this province, and I’m of the opinion that what 
little you have left is rapidly dissipating. And, Mr. Speaker, 
what do we have happen with this increase in this tax? It means 
that people are losing their purchasing power. Saskatchewan 
family people, both urban and rural, are able to buy less and 
less of the products and the goods that they need. We’ve seen 
an increase in the personal income tax through the flat tax. 
There’s a new 7 cent a litre tax on their fuel. And all of these 
things, Mr. Speaker, are compounding the problems that people 
in rural and urban Saskatchewan are facing. This is one in a list 
of many. 
 
The drug prescription plan, increases in urban taxes and rural 
taxes at a local level because of revenue-sharing cuts, increases 
in business taxes, increases in corporation fees — all of these 
things, Mr. Speaker, are compounding the problems that are 
facing families in this province, and it’s all because we’ve got 
an incompetent government, because it needn’t have happened. 
 
And if anybody in this province believes it had to happen, have 
a look at the record of this province since 1971. Have a look at 
the revenue that we were able to generate through taxation of 
resource companies, and have a look at what sound fiscal 
management of this province meant to the people. It meant low 
taxation. It meant high employment levels. And it meant very 
few people on social assistance, or requiring that kind of 
service. It meant that we were able to deliver a dental plan for 
our children, and it meant that we were able to deliver a drug 
prescription plan, and it meant we had short waiting lists at our 
hospitals. 
 
But all of that has changed. Why has it changed? Why do we 
need a new increase in the E&H tax? I say to you, because the 
Premier of this province, the man who sits in that chair, is 
irresponsible, he’s incompetent, and he doesn’t deserve to 
govern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — All of the members on that side can hide. 
They can sit on their hands and they can pretend that this new 
tax grab isn’t happening. And they’re doing it. I haven’t seen 
one of them up to speak. I’ve seen them chirp and natter away 
from their seats, red in the face when they’re told about the kind 
of government their Premier delivers. I’ve seen that. And I’ve 
seen the front-benchers stand up and misrepresent what 
members of this side say, and Hansard clearly shows that. And 
I say, Mr. Speaker, the reason that’s all happening is because  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3446 
 

they’re following blindly the leadership of a man who’s 
betrayed the people. 
 
I said before that the purchasing power of the people of 
Saskatchewan are disappearing, and that’s true. And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, and to the people of this province, that we 
understand what’s happening to middle-and lower-income 
people. We know what they’re facing and we know what these 
taxes are doing. And we also know that when we have the 
opportunity to govern once again, this province in a fair 
manner, those things are going to be changed. 
 
But what, because of these taxes, is our province going to look 
like. The middle-income people are rapidly disappearing, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’ve got a new class of people in this province 
— the working poor. How long can this continue before the 
Premier of this province understands the hurt and the pain that 
he’s inflicting upon Saskatchewan people? How long before 
he’ll go to small town Saskatchewan and find out really what’s 
happening? 
 
Because you can’t govern from New York, or you can’t govern 
from Ottawa, or you can’t govern from this seat in here. You’ve 
got to be home with your people and you’ve got to walk down 
Main Street and you’ve got to be on their doorsteps and 
touching them and talking to them and trying to understand the 
feelings and the hurt that they’re facing. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier of this province was 
doing that, if he was canvassing in my riding in Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, you would have seen a different throne 
speech this spring. You would have seen a different budget 
delivered this summer, finally. And I say you’d see a different 
face on this government. 
 
But he couldn’t, Mr. Speaker, because he had betrayed them. 
And nobody likes to be disliked, everybody likes to be liked. 
And I know that’s one of the reasons that he was campaigning 
on eliminating the E&H tax in 1982. He wanted to be loved and 
embraced by the people of this province. And he was. They 
gave him the biggest majority that any premier of this province 
has ever seen, and he accepted that. He accepted their faith, and 
then he turned around and he stabbed them in the back. 
 
And that’s why the problems in Saskatchewan are 
compounding, Mr. Speaker, because this Premier can no longer 
go to small town Saskatchewan or to the west flat in Prince 
Albert in my riding, because I know what kind of reception 
he’d get there. He’d get a rejection, and I would suggest to you, 
Mr. Speaker, he’d get a flat rejection at 80 per cent of the 
homes because they know that he’s betrayed them, they know 
he’s been unfair with them. And I say to you that this Bill just 
indicates another example of that betrayal and that unfairness. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the middle-income people of this 
province have been the backbone of our tax base. But you take 
away the money, you take money out of their pockets, and you 
create a snowball. You make them poor, they can’t pay taxes, 
and the rich never did. And that’s the kind of government we’ve 
got in this province.  

No understanding of the make-up of the province, no 
understanding of how you finance a government in this 
province — that’s what we’ve had in this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I say to you, it’s going to get worse. It’s going to get 
worse if the Premier of Saskatchewan doesn’t get out there and 
try and find out what kind of mistakes and what kind of errors 
he’s making. 
 
I said before, you don’t government from that seat. Sure, you 
pass legislation from there. But you’ve got to have a feeling for 
the hurt that you’re inflicting on people, and you’ve got to have 
an understanding of what they need so that they can survive in 
the province. 
 
The E&H tax is a regressive tax — another betrayal and another 
reason why he’s losing trust in the people of the province. And 
in order to govern, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to have the trust 
and the faith of the people. And I said before that the Premier 
had that faith and that trust in 1982, and maybe he did deserve 
it, and maybe he went in with good intentions. Maybe he 
thought he could make Saskatchewan the Utopia that he thought 
that it could be, or might have thought it could be. But he never 
made one move to move to that end — not one did he make. He 
started on a list of betrayal and broken promises, and I say that 
that list is growing daily under his administration, and it’ll 
continue to grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, lower-and middle-income people need money that 
they’re taking away, that this government is taking away, in 
order to feed and clothe their families. And they’re killing little 
town by taking the money away from it, because those people 
don’t travel to Saudi Arabia as some of the members opposite 
might. They stay at home, and they spend in their local grocery 
stores, and they stop in at their local tavern for a beer on their 
way home from work, but not when they’ve got no money in 
their pocket. 
 
And this tax is doing just the opposite from what it should be. 
In order to have a buoyant economy in this province, you’ve got 
to have money in the hands of middle-and lower-income 
people. You’ve got to have small business thriving so that it can 
create employment, and I think even the members on that side 
wouldn’t argue that small business is the best way to generate 
employment opportunities in any economy. 
 
And they’re doing just the opposite. When the people of a 
community have no money to spend, the small businesses go 
down. And all you have to do is look at the number of 
bankruptcies that we’ve seen in this province since 1982, both 
rural and urban, and it shows that this government’s on the 
wrong direction, they’re on the wrong path, they’re on a 
downhill slide. 
 
And I way to say, Mr. Speaker, that there are members in this 
Legislative Assembly that understand that things can be 
different, and that they don’t have to be that way. I want to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that there are members in this legislature who 
understand that a lot of Saskatchewan citizens are hurting at the 
hands of this government. And I also want to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that members on this side of the House are committed 
to changing the kinds of things that are creating those problems. 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3447 
 

I said before that the E&H tax is a regressive and an unfair tax, 
and I don’t think that anybody in this province would deny that 
it is. We all understand that governments need revenue in order 
to function. We understand that. 
 
But for goodness sakes, I ask the members on that side to ask 
their Premier to have a look at where he may generate revenue, 
rather than going to middle-income people. I ask him to go to 
the oil companies and ask if perhaps they wouldn’t be willing to 
share more of the hundreds of millions of dollars of profits that 
they’re making in this province with our resources. 
 
I ask them to go to their Premier and ask him if he might not 
have a closer look at the kinds of sell-offs that he’s making in 
terms of his plan to privatize the Crown corporations, and to try 
and get a reasonable price for them, and not a give-away like 
the Weyerhaeuser situation in Prince Albert. 
 
I ask them to go to the Premier and say, Mr. Premier, if you’re 
going to sell things that belong to the people of this province, 
for goodness sakes, get a fair value for them. And I ask them to 
say to the Premier that, Mr. Premier, if you would do these 
things, if you would take a broader look at this province and a 
broader look at where your revenue might come from, that I 
won’t have to go back to my riding and try and tell my people 
why, on a $10,000 car, they’ve got to pay another $200. 
 
And I ask the back-benchers on that side to go to their Premier 
and say, Mr. Premier, another deal like the Peter Pocklington 
deal in North Battleford is undefendable. Look at where we’ve 
lost. We lost that community where we tried to pull that scam. 
And we lost Prince Albert where we made a bad deal with the 
selling of the PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) assets. 
 
And I ask the back-benchers to go to the Premier and say, Mr. 
Premier, we can’t defend what you’re doing to the drug 
prescription plan. My constituents are upset. They feel you’ve 
betrayed them. 
 
And I ask the back-benchers to go to their Premier and say, Mr. 
Premier, we can’t defend an increase to the education and 
health tax because what you’re doing is you’re gutting this 
province. You’re tearing apart working men and women, and 
lower-income people. 
 
And I ask the back-benchers to be honest with themselves, sit 
down with their families at home and ask their families what 
they’re hearing from their friends and neighbours as to the 
unfairness of what this government has been doing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t support this kind of legislation, and 
I can’t support it for a number of reasons, one of which is that 
even though the financial difficulties that the Premier of this 
province has put this province in; even in spite of the fact that 
we’re sitting on $3 and a half billion worth of deficit that we 
have to pay $350 million a year in interest alone for, money that 
could go toward health care and education; even though we 
desperately need these dollars, Mr. Speaker, I can’t go home 
and say to my constituents that I’ve done the right thing if I 
supported this legislation. And I won’t do it. 

(1600) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
the Premier of this province has blatantly, openly, and callously 
betrayed a million Saskatchewan citizens. And I want to say to 
you as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the political party that he 
represents is going to pay for it whenever the next election 
comes, because I believe, like hundreds of thousands of people, 
like the 100,000 people who signed the health care petition, that 
he doesn’t deserve to sit in that chair. 
 
And that’s why I . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A hundred thousand now; yesterday it 
was 60. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — The member can’t add. We’ve tabled 
30-some thousand and 60,000 yesterday and if that doesn’t 
come to 100,000 — that’s why you guys have got problems 
with your budgets, because you can’t add even 37 and 60 and 
come up with close to 100. Well listen, I’ll tell you, 3 per cent is 
a lot closer than the Finance’s minister’s 200 per cent. But 
anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to get back to the topic. 
 
I said before that I can’t go home and defend this Bill. And I’ll 
tell you what, I’m not going to. I’m going to tell you what I’m 
going to do with the members on this side of the House. I’m 
going to go back to my riding, and I’m going to tell those guys 
that you and your government have betrayed them. You’ve 
denied them what rightfully is theirs, and what rightfully is 
theirs is an even and an honest and a fair level of taxation. They 
don’t need the Premier’s hand in their pocket and the Finance 
minister’s hand in their pocket every time you deliver a budget, 
and it wouldn’t happen if you’d get the revenue from the places 
that you know you can get them. If you would do just that one 
thing — and it’s there, you don’t need to be an economist to 
figure it out; all you do is go back to the record of the ’70s 
under the NDP administration, and you’ll find out that you can 
generate revenue from other than out of people’s pockets, the 
way you’ve been doing. 
 
I want to close, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by telling the members on 
that side of the House that I couldn’t support this legislation, 
and I won’t. And I’m asking them to stop the blind following of 
the Premier of this province down the road to hell. I’m asking 
them to have a closer look at what’s going on over there. And 
I’m asking them to say, Mr. Premier, enough is enough, and 
we’re voting with the opposition because this is an unfair and a 
regressive tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I rise today to speak in opposition to Bill 19 and in 
support of the amendment put forward by my colleague from 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
What we are faced with here today is a Bill which is a tax 
increase Bill of 40 per cent on the sales tax. And I want to first 
of all touch on some of the reasons why we would . . .  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3448 
 

why this government would want to present a 40 per cent 
increase in the sales tax. When we take a look at how they 
campaigned in 1982 and how they campaigned in 1986 — and I 
will get to some of the campaign promises that were made, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to eliminate the sales tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the reasons that we are 
facing tremendous increases in taxes, not just the E&H tax, but 
you can take a look at the gasoline tax and many other taxes, 
and the road tax where it eliminated highway construction in 
this province, and the services that has been cut since 1982, and 
you just have to take a look at some of the reasons and the 
panic. 
 
First of all we had the Minister of Finance indicating that there 
would be a set amount of money in the budget, and then when 
he brings it down he finds out that he was $800 million short. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is one of the main reasons why this 
sales tax has been increased by 40 per cent. 
 
You take a look at the provincial debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
which a short five years ago there was no debt. We had just 
come out of 11 straight years of balanced budgets and had $139 
million in the bank, and now we take five short years later, into 
the sixth year of a Conservative government, and we now have 
a debt of $3.4 billion. And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is one of 
the main reasons why the citizens of this province are faced 
with the tax increases like we see here today, and the one that 
we are debating, the E&H tax. 
 
It has come to a point now where the Conservative Government 
of Saskatchewan has borrowed more money on this province 
than the province assets are really worth. They were left in 1982 
with a long-term debt of a little over $3 billion, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They have now turned that around to a long-term debt 
of close to $11 billion. When you take that and the operating 
debt of $3.3 billion, then you can just see the serious problem 
that the citizens of Saskatchewan are facing, and that’s why the 
tremendous increases that we’re getting. 
 
The sales tax is particularly hard on different regions of the 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You buy $1,000 worth of goods 
in Meadow Lake or Weyburn or Regina, it’s a lot different than 
buying $1,000 worth of goods in Ile-a-la-Crosse or 
Fond-du-Lac or Black Lake, Stony Rapids or places like that. 
 
First of all, the citizens up there pay from 40 to 60 to 70 per 
cent higher for their goods. And as you can see by just using 
common logic, that 40 per cent increase in the sales tax is going 
to be added onto the extra cost that they pay. 
 
And I know that Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . he’s quite aware of 
what the cost of living is in the community of La Loche. As a 
farmer and a relative of an individual who is operating a store 
up in that community, you realize that it costs more to get 
merchandise up into La Loche, so that sales tax is a heavy 
burden, and it’s far heavier a burden on that region of 
Saskatchewan than it is in the region in the southern part of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it doesn’t matter what  

you buy in northern Saskatchewan or any of the far northern 
regions, this sales tax presents an extra burden and a hardship 
on those individuals who are living in that region. They are now 
paying more for their goods and services, and also they have 
that added extra that they have to pay on the 40 per cent 
increase. And you could take any scenario you want, take 
$1,000 of goods and services that you purchase in Meadow 
Lake, and you take $1,000 of goods and services you purchase 
in Stony Rapids, and you’re going to see that that 40 per cent 
increase probably would turn out to be closer to 100 per cent 
increase to the individuals who were purchasing it. So it is 
definitely a real hardship on them. 
 
And I say to you with all honesty, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
say to the other members, that you have to take a serious look at 
the promises that you as individuals made, and you too, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, have made in 1982 to totally eliminate the 
sales tax in your first four-year term. And I think that you have 
to take a serious look at what you’re doing. 
 
And when you take a look at northern Saskatchewan and the 
tremendously high unemployment rate that we have up there, 
and the disposable income or the purchasing power that those 
folks that live north of Meadow Lake have, then you see just 
how severe that this here increase in tax is, because the farther 
north you go, the more severe that it’s going to get. 
 
And that’s not really what was promised. As I indicated before, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not what the Conservative members 
opposite promised. In 1982 they said that they would, in their 
first full term of office, that they would totally eliminate the 
sales tax — totally eliminate it. 
 
And I want to say here . . . And I have some campaign material 
for the member from Melfort, and he indicates in 1982, when he 
was out campaigning, that they would phase out the sales tax in 
the first four years. Now the member from Melfort, he made 
that statement. 
 
And I have never heard anybody in Melfort saying that in 1986, 
when he was out campaigning, that he was going from door to 
door indicating that he was not going to honour that 
commitment. He continued to say that he was going to honour 
that commitment. And not once did he indicate, when he was 
campaigning, that when the election was called, and if they 
were re-elected, that he would not only renege on that promise 
but he would add 40 more per cent to that. 
 
And I’m sure, and I know, and I say to the member from 
Melfort, I know that he never went around campaigning, saying 
that he was going to increase the sales tax by another 40 per 
cent. I know he didn’t do that. 
 
And we have another one here, and this is an interesting one, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s the member from Yorkton, and he 
goes on with a full page ad and he says, and he’s asking the 
citizens of Yorkton to vote for him in 1982, and here are some 
of his promises: 
 

Eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax on all clothing and utility 
bills. This measure will be the first  

  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3449 
 

phase of a new Conservative government’s commitment to 
the complete elimination of the sales tax in its first term of 
office and its commitment to ease the burden of inflation 
for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 
And that’s what the member from Yorkton was campaigning 
on. And I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Yorkton, 
when he was out campaigning in 1986, did not tell his 
constituents that he was going to move to increase the sales . . . 
not to eliminate them, but to increase them by 40 per cent. And 
that is what went on, and I think that that’s deceiving the public. 
I don’t believe that had you have told the truth as to what you 
were going to do, Mr. Speaker, that a lot of those members 
would be back farming or carrying out the businesses that they 
were doing. They most certainly wouldn’t be sitting on the 
government side of the House. I can assure you that. 
 
I want to just give a couple more, and then I will move on to 
something else, Mr. Speaker. Here is another interesting one, 
and this is the member from . . . Progressive Conservative 
member, and he is from Saltcoats. And he also says that he will 
eliminate the 5 per cent on clothing utilities, also that they 
would reduce the sales tax in their first year of office. And I’m 
sure that the member from Saltcoats, when he was out 
campaigning, didn’t indicate that he was going to increase that. 
And I’m sure at the same time he wasn’t going around 
campaigning and telling them that he was going to add this 
extra 7 cents on the gasoline tax. You know, this is something 
that they didn’t campaign on. And I think that that’s not fair. 
 
And I have another member from Morse, and he also . . . he 
talks about rolling back the gas tax 20 per cent and phasing out 
of the sales tax. And that wasn’t carried out. And I say to the 
private members who occupy the back-benches of the 
Conservative party, I think that you have to take a serious look 
at your political careers when one takes a look at the patterns 
that are going on throughout Canada. And I’m sure, Mr. 
Speaker, they will continue that pattern. One just has to look at 
the polls. 
 
(1615) 
 
And it’s all taking place because of the types of promises that 
were made, and the types of promises that were broken. And the 
sales tax is a good example. So I say to the back-benchers in the 
Conservative Party, who occupy the back-benchers, you’ve got 
to go back to your constituencies and you . . . if you want to 
continue on in a political career, then I say to you that you have 
to take a serious look at what you’re doing, and take a serious 
look at what your government is doing, because you just cannot 
continue to say one thing and do another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the sales tax, it’s a continual line of 
broken promises, and a continual line of broken promises that 
has destroyed complete families in this province. And I say to 
the Attorney General, I’m not kidding when I say that when you 
fire 423 dental nurses and dental therapists, you literally 
destroyed those individuals. You took the . . . they’ve spent 
many years going to school to get where they were, and they 
were providing a service that was second to none in this  

province. And I say to you, Mr. Attorney General, when you 
did that, let me tell you, you destroyed many, many young men 
and women’s families and their lives and their futures. And I 
say that you will pay for that. 
 
You will pay for the fact that you said that you were going to 
eliminate the sales tax and then turn right around and put a 40 
per cent increase on it. You’re going to pay for that, and I say 
the time is coming very fast. So I say, it’s time for the 
back-benchers to stand up and be counted and to make the 
front-benchers, the cabinet, accountable so that promises like 
this don’t happen. 
 
When they said they were going to eliminate . . . the complete 
elimination of the sales tax, they didn’t say that they were going 
to take away the drug plan, the dental plan. They didn’t say they 
were going to increase the gas tax. So here are promises that 
were made, and promises that were broken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say that once the citizens of Saskatchewan have an 
opportunity to go out and vote — and they’ll have their first 
opportunity in the next six, seven months in a federal election, 
and you’ll see what’s going to happen there, and that’s all 
because of promises that were made and promises that were 
broken. And you’re going to see that that’s going to take place. 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that they will be totally rejected. 
 
And you’re going to see the same thing that’s going to happen 
in Saskatchewan, because the citizens of Saskatchewan are not 
in a position to put up with the type of broken promises that 
have come forth from this government and from successive 
Conservative governments. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you that I will be 
supporting the amendment that was put forward by my 
colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland, and I would just want to 
go over that amendment. And the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland moved that: 
 

Bill No. 19 not now be read a second time because: a) the 
40 per cent increase in the provincial sales tax is a betrayal 
of the Progressive Conservative promise to eliminate the 
provincial sales tax in their first term of office; b) the 40 
per cent increase in the provincial sales tax makes 
Saskatchewan people among the highest taxed in Canada; 
and c) the 40 per cent increase in the provincial sales tax is 
a regressive and unfair tax on Saskatchewan families. 

 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you, and I will be supporting 
the amendment. 
 
(1625) 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 17 
 

Blakeney Prebble 
Brockelbank Simard 
Solomon Kowalsky 
 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3450 
 

Koskie Romanow 
Tchorzewski Thompson 
Rolfes Upshall 
Anguish Calvert 
Lautermilch Van Mulligen 
Koenker  
 

Nays — 29 
 

Muller Duncan 
McLeod Andrew 
Berntson Lane 
Taylor Smith 
Swan Hodgins 
Hepworth Hardy 
Klein Meiklejohn 
Pickering Martin 
Toth Sauder 
Hopfner Petersen 
Swenson Martens 
Baker Gleim 
Neudorf Gardner 
Kopelchuk Saxinger 
Britton   
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 29 
 

Muller Duncan 
McLeod Andrew 
Berntson Lane 
Taylor Smith 
Swan Hodgins 
Hepworth Hardy 
Klein Meiklejohn 
Pickering Martin 
Toth Sauder 
Hopfner Petersen 
Swenson Martens 
Baker Gleim 
Neudorf Gardner 
Kopelchuk Saxinger 
Britton  
 

Nays — 17 
 

Blakeney Prebble 
Brockelbank Koskie 
Romanow Tchorzewski 
Thompson Rolfes 
Upshall Simard 
Solomon Kowalsky 
Anguish Calvert 
Lautermilch Van Mulligen 
Koenker  
 
The Bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly, 
referred to Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane and the proposed  

amendment thereto moved by Mr. Goulet that Bill No. 27 — 
An Act to amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to take part in this debate on a very unfortunate and 
unfair proposed tax increase by the PC government. 
 
We’re not only debating the main motion, Mr. Speaker, but also 
the amendment, and at this point I’d like to read the amendment 
that was moved on September 29 by our side of the House: 
 

That all the words after the word “That” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
Bill 27 not now be read a second time . . . (in order words, 
that the flat tax not be imposed upon the people of 
Saskatchewan for the following reasons) a) the 50 per cent 
increase in the provincial flat tax is a betrayal of the 
Progressive Conservative promise to reduce income taxes 
by 10 per cent; b) the 50 per cent increase in the provincial 
flat tax makes Saskatchewan people among the highest 
taxed in Canada; and c) the 50 per cent increase in the 
provincial flat tax unfairly increases the tax burden on 
low-and middle-income Saskatchewan families. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the essence of our amendment to the proposed Bill 
is that the flat tax is an unfair tax. It’s unfair first of all, Mr. 
Speaker, because it’s not a progressive tax. It means that 
low-income families in the province of Saskatchewan have to 
pay the same income tax rate as high-income families, and we 
think, Mr. Speaker, that that is fundamentally unfair. 
 
The Bill is also unfair, Mr. Speaker, because the flat tax is 
based on net income and, Mr. Speaker, in our judgement that is 
a very, very unfair measure. It’s unfair to tax net income instead 
of taxable income, first of all, Mr. Speaker, because it means 
that higher-income families have available to them a number of 
mechanisms for reducing their tax burden and their flat tax 
payment that lower-income families cannot possibly have 
available to them. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, simply of the well-known RRSPs 
(registered retirement savings plan), which anyone who’s 
making probably more than $30,000 a year can readily take 
advantage of, but which people making $20,000 a year or less 
are very unlikely to be able to take advantage of. Those RRSP 
deductions will take place before the flat tax is calculated. 
They’ll take place before net income is calculated, and therefore 
higher-income earners can accordingly reduce their flat tax by 
claiming RRSPs, and . . . (inaudible) . . . those making less than 
$20,000 a year will be unable to take advantage of that tax 
deduction, and therefore will end up paying more than their 
share of flat tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s our view, on this side of the House, that this 
proposed tax increase by the PC government is a betrayal of an 
election promise — a promise made in 1982 to reduce personal 
income tax by 10 per cent. And I venture to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that every single member on  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3451 
 

that side of the House who ran in the 1982 election made that 
promise in their election literature — the member from 
Meadow Lake has just indicated that in fact he did make that 
promise on behalf of the PC party in his constituency — and 
that promise, Mr. Speaker, is now clearly being broken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is that promise being broken, but the 
effect of this flat tax, which will now amount to one and a half 
per cent of net income — if the Bill that’s before us today is 
adopted in the Assembly — means that the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to be asked to pay an additional 12 
basic points on their personal income tax. 
 
If you take the average taxpayer in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
and if that taxpayer is to ask themselves the question: how 
much more will I be paying in provincial income tax as a 
percentage of federal income tax after this Bill, as compared to 
before? The answer, Mr. Speaker, is about another four points 
of federal income tax will have to be paid, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in total, Mr. Speaker, if you take this 1.5 per cent flat tax, 
what it basically means is that in addition to Saskatchewan 
taxpayers having to pay 50 per cent of federal income tax in the 
form of provincial income tax, this government has now 
imposed an additional 12 points of federal income tax in the 
form of provincial income tax to be levied by this flat tax. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, the imposition of the flat tax by 
this government means that the average Saskatchewan taxpayer, 
in the form of provincial tax, will pay 62 per cent of federal tax 
in the form of provincial income tax instead of 50 per cent of 
federal income tax in the form of provincial income tax, as was 
the case a few years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we, in effect, as a result of this flat tax, are 
seeing an increase of 12 points of federal income tax paid in the 
form of additional provincial income tax here in this province. 
In other words, regular Saskatchewan income tax is, in effect, 
for the average Saskatchewan taxpayer, 62 per cent of federal 
tax. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that leaves Saskatchewan taxpayers with the 
highest income tax levels in western Canada. And we say, Mr. 
Speaker, that that is a direct betrayal of the promise that this 
government made five years ago. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to, in addition to the concerns that 
I’ve expressed so far, raise what for me is my most fundamental 
objection to the flat tax and to this Bill, Mr. Speaker. And that 
is, that not only is it a betrayal of the PC promise but the very 
way in which the flat tax is structured is fundamentally unfair. 
It’s unfair not only to lower-income taxpayers as I mentioned 
earlier but, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfair to those who are sick, to 
those who are old, to those who are generous in their charitable 
donations. 
 
And I want to elaborate on why it is particularly unfair to those 
groups, Mr. Speaker. It seems to me that this Bill is symbolic of 
everything that the PC government is about because, Mr. 
Speaker, if you are fortunate enough to have money to invest in 
housing units such as MURBs  

(multiple unit residential buildings) or if you’re interested in 
investing in oil exploration, or in the motion picture business, 
you can take advantage of tax shelters which can be deducted, 
Mr. Speaker, before you pay the flat tax. 
 
But if you’re a senior citizen, or if you’re a person with a large 
number of dependents, or if you’re sick and have high medical 
bills, or if you are generous and make charitable donations, Mr. 
Speaker, you are not eligible to deduct any of the tax benefits 
that come with being in the circumstances I just mentioned. 
You have to pay the flat tax before any of the deductions that 
are associated with being in the categories I’ve just mentioned 
can be taken advantage of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to elaborate on this point because I think 
this is the fundamental issue about why the flat tax is such an 
unfair tax and ought not to be levied on the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, first of all the flat tax doesn’t apply 
to the basic personal income tax deduction which last year, Mr. 
Speaker, in 1986 was $4,180. 
 
What does that mean, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, that means 
that someone has to pay an additional $61. In fact, every 
Saskatchewan resident who pays tax, and is over 18 years of 
age, is having to pay an extra $61 in flat tax as a result of not 
being able to claim the personal income tax deduction before 
the flat tax is levied. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, every senior citizen in this 
province is eligible to claim a deduction of $2,610 by virtue of 
being over age 65. Now, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the flat tax, 
every senior citizen in Saskatchewan who is paying income tax 
has to pay an additional $39 — 1.5 per cent of $2,610. And they 
can’t claim the senior citizens’ deduction before they pay the 
flat tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the result of that is very beneficial for many 
married couples. But, Mr. Speaker, a married man who would 
be eligible for this deduction of $3,660 can’t claim that 
deduction before paying the flat tax. That’s going t cost the 
spouse, Mr. Speaker, an additional $54 a year as a result of this 
one and a half per cent flat tax — in effect one and a half per 
cent of 3,660. 
 
So just to review, Mr. Speaker, that means that the average 
senior citizen is going to pay an additional hundred dollars in 
flat tax, just by way of not being able to claim the basic 
personal income deduction and the age 65 deduction before 
having to pay the flat tax, Mr. Speaker. And the average 
married person with a spouse making less than $520 is going to 
have to pay an additional $115, Mr. Speaker, by way of not 
being able to claim the basic personal income deduction and the 
married exemption before paying the flat tax — an additional 
$115 as a result of the imposition of the flat tax every year, Mr. 
Speaker, in this province. 
 
Then in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, the flat tax and the way 
it’s been structured by this government is such that it penalizes 
all those who have children. For every dependent child a 
taxpayer can claim a deduction of $710, Mr. Speaker, except in 
the case of the flat tax, because the flat tax is levied before the 
dependent children’s deduction is levied, Mr. Speaker. And that  
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3452 
 

means that for every child an extra $10.50 has to be paid in flat 
tax. 
 
I have two children, Mr. Speaker, and will pay an additional 
$21 this year as a result of the flat tax, because I cannot deduct 
the exemption that comes from being able to claim my two 
sons, Mr. Speaker, before I pay the flat tax and nor can any 
other Saskatchewan taxpayer. And the average family, Mr. 
Speaker, will have to pay an additional $21 in flat tax because 
of, again, the unfair structuring of the flat tax that doesn’t allow 
them to claim their dependent children before they pay it. Those 
are just a few of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, why this flat tax is so 
unfair, but there are many others. 
 
And I just want to point out a few more which I think are very 
unfair. Many people in this province appreciate the fact, Mr. 
Speaker, that if they have a little investment and they can claim 
some interest on that each year, that the first $1,000 of interest 
they earn can be claimed as a tax deduction, but not before they 
pay the flat tax, Mr. Speaker. It can for any other kind of 
income tax payment. The $1,000 deduction on interest earnings 
can be claimed, but not before the flat tax. If they earn $1,000, 
that’s going to cost them an additional $15 a year in tax, Mr. 
Speaker, each and every year because of the policies of this 
government. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, many seniors and others who earn pensions 
are in a position to qualify for the pension income deduction of 
up to $1,000, but not before they pay the flat tax, Mr. Speaker. 
They can’t deduct their pension income on the first $1,000 of 
their pension income before paying the flat tax, and they’re 
going to pay another $15 as a result of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the most unfairly hit by this flat tax 
are those who are sick. Mr. Speaker, consider the case of 
someone who has, shall we say, $500 in medical expenses in 
the year 1986 or 1987, and that is not at all unusual for someone 
to have $500 in medical expenses that they can claim. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they will have to pay an additional $7.50 flat tax 
because they cannot claim their medical expenses and deduct 
those before they pay the flat tax, although they can claim that 
as a deduction for any other form of income tax in this province 
or federally. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, then there’s the case of those who make charitable 
contributions. And let’s just say that one contributes another 
$500 to various charities in this province and in Canada. You 
have to pay an additional $7.50 in flat tax on that $500 
charitable donation, Mr. Speaker. So those who are generous — 
the more generous you are, the more you will be penalized by 
the PC flat tax. If you make charitable donations of $1,000, 
you’ll have to pay an additional $15 in flat tax. Now this is just 
a ridiculous tax system that the PC government has imposed 
upon us, Mr. Speaker, and I think that some of the points I 
make are demonstrating just how unfair it is. 
 
I want to give two more examples before I close, Mr. Speaker. 
Every student in this province, over the course of the last 
several decades, has enjoyed the privilege of  

being able to deduct their tuition rates, and also has enjoyed the 
privilege of being able to claim an educational deduction of $50 
a month for every month that they attend a post-secondary 
educational institution, Mr. Speaker. So the average university 
student is able to deduct approximately $400 a year as a result 
of being in university for an eight-month period and being able 
to claim $50 a month for each of those eight months. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, for every other kind of income tax that a 
student may be asked to pay on their summer earnings or other 
earnings that they receive during the year, they will be able to 
claim this educational deduction before they pay that income 
tax. But in the case of the flat tax, Mr. Speaker, they will have 
to pay the flat tax on the money they earn prior to deducting 
$50 a month for each month that they were in school. And 
that’s going to cost the average university student an additional 
$6 in flat tax. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, there is the case of individuals who 
are supporting other members of their family who are disabled. 
There is a disability deduction for dependents, Mr. Speaker, 
under the income tax system, that allows the supporting 
member of the family to claim an income tax deduction of up to 
$2,860 for dependents who are severely disabled, either 
physically or mentally, and are impaired in the year in which 
the tax is being levied, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in the case of the flat tax, are they able to make this 
deduction, claim this deduction of $2,860 for physically 
disabled dependents before they pay the flat tax? Mr. Speaker, 
the answer is no, they are not. They are forced to pay the flat tax 
before they are allowed to claim this deduction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the members opposite, shame! — shame 
that you levy a flat tax on those who are sick, on those who 
must pay high levels of medical expense, on those who are 
supporting members of their family who are disabled, who are 
mentally and physically impaired. You are levying this tax on 
those who are least able to afford this tax, while you let your 
friends in private business, who are wealthy, write off their 
MURBs (multiple unit residential building), write off their 
investments in oil companies, write off their accounting fees 
and their management agency fees, and while you allow those 
who are well-to-do write off up to $10,000 in RRSPs before 
they pay the flat tax. 
 
You have developed a tax structure in this province during this 
last five years that is clearly geared towards reducing the tax 
burden of those who are wealthy and increasing the tax burden 
of those who are middle income or low income. And we on this 
side of the House tell you that not only do we refuse to go along 
with your flat tax, but we will abolish the flat tax after the next 
election. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, today we are saying that we are supporting 
the amendment not to have this Bill read a second time. And if 
it does come to a second reading, we will be opposing it. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
October 22, 1987 

 

3453 
 

(1657) 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 17 
 

Blakeney Prebble 
Brockelbank Koskie 
Romanow Tchorzewski 
Thompson Rolfes 
Upshall Simard 
Solomon Kowalsky 
Anguish Calvert 
Lautermilch Van Mulligen 
Koenker  
 

Nays — 28 
 

Muller Duncan 
McLeod Andrew 
Berntson Lane 
Taylor Smith 
Swan Hodgins 
Hepworth Hardy 
Klein Meiklejohn 
Martin Toth 
Sauder Hopfner 
Petersen Swenson 
Martens Baker 
Gleim Neudorf 
Gardner Kopelchuk 
Saxinger Britton 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 28 
 

Muller Duncan 
McLeod Andrew 
Berntson Lane 
Taylor Smith 
Swan Hodgins 
Hepworth Hardy 
Klein Meiklejohn 
Martin Toth 
Sauder Hopfner 
Petersen Swenson 
Martens Baker 
Gleim Neudorf 
Gardner Kopelchuk 
Saxinger Britton 
 

Nays — 17 
 

Blakeney Prebble 
Brockelbank Koskie 
Romanow Tchorzewski 
Thompson Rolfes 
Simard Solomon 
Kowalsky Anguish 
Calvert Lautermilch 
Van Mulligen Koenker 
 

Upshall 
 
The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 
Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


