













































September 21, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 21, 1987 

 

 

2689 

 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, under presenting petitions I 

rise to present a petition today signed by many citizens of the 

province of Saskatchewan from communities such as: 

Coronach, Yorkton, Fife Lake, Weyburn, Estevan, Willow 

Bunch, Mortlach, and Moose Jaw. 

 

These citizens are critical of the disestablishment of the 

Saskatchewan dental plan in our school system. They call for 

the reinstatement of that dental program, and ask for the 

rehiring of the dental therapists and assistants. And I file the 

petition on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 

opportunity to introduce to members of the Assembly an 

individual I am sure who is very familiar to most members of 

this House - a member of a very prominent political and public 

family in the province of Saskatchewan, and a gentleman who 

is a former member of this Assembly. And I would like all hon. 

members to join with me in welcoming Mr. Wilf Gardiner, who 

is seated behind the rail. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Plight of Western Farmers 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 

Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, I direct my question to the 

Acting Minister of Agriculture. You may be aware, Mr. 

Minister, that a comprehensive poll was done over the weekend 

in respect to the plight of western farmers, in fact Canadian 

farmers. And in that poll there was headline in the 

Star-Phoenix: “Farmers in despair; expect to leave land.” 

 

And within that poll, Mr. Minister, it indicated that within two 

or three years, that 29 per cent of Saskatchewan farmers say 

they will have to leave their farms. And I ask you . . . and it 

indicates further in that poll that over 53 per cent of the farmers 

indicate they will not be making any money at all in their 

operation this year. Only 13 per cent indicate any income or 

profit. 

 

I ask you: in light of this desperate situation, what are your 

plans to address it? The farmers of Saskatchewan are waiting 

for an announcement in respect to the deficiency payment. I ask 

you: have you again contacted, in light of the desperate 

situation of agriculture, to move the Mulroney government to 

bring in immediately, this fall, a deficiency payment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, our government,  

and particularly our Premier, is well aware of the difficulties 

that the farm sector have faced over the past two or three years, 

whether the issue was one of drought or low grain prices or the 

impact of high interest rates, and the list goes on and on, 

unfortunately. Grasshoppers one could throw in there as well if 

one surveyed the last three or four years. 

 

And because our Premier and our government recognized those 

difficulties, we’ve continually responded. And if more response 

is necessary, I think one could expect to see that forthcoming as 

well. 

 

And I think specifically, Mr. Speaker, of the kinds of responses 

that have been forthcoming from this government: whether it be 

the farm land moratorium; whether it be the production loans, 

the low interest production loans to make sure that the farmers 

have the cash to do the seeding and the harvesting; whether it 

be cash advances for the farmers in the livestock or the grains 

sector; and indeed, the interprovincial . . . or federal-provincial 

co-operation that was behind the deficiency payment and will 

be behind and result in a second deficiency payment, I have no 

doubt. 

 

One of the very big issues facing Saskatchewan farmers, as the 

hon. member has raised, is the question of the debt load that 

they carry, and how we might address that in the months and 

years to come. And that’s precisely why our Premier has 

convened a symposium, an international symposium, to bring 

people from not only across Canada and within our own 

province have done some fair degree of study on this, but as 

well from across the world, to look at some options that may 

have some application here in dealing with a very serious 

problem. 

 

I might add as well though, Mr. Speaker, that I think every 

farmer across Saskatchewan and across Canada recognizes 

there are no quick fixes when it comes to the agriculture issues 

facing us today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I’m glad the hon. members are clapping. I’m 

sure that the farmers that were watching weren’t clapping with 

that answer. 

 

I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, that . . . It’s indicated by the 

federal government that the details will not be worked out until 

October, and they won’t be announcing any decision until 

December in respect to a deficiency payment. 

 

And what we want to know here today: do you support that 

timetable? Are you urging the Mulroney government in fact to 

come forward with a payment this fall to meet the crisis that the 

farmers are having, or are you prepared to play the politics of 

waiting until possibly there’s a federal election, like the last 

deficiencies payment, or when are you going to stand up for the 

farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Our government, Mr. Premier, and I 

think like every farmer across Saskatchewan, would  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2690 

 

 

like to see a payment sooner than later. As I have said many 

times in this House before, the important thing is that we do get 

one, and I think our Premier has made great strides forward in 

that area. He got the unanimous agreement of all ministers of 

Agriculture, including the federal minister, at the last ministers 

of Agriculture meeting. 

 

Part and parcel in terms of getting the payment, and when one 

gets it, of course, is how that payment is structured, and to make 

sure that the payment is as fair as possible, given the varieties of 

kinds of agriculture and the kinds of crops and agriculture 

enterprises that may or may not be subject to deficiency 

payment, is why our Premier, along with the federal minister, 

has consulted widely amongst farm groups; and as I understand 

it there’s a fair consensus forming on how that payment should 

be structured so that nobody is left out unfairly, or to make sure, 

indeed, that the program gets as fair an application as possible, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, what we don’t need is more 

studies, more symposiums, more MLAs running around the 

province like they did in the output . . . in respect to the costs 

inputs. The farmers of Saskatchewan are asking for action, and 

what I want you to do is to detail what action you’re going to do 

in order to prevent 29 per cent of the farmers to lose their 

operations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate 

the hon. member would view our Premier, the Prime Minister 

of Canada, the Minister of Agriculture from Canada - it’s 

unfortunate he would view the consultations that those 

politicians might have with farmers and farm groups as 

somehow yet another study. It seems to me that loudly and 

clearly the farmers across this country have said, let us be 

involved in designing a model because then we will have one 

that we can all live with and all defend and, in fact, that will be 

fair, because there are many, many dimensions to framing a 

deficiency payment - paying on seeded acres versus arable 

acres, for example; what crops are in and what crops are not 

in - all those kinds of questions. It’s only with consultation. 

They don’t believe in the value of consultation; we do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Supplementary. Mr. Speaker, the government 

opposite often claims that their Premier is the most 

knowledgeable with respect to agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — They often claim, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve 

got all of the best programs. But in the poll referred to in this 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member has 

risen on a supplementary which allows a very, very short 

preamble directly related to the question. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, and I will relate it directly 

to the question. The poll referred to in the  

previous questioning, Mr. Speaker, indicates that Saskatchewan 

farmers are the most pessimistic of all in Canada, and I wonder 

how that jibes with all this rhetoric, about the Premier and the 

agriculture programs of Saskatchewan being the best, when our 

farmers are the most pessimistic in the country about their 

prospects. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, our 

Premier, our government, this caucus, doesn’t need any polls or 

any pollsters to tell us what the issues are facing us in 

agriculture today. I would make that point front and centre, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As it relates to the poll results in so far as the difficulties facing 

Saskatchewan versus other provinces, I suspect one might draw 

some conclusions about the percentage of our farm income that 

comes from the grain sector, which has been particularly hard 

hit, as opposed to the red meat sector. And I think any 

fair-minded person who is going to examine this area would 

take into consideration those kinds of things. 

 

But having said all of that, Mr. Speaker, because we recognize 

that Saskatchewan has been particularly hard hit, because of 

that, that is why this government, unlike Alberta, unlike 

Manitoba, unlike Ontario, unlike anywhere else in the country, 

has responded in spades, whether it be with a debt moratorium 

legislation; whether it be with 6 per cent production loans; 

whether it be with cash advances; or whether it be with getting 

the assurance that there be deficiency payments, Mr. Speaker; 

that’s why we have responded, and that’s what we will continue 

to respond, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Lay-offs at Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, they’re not getting 

anywhere in agriculture; perhaps we’ll switch to the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. I’d like to direct a question to the 

minister in charge of the potash corporation. On Friday, even 

before, Mr. Minister, your potash Bill passed third and final 

reading in this legislature, PCS announced the lay-off of nearly 

half of its work-force - 710 people now face indefinite lay-offs 

as early as next month, Mr. Speaker. Can you justify this 

unprecedented lay-off of potash workers in light of the 

government’s promise that Bill 36 would prevent job losses for 

Saskatchewan potash workers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately, 

again, we have a question from the opposition which is less 

than accurate and probably deliberately misleading. That was 

not the announcement that was made, Mr. Speaker, and the hon. 

member knows that. 

 

The announcement that has been made is that Cory division, I 

believe, has had the required five-weeks’ notice of a two-week 

lay-off, and that notice has gone out. Let me assure the hon. 

member that the announcements that have been, and will be, 

made are the traditional announcements made by the potash 

corporation, with  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2691 

 

 

one exception, Mr. Speaker, made by the next leader of the New 

Democratic Party who in 1981 did not have any lay-offs 

because of an election. These are the traditional inventory 

control, the maintenance shut-downs that have always happened 

in the potash industry, and there is absolutely nothing out of the 

ordinary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says this is 

routine. When in the history of the potash corporation was half 

of its work-force laid off and described as routine? Never, Mr. 

Speaker. He says it’s routine. The spokesman for the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan says it’s over-supply. 

 

I want to direct a new question to the Minister of Energy. The 

Minister of Energy wrote to every potash miner in 

Saskatchewan to justify The Potash Resources Act. Her letter 

said, in part: 

 

Without action our jobs and our mines are threatened. I am 

not willing to stand idly by while other governments (and 

it goes on) affect the livelihood of our people and the 

health of our industry. 

 

And later the same letter says: 

 

The main objective of this legislation is to protect the jobs 

of the workers of the potash industry. 

 

Were those, Mr. Speaker, just hollow words to save your 

government’s political skin in the potash communities; and if 

not, why is half of the PCS work-force now facing indefinite 

lay-offs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think the hon. members asked two 

questions, and one which was the final one, Mr. Speaker, which 

dealt with why have - and these are his words, I believe - why 

have half the people in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

received notices of lay-off. 

 

First of all, that is a blatant untruth, Mr. Speaker, and I suggest 

that the hon. member is deliberately misleading not only this 

House but the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I’ll tell the hon. member what the notice is, Mr. 

Speaker - because I find it unfortunate that he wants to play 

with the lives of the potash workers in such a slipshod manner, 

Mr. Speaker - that 225 employees were given notice of a two 

week lay-off at Cory plant, from October 25 to November 7. 

Now that is completely different, completely at variance with 

the allegations of the hon. member after. So I will give him the 

truth, a word that he is somewhat unfamiliar with. 

 

The lay-off is not due to The Potash Resources Act. It is part of 

the inventory adjustment plan put in at the beginning of the 

fiscal year, January. The union was informed of the plan several 

months ago, and this message was reinforced in the past month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the facts; those are the notices that  

have gone out to the members; one mine, Mr. Speaker, 

notwithstanding what the hon. member said. 

 

I believe he asked a second question with regard to the notice 

that has gone out to the potash workers, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll 

ask the Minister of Energy to respond to the second question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 

will not allow one minister to pass on to another minister 

because, you know, we could go through two or three ministers, 

and I realize that what you’re saying . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well they asked two questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I understand that. The point I would like to 

make is this. We see here this afternoon - and this is an 

appropriate time for me to mention it - a situation where 

questioners and those who are answering the question are 

entering debate, rather than actually answering and asking 

questions. 

 

I think this is an appropriate time to mention it. There was a 

couple of instances last week when this also was happening, 

and I didn’t mention it at that time, but I do now. So I ask hon. 

members, in your questions please stick to the question you 

wish to ask because as soon as you refer to something the 

minister said, you’re entering debate. And at the same time, I 

would ask the hon. members who answer the questions to ask it 

in a reasonable and fair manner and that they don’t comment on 

two or three things before they actually get to the answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll direct a question to the 

Minister of Energy since I didn’t hear her voice responding to 

the last question. 

 

I don’t know how the minister is curbed from responding to a 

letter she wrote to every potash miner in Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, but apparently she’s prevented from speaking to 

that letter, and the minister attempting to deny the connection 

between the government’s potash legislation and these lay-offs. 

The Premier in this Chamber is the one who made the 

connection for the last three weeks, in this issue, in this 

Chamber and outside. They said that this legislation is needed 

to prevent lay-offs and job losses. Now 710 workers are facing 

lay-offs. 

 

Just what is this Bill, Mr. Minister, supposed to prevent? Is the 

minister admitting this legislation will not protect Saskatchewan 

jobs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not prevented from 

answering questions, but as it relates to the specific questions 

on PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) there is a 

minister responsible, as the member well knows, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Let’s deal with the issue to the workers, the letter to the 

workers, Mr. Chairman, and the objective of the  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2692 

 

 

legislation has been stated very clearly. The main problem, 

namely the issue of over-supply, and the productive capacity 

was the main issue, Mr. Speaker. A symptom of that problem 

was the anti-dumping petition that was brought down on the 

Saskatchewan producers. 

 

Given the degree of those levies, to do nothing, to address this 

issue, Mr. Speaker, we face the prospect of total mine closures 

and total job lay-offs, not only job lay-offs but you have the 

potential for permanent job loss if a potash mine, Mr. Speaker, 

is closed for any length of period. 

 

The member from Regina Rosemont sits on his seat and he 

chirps there like a bird in a tree and says, that’s not true. I invite 

him to either come in to my office or the Department of Energy 

and Mines or go visit the producers and find out, as opposed to 

simply reading the headlines in the Star-Phoenix. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also said, in presenting the legislation, that 

there would still be the normal course of maintenance shut-in 

periods and that would mean some temporary lay-offs. We’ve 

always recognized that that indeed would take place, and that is 

what they’re facing today. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I 

have the letter here, Madam Minister, and it’s on the stationery 

of the Minister of Energy and Mines - not in the minister in 

charge of the potash corporation - that went to all the potash 

workers in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And in this 

particular letter it says: 

 

I will not stand . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member 

knows that we are not quoting on supplementaries, so I ask him 

to paraphrase the point and put his question. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — You’re quite right, Mr. Speaker. I 

referred to the matter directly out . . . a quotation out of the 

minister’s letter before, and that still stands. The minister said it 

to the potash workers of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to ask a final supplementary: is one Katrina Forrest 

among those that will be laid off by the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, once again I have stated 

what the objective of this legislation is, and I would remind the 

members from across the floor that the legislation, in part, is not 

different than similar legislation back in 1969 in terms of 

volume controls or production. 

 

I might also add, Mr. Speaker, that that party across the floor 

supported the legislation then and, in fact, carried it on through 

when they became government in 1971. I suspect for political 

expediency the member from Saskatoon raises the issue today. 

 

Constitutional Process and Aboriginal People 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Because the minister in charge of Indian  

and Metis affairs is not here, I will direct my question to the 

Minister of Justice. 

 

Yesterday at Fort Simpson, the Pope paid his respects and 

provided a great sense of optimism for the aboriginal people in 

Canada. His basic statement was one of reopening the 

constitutional talks so that we can go ahead and deal with the 

entrenchment of self government for aboriginal people. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is your position in regards to the Pope’s 

statement, and are you going to urge the Mulroney government 

to reopen the constitutional process with aboriginal people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that everyone 

followed the Pope through his tour, not only to Fort Simpson 

but also throughout North America, and, I think, the statement 

made by the Pope yesterday with regard to the right of 

self-government. 

 

This government has, I think, not unlike any other government, 

supported the concept of self-government for aboriginal 

peoples. In the 1985 constitutional negotiations our Premier put 

forward what he believed was and would be an acceptable 

accord, the Saskatchewan accord, to deal with the question of 

self-government. Now that was not accepted by a series of 

people and we all know how it unfolded. 

 

This government maintains its position that we support the 

concept of native self-government, aboriginal self-government. 

The difficulty - and I suppose the difficulty that came down in 

the most recent first ministers’ conference - is while we can 

support the function and the concept of aboriginal 

self-government, we get down to the next question is: what are 

we going to put into the constitution, and what does that, that 

we put into the constitution, mean? What does it mean for 

self-government, let’s say, within the city of Regina? What does 

it mean in other parts of the province? And those are significant 

and weighty questions. 

 

I think that our Premier has made it clear, following the break 

up of the last first ministers’ meeting on the aboriginal rights 

questions, that we would certainly be prepared to revisit that 

issue again at the constitutional table. As you probably are 

aware, the agenda for the constitutional table is set by the Prime 

Minister in conjunction with the 10 premiers, and I would 

assume that the next time that they sit and meet, that you will 

see those 10 premiers and the Prime Minister discussing that 

agenda item once again. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, your terminology 

is one where you say you will revisit the issue. The Premier 

said, when he came back from the constitutional conference, it’s 

be business as usual when we came back. Then he proceeded to 

dismantle the organization and took away the funding on 

AMNSIS (Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians of 

Saskatchewan) which dealt with constitutional issues. What are 

you going to do to get back that money so that people can look 

after their constitutional matters in this  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2693 

 

 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I think that what I indicated to the 

hon. member’s question is that this government stands prepared 

to deal with the question of aboriginal self-government in this 

country. We indicated, as I’m sure the Premier indicated, is the 

definition or the meaning of any type of particular wording that 

would go into the constitution. I think that’s fair, and that’s a 

difficult issue. That’s a difficult issue to deal with. 

 

What I indicated to the hon. member is that when the Prime 

Minister and the Premier sit down again to determine the 

agenda for constitutional conferences that are now enshrined in 

the constitution to be happening each year, along with a 

premiers’ and prime minister’s conference on the economy — 

but I’m sure that there is going to be a series of items dealt with 

on that agenda. Those people will sit down and determine what 

the agenda item will be. Now some would argue that it should 

be the Senate — will it be the Senate; will it be native 

self-government; will it be some other issues? I’m sure that will 

come forward soon. 

 

I can only indicate to you that the government would be 

prepared to revisit the question of native self-government. 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, the minister states that you need a 

definition. His government went down and dealt with the 

Quebec, the Meech Lake-Langevin accord, and did not give us 

a definition of distinct society. 

 

Here you are, you have one set of laws and one set of processes 

dealing with the issue in Quebec, and you will not use the same 

processes when it comes down to aboriginal people in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Are you going to utilize the same processes that 

you are utilizing in the case of dealing with Meech 

Lake-Langevin accord and with dealing with the Quebec issue? 

Are you going to use the same principles and processes when 

you are going to be dealing with aboriginal people in Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I would think that the hon. 

member does not do justice to the constitutional negotiations by 

saying that the distinct society dimension of the question on the 

Meech Lake accord is the same thing that we’re dealing with on 

self-government with the aboriginal people. 

 

The second thing he asked: will you use the same process; will 

you use the same process that arrived at the Meech Lake accord 

to deal with native self-government? 

 

The member from Riversdale has been extremely critical of 

using the concept upon which the 10 premiers and the Prime 

Minister arrived at the Meech Lake accord. Now I hear you 

saying something totally different, that we would . . . that you 

would advocate that type of process to  

deal with native self-government, I will certainly that that under 

advisement and advise the Premier as to your concern and 

report back. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 41 - An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor  

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 

to amend The Provincial Auditor Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 42 - An Act respecting the Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Acts Resulting from the  

Enactment of The Provincial Auditor Amendment Act,  

1987 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move first reading of a Bill respecting the 

Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts Resulting from the 

Enactment of The Provincial Auditor Amendment Act, 1987. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILL 

 

At 2:34 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bill: 

 

Bill No. 36 - An Act respecting the Potash Resources of 

Saskatchewan 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:36 p.m. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 39 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, as we 

begin today, I would like to move to some questioning around 

an institution. Though it’s not very old in our province, it has 

come to occupy, I think, a very special place, and I refer to the 

Diefenbaker Centre on the campus in Saskatoon. 

 

You’ll be aware, because of funding cut-backs to the university, 

the University of Saskatchewan no longer is able to continue 

funding the Diefenbaker Centre. And I’m told that there is some 

real and immediate danger that the Diefenbaker Centre may 

force closure. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think that would be a tragedy. I’m told that the 

federal government has denied funding, and I am told  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2694 

 

 

that the Diefenbaker Centre has made some requests to your 

government and therefore, I assume, to your department, and to 

this point have not, or at least a week ago, had not received 

word. 

 

I find it perhaps a bit peculiar, a bit ironic, Mr. Minister, that a 

Conservative government in Ottawa and an Conservative 

government in Regina seems unable or unwilling to find the 

funding for a centre which honours the member of the 

Conservative prime minister from Prince Albert. I find it almost 

a bit odd that in fact the issue should be raised in this House by 

a New Democrat. 

 

Mr. Minister, politics aside, politics aside, Mr. Diefenbaker was 

our prime minister, the prime minister from Prince Albert, and 

this centre in Saskatoon not only honours his memory but it 

houses, of course, his very valuable collection of papers which 

have an extremely valuable role to play in archival work and 

education work. It holds very valuable documents in terms of 

our Canadian history and Canadian parliamentary system. 

 

But as you well know, the centre is much more than that, much 

more than a monument, much more than an archives. It has 

become a living centre. It has become a centre of opportunity 

for those involved in training in archival work. It has become a 

place of exhibit and a place where many valuable exhibits are 

formulated and then travel the province. And not 

insignificantly, the Diefenbaker Centre has become a tourist 

attraction for the city of Saskatoon and our province. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask today what you are going to do, 

what your department intends to do, to ensure the future of the 

Diefenbaker Centre. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, maybe I could start by 

addressing the university funding. I wouldn’t say it was fair that 

university funding has been cut so Diefenbaker Centre is in 

some jeopardy. Rather what has happened, funding did increase 

— I remember I was minister responsible for that department at 

one point — funding did increase over the years to the 

universities, no question. But as enrolments have mushroomed, 

universities have had other priorities of how to spend money; I 

think we’re all aware of that. 

 

In Saskatoon the Diefenbaker Centre has been placed in some 

difficulties and the future in some doubt because the university 

doesn’t feel it can commit funding to this particular venture. 

 

To date, to the best of my knowledge, I haven’t been 

approached by Diefenbaker Centre for assistance, but I did meet 

with the Minister of Education approximately two weeks ago, 

and we discussed several options which included federal 

assistance, my department and his department being involved, 

and I think you’ll see some rescue for the Diefenbaker Centre. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Then do I have your assurance, Mr. Minister, 

that you and your government would not stand by and allow the 

Diefenbaker Centre to close its doors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I can safely say, Mr. Chairman, that the 

government will not be standing idly by watching the  

Diefenbaker Centre close its doors. We will take measures to 

ensure the continuance of the Diefenbaker Centre. I think I 

could safely give you that commitment. I feel committed to it, 

and we’ll be working at it. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 

wonder if the minister could give us an indication of when we 

can expect an announcement with respect to funding for the 

Diefenbaker Centre and what kind of funding figure your 

government is currently look at. What kind of a financial 

commitment can we expect from your government to keep this 

very valuable centre open to the university and to the public at 

large? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, discussions are 

ongoing. We feel the federal government has to be involved, 

given the nature of this particular centre. The federal 

government should be involved. I have no commitment from 

them. All I can say is that we won’t stand by as a government 

and let Diefenbaker Centre close. I would hope to have it 

resolved in the very near future. Certainly from my involvement 

in it, it will be quick. We will expedite it just as fast as we can. 

 

Mr. Chairman, if I may take this opportunity to pass some 

information over that has been requested in the past. 

 

Mr. Prebble: — I wonder if I could have one further 

commitment from the minister with respect to the centre. As the 

minister will know, the centre now plays a wide variety of roles 

in the community. It’s the only centre in Saskatoon to offer 

bilingual programming on a regular basis. It’s unique in 

offering programs to teach children about the structure of 

Canadian government in a very stimulating environment. There 

are a number of temporary exhibits and arts exhibitions of 

community interest at the centre as well as its major role, of 

course, in honouring and recognizing the life of former prime 

minister Diefenbaker and providing a very valuable archival 

resource to the community. 

 

Can the minister give us his assurance in this legislature that all 

the functions that the Diefenbaker Centre currently performs 

will be able to continue after his rescue initiative which, I might 

say, members on this side of the House will be most 

appreciative of? 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, for all the articulate 

reasoning that has come from the two members who have been 

speaking to this issue, we will be addressing the question. 

 

I feel it’s a wee bit unfair for me to try and steal some thunder 

from another minister, the limelight on this issue, because it’s 

really not under my portfolio. But given the nature of the centre, 

given the types of things we do in this department, then we’re 

certainly interested in being involved in providing some kind of 

relief and a rescue operation for the Diefenbaker Centre. 

 

To precisely commit to all of the functions — I’m not really, I 

confess, familiar with all of the functions performed by the 

centre, but for the reasons which you so eloquently expressed, 

we would certainly try our very  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2695 

 

 

best to salvage all the operations. And I’d have to discuss it 

with the Minister of Education. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to move our attention 

then to another two institutions, again which are very 

significant institutions to the province of Saskatchewan and 

particularly now to the people of southern Saskatchewan. I refer 

now to the Museum of Natural History here in Regina and 

Government House here in Regina. 

 

In the 1986-87 Estimates for the former department of culture 

and recreation, the Museum of Natural History was listed as a 

separate subvote with an estimate of $1,179,540. In the 

Estimates for your department in this current year, I find no 

such subvote, so I’m assuming the museum is still within your 

responsibility. So can you please tell me where the operational 

moneys for the Museum of Natural History are included in this 

year’s Estimates and how much they will be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member will be 

able to find this one under item 12, heritage programs, and the 

estimate there he’ll see, the total estimate, is $2.121 million for 

this year. I’ll have to break down for you how much out of there 

will be going towards the Museum of Natural History because 

it’s not broken down in here. But I can give you the number. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I would very much appreciate 

having that number. Do you have it now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — $1.224 million. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In April of 1986 

your government announced a major expansion project to the 

Museum of Natural History, and I know that project has begun. 

I would like to know how much money is allocated for this year 

under that program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, museum redevelopment 

for this year is $249,000. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to 

congratulate you and your department for undertaking that work 

in the museum. 

 

On an issue that concerns me now in regard to the Museum of 

Natural History, you well know that both the Museum of 

Natural History and Government House occupy very special 

places in the hearts and minds of Saskatchewan people. They 

represent our heritage - one our natural heritage and one our 

human heritage. And I think to the credit of many governments, 

including yours, these centres of common heritage have been 

open and available to the people of Saskatchewan without 

charge. I have heard rumours that in fact you are considering a 

user pay kind of system, an admission fee, for both the Museum 

of Natural History and Government House. Well I’m simply 

asking: are you considering admission fees for these two 

institutions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, there has been no 

thought given to charging admission fees to Government 

House. There was discussion relative to the Museum of Natural 

History, because it does cost money to operate  

and it would be rather nice to have some revenue coming in to 

offset some of the costs of our programs and some of the things 

we’d like to do, like the new diorama and other things like that. 

 

But given this year that there is construction taking place — 

we’re renovating; we’re doing the basement — we thought it 

would be unfair to introduce any kind of a user fee for this year. 

But I’ll be honest with the hon. member; we haven’t ruled that 

out in future years as being a possibility. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I share your opinion that it would be unfair 

this year, particularly while renovations are under way, but I 

would also submit that it would be unfair in any year. And we 

may be debating this then again at some future point, perhaps 

next year. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, I want to return for a few minutes back to the issues of 

your parks side of your portfolio, and submissions that have 

arisen as a result of recent negotiations between the provincial 

government and the federal government in relation to 

grasslands park. 

 

And as you know, Mr. Minister, there was a conference held 

here in Regina this past weekend by the Canadian Parks and 

Wilderness Society. One of the intentions of that conference 

was in fact to try to remove the log-jam which is holding up the 

establishment of grasslands park. And as a result of that 

conference, Mr. Minister, the united positions concerning the 

establishment of grasslands national park emerged as a result of 

negotiations between the following groups: the Canadian Parks 

and Wilderness Society, Saskatchewan Natural History Society, 

the Sierra Club of Saskatchewan, the World Wildlife Fund, and 

the Nature Conservancy of Canada. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to read to you the proposal that these 

groups have put forward as a united position and elicit your 

reaction to that proposal. Now I understand very well that 

negotiations will be under way tomorrow between Mr. Swan, as 

Minister of the Environment and also minister responsible for 

the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, and . . . But obviously a 

position being put forward by groups, particularly as it relates to 

parks, has some direct impact on your department. 

 

The groups, the coalition of wildlife groups and conservation 

groups, have put forward the following proposal, Mr. Minister, 

and they propose that the provincial and federal governments 

take the following actions. First of all, that the province of 

Saskatchewan retain the ownership of the main stem of the six 

significant water courses — that’s the Frenchman River, Breed 

Creek, Morgan Creek, Wetherall Creek, Horse Creek, and 

McEachern Creek — within the proposed park area. 

 

Secondly, that the corridor of provincial ownership — and I 

repeat, provincial ownership — for each water bed should be 

defined as the 25-year floor line in terms of how the . . . how far 

back the ownership would extend, and also that the provincial 

and federal governments should sign either a long-term licence 

agreement or establish regulations for governing water 

management and use on park lands. This licence or set of 

regulations  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2696 

 

 

should be amended . . . appended, pardon me, to the agreement 

which establishes the park. 

 

The groups go on to say: by adopting these actions, the 

provincial government will maintain its legislative rights to 

water in the region, and the federal government can establish a 

land-based park with negotiative rights, agreements to water 

use. 

 

What’s your reaction to that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I think, as I’ve 

expressed before, both in the House here on the floor of the 

Assembly and outside, you can add my name to a list of groups 

and individuals who support the grasslands park. I think it’s an 

excellent concept, and it would certainly not complete our 

provincial park system but the federal park system who want 

that particular type of ecology within their system, and we 

welcome it. 

 

Without giving away all the bargaining chips of my colleague, 

who’s meeting tomorrow, the proposal as outlined — and I 

have a copy in front of me — is acceptable both to me and to 

my officials, and we can take that position to Mr. Swan and let 

him negotiate it from there, of his issue with the water, which 

we’ve talked about in the past. I think that there may be a 

workable compromise solution here that would be certainly 

acceptable to our department, hopefully acceptable to his. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I find your answer 

acceptable in terms of our position from this side of the House. 

We feel that there has been sort of undue and unnecessary delay 

over this whole issue of water ownership. And I want to say 

publicly that we will join with you, and we think that this 

certainly is an acceptable compromise. So that when the 

Minister of the Environment goes down to Ottawa tomorrow, 

that I want to assure you and the minister who’s just come into 

the House, that he will have the support of this side of the 

House in terms of the compromise agreement, and that I’m glad 

they could add . . . the conservation groups could add your 

name to the list, and they certainly can add my name to the list 

in terms of certainly what is a creative and acceptable proposal 

to trying to break the log-jam. 

 

I hope that when it comes to dealing with the regulations and 

the setting up of the regulations, if this proposal is accepted by 

the federal government — and I certainly hope it will be 

acceptable to the federal government — that in fact we can 

work out the deal and have grasslands a reality when my friend, 

the Minister of Environment, the member returns back from 

Washington with an agreement in his pocket. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 

comments the hon. member has made and the expression of 

support. It’s not often in this Assembly that we walk out united 

on any particular issue, and I’m happy that we’re in agreement 

on this one. 

 

I think this is going to be to the good of the province and to the 

good of the country in general, and I welcome the support of the 

opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I want to join 

with my colleague in wanting to support you and to support the 

position that’s been brought forward by these five groups. It 

seems that they have provided for us a workable compromise, 

and I sincerely hope your colleagues in the federal government 

see it that way so that we can see indeed a grasslands park in 

the year 1987. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like us to move tow hat I think is one of 

these most sign significant areas of your responsibility, and 

that’s funding to the arts in our province and the whole 

community of the arts and cultural activity in our province. And 

I for one do not see estimates as a time for long dissertations, 

but I think it’s important on this significant issue that perhaps 

we each have a little bit of an opportunity to put some remarks 

on the record. So I’ve prepared just a few observations about 

my view of the role of the arts in the province, and funding for 

the arts, and I’ll welcome your response to some of these 

remarks. 

 

I think the discussion we will have about funding to the arts 

needs to be put in a context. It seems to me it used to be that we 

in Saskatchewan had this notion that we had to travel to 

Toronto or New York or somewhere to see good drama, good 

music, good galleries. We know that’s changed. We know 

that’s changed, Mr. Minister. Since the days of the Second 

World War we have seen a phenomenal growth of the art and 

cultural community in Saskatchewan, and I think in many ways 

we have come of age — we have come of age in Saskatchewan. 

 

In the last 40 years we’ve seen that change; we’ve seen that 

change, Mr. Chairman. We find that we can pursue in 

Saskatchewan: art, music, and drama, writing, and sculpting, 

and photography, and craft work, here. We find that we can 

enjoy and appreciate artists of national and international stature 

right here — Regina and Saskatoon and Estevan and Moose 

Jaw and Pense and Davidson, and so on. 

 

And that change has come about in my mind by the very 

creativity of Saskatchewan people and by appreciative 

Saskatchewan audiences, and in no small measure by a 

succession of Saskatchewan governments who have been 

committed to adequate funding to the arts, primarily through the 

Arts Board, and in later years through moneys provided through 

Sask trust and the lottery system. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I submit that both of those sources of funding 

for the professional arts, particularly in Saskatchewan, have 

come under attack by this government. 

 

(1500) 

 

In many ways, Mr. Chairman, I believe the arts in our province 

represent the very state of our culture as a community, and they 

reflect the creativity of our people. These are the people who 

bring to us what is good. These are the people who show us 

what is beautiful. They inspire us; they draw from us emotion. 

It’s the artist in our midst who lays before us what is eternal in 

human life. It is the artist in our midst who tells the human 

story, tells our story. It’s the artist who portrays our heritage. 

It’s the artist who probes our present, and it is the artist who 

shows us our future. 

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2697 

 

 

Therefore that community, that cultural and artistic community, 

is absolutely integral, I believe, to the quality of life of 

Saskatchewan; and without the music and the dance and the 

artistic expression, our lives would be measurably poorer. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I would like to quote from a very recent federal 

government survey into funding of arts in Canada, the Bouvey 

report, from Edmond Bouvey, and I would like to read a 

paragraph into the record. Edmond Bouvey writes: 

 

Though quality of life is essentially a personal concern, it 

nevertheless also belongs in the very special cultural, 

social, economic, political, and geographical context 

which characterizes us as Canadians. Today we accept 

without question the importance of the arts and the 

development and expression of our uniqueness as a 

people. On the one hand, our Canadian heritage celebrated 

through art galleries and museums — regional, 

metropolitan, and local — represents the story of our past. 

On the other hand, creative artists in the visual, 

performing, and literary arts, and the organizations that 

serve them daily, help to shape our heritage for tomorrow, 

winning for us a place among the great nations of the 

world. The achievements are all the more gratifying as our 

artists attain excellence and a recognition that carry them 

beyond our borders and out into the international 

community. 

 

And we can heartily endorse those comments in terms of 

Saskatchewan artists and the cultural community in 

Saskatchewan. But we also note, Mr. Chairman, that not only 

has the cultural community become and is integral to quality of 

life in our province, it has indeed become a very significant part 

of our provincial economy. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I can do no better than to illustrate that from this 

little documents which I’m sure the minister is familiar with, 

published under the . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Members are not allowed to use 

displays in the House. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was referring to a 

document entitled, “The Economic Impact of Culture in the 

Arts,” produced by the former department of culture and 

recreation, so I’m sure these quotes will not be challenged by 

the minister. This document shows clearly the economic impact 

of the arts in Saskatchewan. A few quotes: 

 

Only recently has the cultural community began to 

document its value to the province in hard economic 

terms. This documentation has revealed that the impact of 

cultural activity and industry extends far beyond building 

a better quality of life and unique identity for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

You will find this of interest, I think, Mr. Chairman. The arts 

and culture are growth industries. There are presently 60 per 

cent more jobs in the arts and in culture than 10 years ago - 60 

per cent more jobs today in arts and  

culture than there were 10 years ago. Today there are twice as 

many people employed in this sector as there are in the 

Saskatchewan oilfields or in the combined industries of 

uranium and potash. There are more than twice as many people 

working in culture and the arts than in the oil industry in 

Saskatchewan; than in the potash and uranium industries put 

together. And compared to some of those industries, the 

benefits of the cultural community, the economic benefits tend 

to remain in the province. 

 

Another quote from this same document: 

 

Money invested in arts and culture is more than adequately 

returned to the public. As an example, the province 

through the Saskatchewan Arts Board provides a yearly 

operating grant of $153,000 to assist in the continued 

support of the Globe Theatre in Regina. In return, this 

organization generates a payroll of $685,000 to support 

seven full-time and 78 part-time staff. Without this initial 

grant, the Globe Theatre would not be able to support this 

level of employment, provide entertainment to their 

118,000 patrons at reasonable costs, nor to bring live 

theatre to schools throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I could talk about the business generated in our 

province through the cultural industries. I could talk about the 

investment stimulus. I could talk about the impact on tourism. I 

could talk about export possibilities from the cultural economy. 

The simple fact is that this industry now continues to outpace 

all other sectors in the Saskatchewan economy, and it’s, today, 

easily one of the most productive and one of the largest 

industries in our province. 

 

But I submit, Mr. Chairman, and I submit, Mr. Minister, this 

industry and this cultural community has been threatened by 

your government’s lack of priority in funding to the arts, a lack 

of priority that has characterized your government from its very 

beginning. 

 

Mr. Minister, a specific question. In his 1986 task force, 

Edmond Bouvey suggests that if the arts in Canada are to 

survive and grow to the 21st century, that his recommendation 

is their real growth in funding must be at a level of 4 per cent 

per year, federally and provincially — 4 per cent per year. I ask 

then specifically, Mr. Minister: do you agree with the findings 

of Edmond Bouvey and his report on funding to the 

professional arts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, there’s little doubt that 

over the last number of years — and we go back prior to 1982, 

I’d like to remind the hon. member — that funding to the 

professional arts community did not keep pace with inflation. I 

would have no quarrel with that whatsoever. To agree with a 4 

per cent, or whatever the figure is; I don’t know what the figure 

is - but what I can say is: when we look at the historic level of 

funding, since 1982 funding has increased to the Saskatchewan 

Arts Board, not decreased, and the levels that we are providing 

are higher than the levels of the previous administration. 

 

And I don’t say that just to make a political point. I say that  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2698 

 

 

to point out that we do recognize that professional arts in 

Saskatchewan has an important role to play in one of our key 

areas, which is economic diversification. There’s no question, 

trade follows culture. If ever we saw an example of that, Mr. 

Chairman, we have got to look no further than out on the east 

coast, and take a look at what happened in the Maritimes and in 

Atlantic Canada. 

 

St. John’s, Newfoundland, thought they were really going to 

boom when they had the oil patch off shore. They thought that 

the city would boom and people would be attracted to live 

there. And it didn’t happen, Mr. Chairman. What happened was 

that companies, in moving their executives in, and many of 

their workers, located not in St. John’s, Newfoundland but 

Halifax, Nova Scotia and they commuted by helicopter out to 

the oil. Why? Because they thought that Halifax had a better — 

for want of a better word — quality of life to offer its residents 

because they had a strong cultural community. 

 

I remember, and members opposite know I wasn’t born in this 

country, but when I arrived here 21 years ago, I remember 

hearing things like: Saskatchewan is a cultural wilderness. Well 

that’s balderdash, Mr. Chairman. There are all kinds of good 

things have gone on in the last 20 years, certainly since I’ve 

been residing here — some of them under the administration 

previous, some under the Liberal administration, and I’d 

submit, Mr. Chairman, certainly a lot of good things under our 

administration. 

 

Historical funding levels: we’re up in the ‘86-87 year to some 

$3.15 million that was channeled through the Arts Board, not 

including a half-million dollars that we put in there for deficit 

reduction to professional arts groups, some of whom literally 

were being told their doors were having to close; they were 

bankrupt. 

 

I had a panic call from Twenty-Fifth Street Theatre. I had a 

similar panic call from the Saskatchewan Theatre Ballet. And I 

told those groups, Mr. Chairman — and I’ll stand here, and I’m 

not afraid to stand here and tell the whole world — I responded 

to them immediately with money to keep them alive and to keep 

them viable. And they’re viable today because, after they got 

the initial money, we said we’d go on a deficit reduction 

program to help them reduce their deficit, totally eliminate it 

over a period of time if they do some fund raising themselves so 

that they will be in a viable position. 

 

Mr. Chairman, if we let our professional artistic community go, 

we never get it back because we lose our credibility as a 

government, as a province. If we let the ballet fold, it’s 10 years 

— it’s 10 years, Mr. Chairman, before we can even begin to 

attract dancers from other areas to come back to Saskatchewan 

because they would see is as no long-term commitment to the 

ballet, or to the theatre, or to many of the other groups which 

are supported by the government through the grant to the Arts 

Board. 

 

So we place a very high priority, Mr. Chairman, on the 

professional and the performing arts in Saskatchewan. As I say, 

they have a role to play in our economic diversification. They 

certainly have an important role to play in tourism, and yes, 

there are thousands of jobs in Saskatchewan depending on the 

arts community. And,  

Mr. Chairman, we’re not going to let them down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I want us to have a discussion 

about your government’s level of funding to the professional 

arts. You’ve brought up the subject of the moneys that went out 

to the professional arts in the past year, particularly to those 

companies who were running such large deficits. I submit to 

you, they got into that deficit problem because of a lack of 

funding from your government. 

 

I’m going to ask you: where did that money come from? Where 

did the money come from that you provided for the theatre 

companies for that $1.5 million that went out for deficit and 

other uses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the deficit wasn’t built 

under a Progressive Conservative government. The deficits 

were accumulated over a number of years. When I got the 

portfolio I had very clear marching orders from the Premier 

prior to Christmas when he said: I want you to get out there and 

consult with those groups; I want you to find a solution; and 

let’s try and do something to help the professional arts 

community. 

 

And the funding specifically to which you refer came from the 

source — which I think was instituted precisely to address this 

type of problem — which was the lotteries. The lotteries were 

set up in Saskatchewan to provide funding to sport, to 

recreation, to cultural activity, and to parks and recreation 

associations. That was the source of the additional funding, and 

I make no apology for that, Mr. Chairman. That’s what lotteries 

were set up in this province to handle; I may say, set up under a 

previous administration, and I compliment them on it. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, so then you’re being very clear 

here. That money that went out, that special grant that went out 

last year, was not money from your government; that was 

moneys that you expropriated from the volunteer community in 

Saskatchewan. I know the volunteer community is not opposed 

to the funding of professional arts; indeed they’ve shown some 

real leadership. But let’s be clear: it as not a commitment of 

your government; it was not tax-based funding; it was money 

expropriated from the lottery funds to bail out those companies 

that in fact are in the deficit situation because of a lack of 

funding from your government over the past four or five years. 

 

Mr. Minister, in real terms, funding to the Arts Board from 

1982-83 to 1986-87 rose 4.3 per cent. That’s less than 1 per 

cent a year, and you and I know that it will be closer to zero per 

cent had the volunteer community, represented through SCCO 

(Saskatchewan Council of Cultural Organizations), if they had 

not in fact transferred some of their funding — 250,000 in 

’85-86; 350,000 in ’86-87 — to the Arts Board to enable the 

Arts Board to carry on with the summer school. 

 

So in terms of real tax-based funding to the arts in 

Saskatchewan, it’s zero per cent, or very close to zero per cent, 

over each of those years. And I submit, Mr. Minister, that is 

simply not good enough. It’s not good enough for  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2699 

 

 

the artistic and cultural community in Saskatchewan, not good 

enough to maintain that community to what we know it can be 

and can do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — A couple of points, Mr. Chairman. One, 

I wish I’d bothered to bring my little personal file down here 

with the letters I received from Globe Theatre, Persephone, 

Twenty-Fifth Street Theatre, Saskatoon Symphony, and 

Saskatchewan Theatre Ballet and numerous individuals 

complimenting the government on the measures we did take on 

their deficit reduction plan. That’s the first one. 

 

The second one . . . Let’s talk about the lotteries here. The hon. 

member is saying that isn’t government money; that’s nothing 

to do with government; this money belongs to a volunteer 

group. Mr. Chairman, we license that group. We can choose to 

license any group we want. We pick a provincial marketing 

organization; we have chosen Sask Sport Inc., and they are very 

happy to co-operate. They were absolutely delighted when I 

asked them about funding via the lottery system to the 

professional arts. They’re very supportive of that, and they 

understand that the money generated, which they are handling, 

they are handling on behalf of the government. 

 

Now if we had a mind, we could take the lotteries and run it 

through the Department of Finance, if we had a mind to do that, 

because the lotteries are set up, run, organized, controlled by 

government. We have turned the function over to a PMO, a 

provincial marketing organization, Sask Sport Inc. The 

ownership of the money is not necessarily that of any one 

volunteer group. It is administered by that group and, I may say, 

administered extremely well by that group. And I am one 

person who’s not of a mind to see major changes made in that 

regard. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, before this afternoon is over I 

hope we can have some discussion about the lotteries. I don’t 

intend to entered into that discussion right now. But let me just 

make this single point: you suggest that simply because your 

government licences the lottery, licences the volunteer 

community to conduct a lottery in this province — which I 

think is the best system — then you suggest that somehow it’s 

government money. Well you also licence every service club in 

the province to run bingos, but you don’t go about suggesting 

that the proceeds from those bingos, therefore, are yours, or 

should be directed by your government. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to put that discussion of the lottery aside 

for a moment because I want to come back to it later this 

afternoon. 

 

(1515) 

 

Let’s look at funding to the professional arts, particularly 

funding to the Arts Board in this budget year in this estimate 

document. Last year, 1986-87, tax-based funding through the 

Art Board to the professional arts was at $2.1 million. This year 

that figure reads $1.3 million. That’s very substantial cut in 

tax-based funding to the professional arts. In fact, I calculated it 

somewhere about a 38 per cent cut. Mr. Minister, how do you 

expect the Arts Board and the professional arts community in 

Saskatchewan to deal with a 33 per cent cut in funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, let me deal with that. 

The figure that shows in the blue book isn’t the actual grant that 

is going to the Saskatchewan Arts Board. That is base grant, 

less the salaries of the people employed there and the 

consultants. In actual fact they will be receiving $1,904,400 

plus an extra $1 million of funding that will be going to them 

supplementary this year. So we’re talking about a big increase, 

a significant increase. I met with the Arts Board last Monday, as 

a matter of fact, and they were expressing great satisfaction 

with the level of funding and what they would be able to do 

with it. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I would be remiss if I did not clear up 

something on the lottery issue. The Government of 

Saskatchewan is a partner in the Western Canada Lottery 

Corporation. NO service group, no Kinsmen, no Lions. The 

Government of Saskatchewan, the Government of Manitoba, 

and the Government of Alberta comprise the board of directors 

of the Western Canada Lottery Corporation. We are the owners. 

Therefore, Mr. Chairman, any money generated through that is 

in part owned by this government, in part owned by the 

Government of Manitoba, and in part owned by the 

Government of Alberta. I’d be remiss if I didn’t point that out. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, may I ask: why then, why in this 

estimate document, if in other years the salaries of the Arts 

Board staff were included in the Arts Board grant, then why in 

this estimate document are those salaries not included? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, initially when we were 

looking at budgets, there were contemplated reductions in 

grants to third parties. Some, in fact, received that. When we 

looked at the Arts Board, there was discussion prior to the 

budget being prepared that we could in fact pay the staffs of the 

Arts Board, take their people and pay them through the 

department, run it that way. We discovered after some 

discussions, but the blue book had already been prepared, that 

in fact to do that would have meant legislation. We’d have had 

to have changed The Arts Board Act. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I was not prepared to make changes to the 

Act, and I wasn’t going to bring it in here. So I met with the 

Arts Board, met with the chairperson, discussed how we could 

handle this and said, well if it means changes to the Act, we’re 

not changing it; we’ll take the money that was based for 

salaries, put it back to the Arts Board; they can pay the staff and 

look after arrangements as before. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well I find this very interesting, Mr. Minister. 

For a minister and a government who goes about priding itself 

in its consultation with people, you’re telling me that you 

produced a budget, an estimate, taking for granted that you 

were going to take from the Arts Board all of their staff and 

amalgamate them into your department. It shows you planned 

to do that if you didn’t include the money in the budget, and 

then you went out and started consulting. 

 

Who did you consult with before? Who did you consult with to 

come up with this figure? Who did you consult 

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2700 

 

 

 with to come up with the idea of amalgamating the Arts Board 

staff into your department and thereby ending, effectively 

ending, that arm’s-length arrangement that has served the arts 

community in Saskatchewan for so long? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That’s an excellent question, Mr. 

Chairman. As the hon. member knows, I was a rookie minister 

of this particular department, Culture and Recreation. And the 

discussion was internal about how we could relate better to the 

Arts Board. In fact, we thought initially that by absorbing their 

salaries and some other costs that they had, we would have 

more money to give them to run their programs and to do their 

granting and jurying system. 

 

It obviously turned out not to be accurate. As I said, I was not 

aware at the time that this would necessitate changes to The 

Arts Board Act, and I was not prepared to make any changes, so 

hence back to the status quo. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, will you give assurance to this 

House and to the arts community in Saskatchewan that before 

you get any more good ideas about rearranging the arts 

community and their staff and so on, that you will in fact 

consult prior? I know there was lots of consultation after your 

announcement was made — lots of it. Will you assure the arts 

community that no more good ideas will be publicly announced 

before adequate consultation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, it wasn’t quite a public 

announcement. It was a discussion of a review of the Arts 

Board operation, the way they do business and the function, and 

it had never been carved in stone at that point. The commitment 

the hon. member wants is a very easy one for me to give now in 

retrospect. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, another area that concerns me in 

terms of arts board funding through the Arts Board relates to the 

Saskatchewan School of Arts at Fort San. As you well know, 

1,200 young people were involved in programs down at Fort 

San this summer, a significant increase over last year, and a 

significant increase over the year prior. 

 

Rumours at Fort San this summer have abounded that the 

programs at Fort San, the summer school, will not be there for 

much longer. I have had, and perhaps you have had . . . I have 

had young people in my office who have come to me with this 

concern, and they have wanted me to come to this House and 

ask you, as minister, just what is the plan in terms of the 

summer school at Fort San? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It’s a fairly complex question, Mr. 

Chairman. And yes, I’ve been getting a lot of comments and 

questions too, the same as the hon. member and other members 

in the House. 

 

The operation down there, I’d like to say, Mr. Chairman, is a 

first-class summer school. It is excellent. Some of the 

instructors there turned down some of the more better-known 

national summer school of arts in other parts of North America 

just to come here because of the unique nature of the program. 

It is an absolutely first-class program. 

 

It’s not a government program, as we know. It’s not through the 

Arts Board and with help from other folks, notably the 

Saskatchewan Council of Cultural Organizations, who do, as 

the hon. member pointed out, make a healthy contribution to 

make sure that the summer school can continue. 

 

Where we’re running into some difficulties is: what is the future 

of the Fort San complex? The buildings are in bad need of 

restoration — very draught, cold. It’s a tremendously expensive 

complex of buildings to keep operating, and I don’t need to 

bore everybody here with the history of Fort San. We know 

what it was originally — the sanatorium for TB (tuberculosis) 

and so on. Over the years, as TB lessened, there was no need 

for Fort San to operate as a sanatorium. 

 

The government has been running it for a number of years at an 

annual loss of some . . . I believe this year we’re looking at 

close to half a million dollars loss of taxpayers’ money just to 

operate those buildings. Now obviously, to be fiscally 

responsible to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, we have to take a 

look at this Fort San complex and decide if there is something 

we can do with it to make a break-even process, or do we just 

get rid of it altogether. We don’t know. And at this point I really 

can’t tell you what the future of the Fort San complex is. I can 

tell you that if Fort San is not available — and I discussed this 

with the Arts Board last week — we will certainly assist in 

finding an alternative facility. 

 

As the hon. members are aware — because you visited it 

yourself and took a look at the operation; I’m sure you were 

impressed with what was happening there, as I was — that 

we’ll do our best to find a facility big enough to accommodate 

the arts school. And I’m sorry I can’t be any more definitive 

than that at this precise moment. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, could you be a little more 

definitive then, in the process that will be undertaken to 

determine the future of Fort San? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the property 

management corporation has been doing studies on Fort San. 

They’ve looked at proposals that others have put 

forward - architects - what could be done down there. It’s 

actually in their hands right now. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Do you have any idea when we can expect 

some recommendation then from property management — 

recommendations to your department and to the House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we should have a pretty 

clear idea of the future of Fort San before Christmas. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and then on behalf 

of the many young people that I’ve talked to, and indeed over 

the weekend I spoke to those who have been involved in 

instruction at Fort San. I think you may have been present for 

some of the highland festival here in Regina. I know there was 

significant discussion there. 

 

Just to say to you, Mr. Minister, that those who have studied at 

Fort San, those who have taught at Fort San, see that location as 

very significant to the program, very  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2701 

 

 

significant to the program. We ought to look at, I think, every 

option and opportunity available to keep the summer school at 

Fort San. There’s no question it is a place of great beauty. It is a 

retreat from the hurried world where artists and craftspeople 

and musicians can come together and explore their fields. 

 

So I would encourage you, on behalf of the many, many who 

have contacted me, to very seriously consider all options for 

keeping the summer school at Fort San, in addition to keeping 

the summer school open. 

 

And if I may say, Mr. Minister, I would like to see the 

Saskatchewan Summer School of the Arts funded with 

tax-based funding. I’m not sure how long we can expect the 

Saskatchewan Council of Cultural Organizations to be so 

gracious with their lottery money in helping we, the 

government, to fund this very valuable school. 

 

And so the two things: I would encourage you to keep the 

school in Fort San, and to look again at complete funding of 

that school through tax-based dollars. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No question, Mr. Chairman, that the 

location of the summer school of the arts in Fort San is 

conductive to good work. The setting is absolutely beautiful; 

the grounds are immaculate; it is peaceful; it is tranquil; and the 

students enjoy it immensely. 

 

I just have one other comment on the school of the arts I’d like 

to make. Some of the U.S. instructors who were there, with 

whom I visited when I was down, had told me — and I 

mentioned this — about the unique nature of the program. They 

also pointed out that the summer school of the arts is very well 

known outside of our borders, but right here in Saskatchewan 

we seem to have an inferiority complex about how good we are, 

or how well some of the things are done in this province — 

whether it be the performing arts, or whether it be the summer 

school of the arts, or whether it be our parks system which just 

won a national award as being the best parks system in the 

country. We tend somehow to have an inferiority complex and 

think, well, we’ve got to be second-class because we’re just in 

Saskatchewan. If I go on the banquet tour and I start telling 

people how wonderful the school of the arts are and the great 

things that happen there, I can see a lot of heads shake. It can’t 

be; this is Saskatchewan. 

 

And yet outside of our borders, when you get away from our 

boundaries, the arts community know about the summer school 

of the arts, they know about the quality of the program, and I, 

for one, would like to see it continue, preferably at that site. But 

if that is an absolute impossibility, and I won’t know for a 

couple of months y et, we’ll certainly be looking for the best 

possible site where we could hold the summer school of the 

arts. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, when you do have a report from 

property management, can we expect a public announcement? 

Will you announce publicly any intention to alter Fort San, or 

will you publicly announce what will be happening? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, when we get a gam plan 

for Fort San, there’s going to be nothing secretive  

about it or clandestine. As far as I’m concerned, as soon as we 

know what we’re going to do, we’ll stand up and tell the public, 

definitely. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I have some questions with 

respect to recreation and facilities grant program, slashed from 

6 million to 2 million. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’d give us 

an explanation of what on earth you’re doing with this program. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, what we did was we 

extended the period of time over which the grant would be paid 

out. And all of the communities that meet the criteria for the 

facilities grant program will receive the eligible grant. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, you initially allocated 

32 million for this program in 1983. Your budgetary estimates 

to date have allocated 21 million. I understand that that amount, 

full amount of the 21 million, had pretty well been spent by 

March of this year. If you were going to make the balance of the 

32 million available, there would have to have been 11 million 

available this year. You’ve got 2 million available. I can’t 

believe, Mr. Minister, that you’re going to be able to fund this 

program with $2 million for this year with the estimates coming 

in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, simply put, all of 

the eligible communities will receive funding before the 

program is over. We’ve extended it; the buzz-word is “slow 

walk” the program, but communities who have made 

application will be paid out. The approval to date is 

$22,693,549 — that’s the approval to date. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Would you explain to me how you’ve 

extended it, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — As communities go ahead and 

construction, Mr. Chairman, they are eligible for pay-outs. It 

doesn’t all come out at one time. It comes out in pieces, more or 

less like progress payments, and we see that going over the next 

two years. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — When the program was initially 

announced, it was announced that it was going to expire in five 

year’s time, which would have made it March 1988. To what 

has the time now been extended? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The deadline for application remains 

the same at March 31 of 1988, and the additional two years we 

talked about would take it to March 31, 1990. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, to make sure I understand what the 

minister says, that the deadline remains March 1988, but you 

think you’re going to spend the balance of the money after . . . 

the balance of the $9 million after March of 1988. Is that what 

you’re saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — They may apply in March, but they 

wouldn’t be eligible for any funding until the project was 

substantially on its way, either a progress payment or, in some 

cases, substantially complete. And there hasn’t  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2702 

 

 

been maximum take-off in any event, as I’m sure the hon. 

member is aware. You were minister of this department at one 

time when you ran a similar program, I believe. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you have allocated 21 

million . . . I do not understand why the funding is reduced to 

two million this year. In each of the previous years — you’ve 

allocated 21 million during the first four years, that’s about four 

to five million a year. I would expect that as time goes on and 

as the projects near completion the amount of money you’d 

expend would increase, not decrease. 

 

Last year you budgeted six million, you must have spent close 

to six million in order to arrive at this figure of 22 million to 

date. How is it that last year you spent six million; this year 

you’re going to get by on two million. I do not see why the 

level of expenditure has such a sharp decrease the last year. I 

would think the level of expenditure would increase the last 

year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, that was strictly a fiscal 

decision that was taken, that we would not be spending as much 

money in this year as we had previously; it would be slow 

walking it. Money would be paid out to the communities, 

however, and they will receive the money for which they are 

eligible. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well how are you going to slow walk it, 

Mr. Minister; this is a formula program. As was initially 

announced, every community’s entitled to the $5,000 base 

grant, plus the 25 bucks. How do you expect to slow walk it? 

Are you going to . . . is there going to be a lottery? Are you 

going to pay every second application that’s made? Or how do 

you expect to slow walk it? 

 

I just don’t understand, Mr. Minister, how you control 

expenditures in this kind of a program without some 

extraordinary measures such as cutting the applications off 

early. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the initial fund that was 

announced was based on the maximum take up, and we haven’t 

reached maximum take up y et, and indications are it won’t be 

there. As you probably remember too, there was incentive for 

rural municipalities to get together with communities and 

jointly build, for example, an arena in a town surrounded by 

two or three municipalities, and that’s had some impact, too. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, this is like talking to a bowl 

of jelly. You’re just not making any sense. 

 

Mr. Minister, last year you spent close to six million. As you 

pointed out, each year that goes on you should be expending 

more, because more program, more facilities will be finished 

and eligible for all the funding. How is it, when I asked you 

before, how it was that you could get you to spend six million 

last year and two million this year, you said we’re going to slow 

walk it. I asked you how you’re going to slow walk it, and now 

you’re back telling me that nobody wanted your money 

anyway. Why did they want your money last year to the tune of 

six million, but this year they’re not going to want any more 

money than two million. I just . . . you’re not making any  

sense, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m sorry the hon. member can’t 

follow, Mr. Chairman. I thought it was very simple. Instead of 

spending six million this year, we’re going to spend two 

million. We’re going to extend the life of the program, make it 

a little bit longer, and spend the balance of the money over the 

next number of years. Is that being a bowl of jelly? 

 

It’s too bad that this member always has to try and lower the 

level of debate, get in a little muck-raking. I really don’t think 

you serve the public very well, or your constituents, when you 

do that. And like I told you last year in estimates, when you 

behave like that, take your mouth to a proctologist and get it 

looked at. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I might add it was you who 

started the process of insulting each other, not me. 

 

Mr. Minister, how is it that you . . . You don’t control 

expenditures, Mr. Minister. Unless you introduce some 

extraordinary measure, you can’t control expenditures. That is 

decided by the municipalities. You just pay the bills in this 

thing unless you are in some way going to control expenditures, 

and I want to know how you’re going to do that. But as the 

program was initially announced, you have no control over 

expenditures. You pay bills as they come in, that appropriate 

application. 

 

How is it that you spend six million last year and you’re going 

to spend two million this year? How are you going to control 

expenditures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, they may be eligible this 

year, but instead of getting a cheque this year, they’ll get it next 

year or the year after. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Are you serious? Are you serious? If the 

city of Regina submits an application in September, you’re 

going to put it in the file and pay them in May of next year. Are 

you serious about that comment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the mere fact of 

receiving an application doesn’t mean construction has started. 

If we approve it, we’ll tell them up front when they’ll get paid 

and they can plan their construction dates accordingly; and in 

any event, it would be by progress. 

 

If they’re going to build an arena and they come to us and they 

say, it’s going to cost $250,000, we don’t write a cheque for 

$250,000 that day and say, well away you go, city of Regina, 

and build an arena. It goes by progress, and they don’t build an 

arena overnight, as the hon. member should well know. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — But, Mr. Minister, the . . . what you say is 

true, but has no relevance to what’s under discussion because 

we’re not at the stage — most of these projects are being 

approved; in many cases they’re at the stage where they’re 

being completed. 

 

How do you decide when they get their cheque? Are you just 

going to spend the two million, and when that’s gone everybody 

else waits until May of next year? Or how do you intend to slow 

walk the payments? I now understand  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2703 

 

 

the minister isn’t slow walking his program, he’s slow walking 

his payments and financing this at the expense of the 

municipalities, I might add. How do you intend to slow walk 

payments? Are you going to spend the two million, and 

everybody else waits till May, or do you have some system of 

encouraging municipalities to slow walk their construction so 

they don’t get caught, or what is your system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m confident the 

$2 million budgeted for this year will get us through out 

commitments for this year. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Do I take it that you’re not going to answer 

my question? Is that what I am to interpret from that last 

response, that you’re not going to answer my question? 

 

You said you’re going to slow walk payments. What system do 

you have for slow walking payments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Based, Mr. Chairman, on the uptake, 

the level of construction, how far along they are, we will pay 

them as they go. And most of them are not going to be 

completed in this year in any event, so they’ll fall into next 

year’s budget. The program will be extended. The communities 

affected have already been notified that payments will be 

extended, not just in this one year, but over the next two years 

after this fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you’re not as obtuse as your 

. . . it’s a great act, but I think you understand my question. Let 

me just briefly recall what we’ve . . . our discussions, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

I asked you how it is that you spent 6 million last year, and 

you’re going to get by with 2 million this year. You said, we’re 

going to slow walk the program. I pointed out to you that you 

don’t control expenditures; the municipalities control 

expenditures, but at pace of their construction. Your response to 

that was, we’re going to slow walk the payments. When I asked 

you what your system for slow walking the payments is, you 

hurry back to the starting line and you say, I’m confident that 

$2 million is going to do me. 

 

(1545) 

 

I’m delighted in your confidence, Mr. Minister. It’s the 

beginning of greatness. But I would like to know, Mr. Minister, 

how it is that you’re going to slow walk either the pace or 

construction or the pace of the payments because you can’t 

spend 6 million last year and spend 2 million this year when 

many of these projects are coming to completion. You’re not 

making any sense, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — With the full knowledge of the 

municipalities, Mr. Chairman, and we tell them right up front, 

yes, you’re approved, but you don’t expect payment this month, 

next month, or the month after. We explain to them they will be 

down the road, and they can plan their construction accordingly. 

If they want to start immediately and they have sufficient 

funding to carry on, they can, if that’s their decision. But we do 

have some control over the construction by telling them when 

they  

may expect payment. Therefore they know when they may 

begin construction. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well what system do you have for ensuring 

that this is done fairly and that all municipalities . . . I’m trying 

to think of the community that the . . . Turtleford, but I’m not 

sure if . . . how do we ensure that Turtleford is treated in the 

same manner as . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Regina. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Regina, yes. It’s not the best example in 

the world. How do we ensure that Turtleford is treated the same 

as Wynyard in this slow walking system of yours? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — When communities apply, they are 

taken on a first come, first served basis. They’re dealt with by 

individuals within the department whose role t is to go out and 

meet with them and talk to them, and it’s explained to them 

right there and then that, yes, if they’re eligible, they will be 

approved - if they’re eligible, they will be approved; and then 

we explain the payment system, and they plan their construction 

date accordingly. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well that doesn’t answer my question, Mr. 

Minister. Time, however, I don’t think permits me to draw out 

of the minister your system for postponing payments. I suspect 

that’s because there isn’t a system, and I suspect that it has 

everything to do with who represents those communities and 

how much political punch they have, and very little to do with a 

fair and reasonable allocation. I suspect, Mr. Minister, that 

ridings which do not have a spokesman in the government 

benches have some difficulty getting the same treatment out of 

such a discretionary system . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is that a charge . . . an allegation? 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Yes, indeed it is. I just finished making it 

for the benefit of the member from Weyburn who has some 

difficulty with the English language. I just finished making that 

as an allegation. I just finished making it, so the member from 

Weyburn will understand me. I am saying that your system is 

far too discretionary, that it’s almost certain to be abused, and 

you should . . . you should, and you need some system for doing 

it fairly. 

 

The initial system, as it was initially announced, had no such 

qualifications attached to it. The initial program which you 

announced was 32 million for five years; there was a formula. 

When they got their project completed and the paperwork all 

done, they got paid. Now you’re saying that’s not the system 

any more; you’re not going to pay them when they get done, if 

they finish it before your timetable. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, it’s a bad system. It should be such 

that there’s little discretion in it, and all communities are treated 

the same because the nature of any political system, and 

particularly this one which is built upon patronage, is that 

communities won’t be treated the same. Those that are 

represented by government members will be treated . . . and 

influential government members, will be treated well. So I say 

to you, Mr. Minister: if your  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2704 

 

 

system is as I understand it, it’s a bad system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m a little 

disappointed at the lack of faith being expressed by the hon. 

member. I could give him, constituency by constituency, the 

projects which have approved and where they money’s going 

— Assiniboia . . . In fact, what I’m going to do, Mr. Chairman, 

what I’m going to do, I’m going to take the grants and the 

cheques that went out this year and all the ones that were passed 

by OC; I’m going to find a list and I’ll have it sent to you and 

you can peruse it for yourself. And you’ll see that ridings 

represented by NDP members have, in fact, received funding in 

this year. Frankly, I find it a little disappointing that you’d make 

that kind of charge on the floor of the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, it’s been a trade mark of this 

government; patronage has been a trade mark of this 

government. As I’ve said on so many occasions, it is normally a 

sign that a government’s getting long in the tooth. Mr. Minister, 

it was a pillar of this government from the very beginning. You 

came into office apparently believing that patronage was the 

foundation upon which any successful government was built. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to address an ancillary issue before time 

elapses, and that is the fact that your slow walking 

expenditures, in and by itself, I think is unfortunate. Mr. 

Minister, this particular program had a number of positive 

features to it. It generated employment; had a very significant 

multiplier effect. I think I was told last year that your estimates 

were that, for every dollar the government spent, $4 wound up 

being spent in the community. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, it is an expenditure which results in a good 

deal of economic activity had hence employment, something 

those communities need very badly; provided part-time 

employment in communities for farmers. We’ve lost a good 

deal of that. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, here again the public of Saskatchewan is 

paying for your fiscal incompetence. Because you’ve got 

yourself into difficulty on such a grand scale, a program which 

is needed, which provides important benefits, has been largely 

lost. We’ve gone from 6 million to 2 million. 

 

And as I say as well, Mr. Minister, that the program itself is 

needed. This program has resulted in a significant enhancement 

of recreational, cultural facilities in Saskatchewan, and thus an 

enhancement of the quality of life in Saskatchewan. It has 

provided employment, often part-time employment, and it has 

enriched the communities. 

 

Once again, Mr. Minister, the public of Saskatchewan are 

paying for the incompetence which you people demonstrated on 

such a grand scale in 1982 to 1986. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m glad the hon. member appreciates 

the value of the program and understands why we put it in. 

Certainly, it created a lot of employment, it’s done a lot of 

good, and it’s put needed facilities scattered right throughout 

the province, so I’m glad he appreciates the program. I’m 

confident, Mr. Chairman, that we can fulfil all of our 

obligations by March of 1990. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just want to touch briefly on this grant because 

of the implication it has for the building of public libraries in 

the province, particularly in the regional system. I recognize 

that this grant has been in place for some time, but I was very 

alarmed to see the amount reduced from 6 million to 2 million 

for this year, and it sounds to me as if the five-year plan is being 

extended for the next three years. There are rumours that this 

grant may be dropped altogether. Is there any substance to that 

rumour, that in the future it won’t be there in the budget at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we introduced the 

program; we said it was a five-year program, and expected it to 

expire at the end of five years. There hasn’t been any particular 

consideration given right now as to renewing it or bringing in a 

different program, a similar program. It just really hasn’t been 

discussed. We extended this program a little longer for the 

period and that’s as far as it’s gone. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Well, to extend it for another three years out of 

a five-year program is extending it quite a bit from the original. 

 

I just want to put on the record my concern about the building 

and the renovating of the public library buildings in this 

province that belong to the regional system. When I questioned 

the Minister of Education about this, and about the building of 

library facilities, he pointed out that the public library system is 

supported by this facilities grants. There is a lot of talk from the 

government about the building of library facilities, by the 

Minister of Education. The facilities he’s referring to are 

buildings within the schools and the community college system, 

and presumably the technical system. There’s no money, in the 

budget for education, for the building and maintenance of 

public libraries in this province. 

 

But your government has talked a lot about the development of 

the information age in Saskatchewan going into the 21st 

century, the knowledge-based industries, etc., etc. What plans 

do you have to build public library buildings out of the Parks, 

Recreation and Culture budget? A 50 per cent grant coming to 

the municipal governments is not enough for the funding of 

these library facilities. They are very badly needed. 

 

And I suggest that the 50 per cent . . . requiring the 

municipalities to put out 50 per cent is too high, and it’s no 

wonder that the municipalities are not able to pick up on this 

benefit. And I want to know . . . Okay, two questions. One is: 

what are your plans for the public libraries, and what are you 

going to do to help the municipalities fund these buildings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, communities make 

those decisions. I don’t make them on their behalf. I see she’s 

waving her arms around there and probably thinks there hasn’t 

been anything spent on libraries. The amount . . . For your 

information, because you’ve come in here totally ignorant of 

the facts, you should do your homework before you come into 

estimates. 

 

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2705 

 

 

The amount approved from a grant program is $569,981, of 

which $500,861 has already been paid. Number of projects per 

community status: cities, two; towns, 16; villages, 15; R.M.s — 

not one — 36. There were projects in 27 constituencies, and the 

very first one I’m looking at, to allay the fears of the member 

for Regina Centre, was in Prince Albert. And I believe that’s the 

constituency not held by anyone on this side of the House. 

 

Ms. Smart: — It’s my job to ask you questions, Mr. Minister, 

and I don’t think that that kind of arrogant response is 

necessary. I’m asking you an intelligent question about the 

development of the information age in Saskatchewan . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Try it. What are your plans for 

extending the public library system buildings in this province in 

co-operation with the Minister of Education who wants to see 

this province enter the information age? What are you doing 

specifically to support public library construction in the future, 

since the grant has gone down from 6 million to 2 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I think, Mr. Chairman, I outlined 

already for the hon. member what we have done. We’ve put in 

over half a million dollars, and we’ll be looking at other 

projects in consultation with the minister responsible for 

libraries, and certainly with the communities. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to go back again to talk 

about some of the things that are happening in some of those 

cultural facilities that this program is intended to provide - some 

of the things that are happening inside. I want to pick up just 

three issues again from funding to the professional arts, and I 

want to make a couple of what I think are very positive 

suggestions and get your response to them. 

 

Again I ask: do you support the recommendation of Edmond 

Bouvey that the professional arts community, the culture 

community, needs annually, between now and the turn of the 

century, a 4 per cent increase in funding? We certainly don’t 

have that in this budget. Will you commit yourself to looking at 

at least that amount in the upcoming budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, in a perfect world it 

would be great to say there’s all kinds of money available, and 

yes, we’d make commitments to increase every year the amount 

of money government’s spending. We made a conscious effort 

this year to try not to spend any more than we spent last year, in 

order to do that we had to take a look at all of the operations of 

government, the sheer size of government, as well as the 

granting formulas. 

 

I can say that we have increased the amount available, as the 

hon. member is aware — we discussed this earlier — to 

professional arts in this year. I would like to maintain it at least 

at that level. And if there’s any possibility of increasing the 

level of funding, I’d be the first to do it because I’d be delighted 

to do it. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, I remind you that we have 

employed in the cultural industry in Saskatchewan more than 

twice the number of people employed in the  

potash and uranium industry. That’s from your document. Now 

I hear rumours that we have $800 million to write off a debt for 

the potash corporation. I hear that kind of figure — $800 

million. So apparently there’s money around. 

 

If, in fact, this underfunding of the arts is to continue, would 

you look at another recommendation from the Bouvey task 

force, and that is to insert some stability into funding for the arts 

— some stability. So that the arts community wouldn’t be 

looking at funding just for one year, but that they could have a 

commitment for a minimum, a minimum of a three-year 

funding period. It would certainly help the cultural community 

in Saskatchewan in their planning if they could have at least a 

three-year commitment. Would you entertain that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — One of the problems we have, Mr. 

Chairman, is that government is voted money on an annual 

basis, and we go through this democratic process which we’re 

participating in right now. I think a three-year commitment is, 

in fact, a little on the short side. We’d prefer to look at a 

five-year plan and a five-year budgetary process for those 

particular groups. 

 

We have to talk to them about where they anticipate being 

down the road. And in fact we have to talk about the survival of 

some of those groups. I would like to see the current level of 

funding plus the access that we have to the lotteries kept up. If 

there’s any way to increase it, yes. But obviously this is going 

to be a cabinet decision to say, well there’s not going to be a cut 

to that particular grant in future years. It’s going to be a 

discussion that will take place in the budgetary process which 

will be coming up again in the next few months. 

 

(1600) 

 

But I really believe that we have to look further than a one year 

at a time ad hoc basis with funding to professional arts. And I 

take the advice of the hon. member and I’d like to say we’ll 

look at a five-year program if possible. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’d be more than delighted if you 

would look at a five-year period — more than delighted. And 

certainly we do that with other government programs and then 

commit to that five-year period so there will be some stability 

for the arts community in terms of their funding. 

 

One other question, Mr. Minister which I think is a positive 

direction you might move in terms of the arm’s-length principle 

of the Arts Board. would you look at changing the legislation, 

changing the legislation governing the Arts Board so that the 

board themselves may choose their own director rather than 

having a director appointed by order in council, who may or 

may not be a political appointment? Would you consider that 

option? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I certainly would consider it, Mr. 

Chairman. I’ve discussed it with the Arts Board. I strongly feel 

the incumbent executive director would probably resent it if 

anybody suggested he was a political appointment. I’m quite 

certain he wasn’t, and doesn’t 

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2706 

 

 

 regard himself in that capacity at all. But it’s something we’ve 

talked about at the Arts Board and it’s something I’d be 

prepared to discuss further with them and explore it and see 

what possibility there is to do that, yes. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I certainly agree the current 

incumbent, the current executive director, I would not describe 

as a political appointment. But you will recognize that that 

danger exists when the director is appointed by cabinet, no 

matter who may be government of the day. 

 

An Hon. Member: — My dad would like the job. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I’m sure your father would like the job. 

 

So I’m happy to hear you say that you would consider it. I 

would encourage you to give it a lot of consideration and 

continue that dialogue with the Arts Board, and perhaps by this 

time next year we can see a change to the Act. 

 

Mr. Minister, we discussed a little earlier the summer school of 

the arts in Fort San. We have had in our province in the last 18 

months another school involving young people involved in the 

arts. You should know it well — the Saskatchewan School of 

the Performing Arts in Saskatoon. It operated in this past year 

providing some 30 students, ages 10 to 18, with classes in 

voice, music, drama, dance, in addition to their academic 

training. That school, as you know, had financial difficulties, 

and I may say had some difficulties with your department. And 

the most recent media reports that I see, and the reports that I 

hear from Saskatoon is that the school is now effectively closed 

— at least it certainly hasn’t reopened this fall. It’s trying to sort 

out its financial difficulties. And I wonder if you could give the 

House just an update on the school of the performing arts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I remember the details 

on this. Obviously this started before I assumed this portfolio. 

But as the hon. member is aware, we did get into an agreement 

with the school of performing arts that we would give them 

funding of $200,000 to capital; the city of Saskatoon matched 

it. But there was a condition in there that that was it. They 

wouldn’t be coming back for any more money. And they in fact 

thought that they could survive with that; they could run with 

that. 

 

Now I’m aware of their internal administrative and 

organizational difficulties. I’m somewhat loathe to get into 

those because it entails some criticism of individuals, and I’ve 

no intentions of doing that on the floor of the legislature, to start 

criticizing people. But it did have internal organizational 

administrative difficulties which caused them some severe 

problems. 

 

One of the difficulties was, they tried to start up too quickly. 

They didn’t plan long enough ahead for a curriculum and 

looking at staff and all of the logistical things. They were 

gung-ho, enthusiastic, which you have to admire, Mr. 

Chairman, but they started up just a little quicker than they were 

actually able to cope with, and that helped to contribute to their 

difficulties. I may say, we did give them an additional 50,000 

after that, but it didn’t rescue them. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, in a letter that you sent to me, 

dated February 20 of this year, you said that you believed the 

school to be a “visionary idea.” Do you still hold that position? 

What will you and your department do now to see this visionary 

idea continue and come to some reality again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, no question about it 

being visionary. This would have been the only school of 

performing arts in Canada, as a matter of fact. It’s unfortunate it 

didn’t get off the ground. It wasn’t on the best financial footing; 

it certainly was not on a good administrative footing. And 

consequently, subsequently they ran into difficulties. 

 

If the hon. member is asking me for a commitment of funding 

to do a new school of performing arts, I cannot give him that 

today. I can tell him we’re very interested if other groups have 

got a concept and a plan. I have had one or two individuals in 

Saskatoon who don’t want the idea to die, and they certainly are 

more than welcome to bring it to the attention of our 

department. I cannot at all commit any more funding. We’ve 

already spent $250,000 on that, and that’s gone. And I don’t 

want to commit to that particular school, but I would be 

interested in meeting with anybody else who’s got a good idea 

for a school of performing arts. Visionary doesn’t even come 

close to describing what an exciting concept it is. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I say to that: hear, hear, Mr. Minister. I share 

your enthusiasm for the vision of that school and the concept of 

that school. 

 

Can I make one simple point. If, as you suggest here in the 

House today and certainly as officials of your department have 

suggested outside the House, the difficulties encountered by the 

school of performing arts had much to do with the management 

of that school, would you then commit to lend, to offer some of 

the expertise of your department — and I’m sure you must have 

expertise in your department — in terms of management? 

Would you offer to lend that, to provide it to this group or to 

any other group that may come with such a visionary idea, and 

would you commit to do that when you’re providing public 

moneys, as were provided in this case? I submit those moneys 

were provided without some of the expertise that might also 

have been provided to assist that school and its management. So 

would you commit your department and yourself to that kind of 

a direction? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, definitely we’d make all 

the expertise available. As a matter of fact, the assistant deputy 

minister sitting beside me is meeting with them tomorrow to 

take a look at the situation. 

 

I will point out, Mr. Chairman, that initially when they started 

up, they really didn’t want our help or our expertise. And 

frankly, I honestly believe that contributed to their subsequent 

problems, that they did not accept offers of assistance from the 

department. They wanted t go it alone. Ultimately, we had to 

insist that we had someone represent us because we had money 

on the board. 

 

But yes, we’d make expertise available not only to them  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2707 

 

 

but anybody else who thinks we can be of service to them. 

That’s why we’re here; we’re here to serve. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have some 

questions of the minister regarding forestry and his 

government’s record and the future for forestry in this province. 

 

Specifically I would like to ask some questions about the 

closure of the nurseries in northern Saskatchewan, the nursery 

at Macdowall and at Chitek Lake. And I would ask, Mr. 

Minister, the closure of these nurseries, in some people’s 

estimation, is going to create some hardships in terms of the 

future of our forests. And I would like to know how the closure 

of these nurseries is in fitting with a good plan, a solid plan, for 

sound forest management in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, one of those 

nurseries to which the hon. member refers is in my own seat, 

and if he doesn’t think that was a very difficult decision, believe 

me, that was a painful decision. Nobody likes to close anything 

down, especially if there are jobs affected. And we did our best 

to accommodate all of the people who were affected by the 

decision to close them. 

 

The simple fact is, Mr. Chairman, we have more than adequate 

capacity with the north branch and the Big River nursery right 

now. We have all the capacity we need for reforestation 

programs. As we probably had this exchange before, I believe, 

in terms of reforestation and forest management, what we have 

to be cognizant of, Mr. Chairman, is that the forest industry is 

changing, and the traditional type of tree we planted, spruce for 

example, is not in such great demand now because of changes 

in technology in the forest industry. And because of the high 

tech that has come into that industry, they’re utilizing other 

species of woods. 

 

And in managing of forests and in looking ahead and trying to 

project what will be required in the future, we’re having to take 

into account the nature of the industry as it exists in 

Saskatchewan, which is not at all the same, as the hon. member 

is aware, in say, Manitoba, Alberta, B.C., or down East, Quebec 

and Ontario, which are the big forest partners in the game. 

 

We have to take a look at what is specific to our industry; where 

it is going to be. And this is a difficult thing, as I’m sure the 

hon. member can appreciate, saying where are we going to be in 

25, 50, or 70 years’ time. The fact is we have still not harvested 

the first tree we planted in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I realize of course that one 

of those nurseries was in your riding and one happens to be in 

my riding. And I guess that’s one thing we do have in common 

— maybe not a lot of other things, but certainly that we may. 

 

I understand as well the changes in technology and the changes 

in demand, and those things change from time to time, and we 

have to be a forward looking province if we’re to maintain a 

viable industry. But, Mr. Minister, I think there are some people 

in this province who maybe  

tend to disagree with what you’re doing. 

 

In terms of the backlog of areas that have been harvested and 

not reforested, I think you will agree with me that there is a 

problem there, and that there is a problem that needs to be 

addressed, and the way to address it is by sound forest 

management activities. 

 

And I was sent a news release in the first part of March from 

the Saskatchewan Forestry Association, Mr. Minister. And in 

part it says, and I want to quote from that release: 

 

Recently our silviculture efforts in Saskatchewan have 

been declining. Planting has dropped from a peak in ‘83 of 

12 million to a low of 8 million in 1986. Similarly, 

scarification to assist natural regeneration dropped from a 

high of 11,000 hectares in ‘82 to 75 hectares in ‘86. Only 

39 per cent of the total area harvested is scarified and 32 

per cent planted. 

 

With this commitment to forestry, it is apparent that a 

more substantial forest management effort is required. The 

longer this effort is delayed, the more expensive will 

become the treatment. 

 

I wrote to you urging some action, Mr. Minister, shortly after 

there. But this from the Saskatchewan Forestry Association 

would seem to indicate to me that the professionals, as part of 

that association, do feel that your department is not keeping up 

and not doing what you perhaps should be or might be doing in 

order to enhance this industry. Could you comment on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’d be delighted to 

comment on that, and don’t misconstrue this as being a political 

comment, but the individual in question who wrote that actually 

lives in my riding, and I’m very familiar with him. I do know 

him; we’ve met several times. 

 

But he’s talking about how the traditional levels have gone 

down, and that statement’s entirely false. In the last four years 

of the NDP administration, they planted 39 million trees. In the 

first four years of our administration, we planted 45. So the 

comment is obviously false, as made by that particular 

individual. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I’m not commenting on 

this individual’s particular political affiliation, nor do I care to 

go back years and years. I’m looking at the problem as we see it 

now, and how we can solve those problems. 

 

The Saskatchewan Forestry Association is not one man; the 

Saskatchewan Forestry Association has many members, and 

I’ve met with an awful lot of them. And so I would hope that 

you wouldn’t want to indicate that each and every one of the 

members of the Saskatchewan Forestry Association are part of 

that association for political reasons. I frankly don’t believe that 

to be the case. 

 

Mr. Minister, regarding the forestry or the nurseries, I would 

like to take you back to 1986 where your  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2708 

 

 

government cut funding. And I believe this debate went on in 

the legislature at the time. And I want to refer you to a 

inter-office, I guess it is, memo, and in it it indicates that 

because of your cut-backs in 1986 that Simpson Timber, which 

you rescinded by the way, after some public pressure through 

this House, that Simpson Timber wouldn’t get 500,000 trees for 

fall planting because that department would be out of money to 

fund the nursery to supply those seedlings. 

 

(1615) 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, having gone back to your government’s 

record of 1986, looking at what has happened in 1987 in terms 

of the closure of the two nurseries, do you not feel that the 

people involved in forestry and the people of this province who 

depend on the forest industry for their livelihood should have 

some concerns? I frankly, Mr. Minister, after listening to a lot 

of debate and a lot of rhetoric in here over the last weeks, am a 

little hesitant to believe that because of the closure of those 

nurseries and the funding cuts in 1986, I’m a little hesitant to 

believe that you’re not making these cut-backs strictly for 

financial reasons as opposed to what will build a good, 

economic forest industry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, with the two nurseries 

that we are currently operating, we have a capacity of close to 

20 million seedlings annually, and that is more than adequate 

for our particular needs right now. 

 

We have made a commitment over five years that we’ll plant 50 

million seedlings. That’s the commitment by cabinet; it was a 

decision taken some months ago. Now we may not plant 10 this 

year; we’re probably looking in the order of 7 million this year, 

maybe a little more. But certainly we intend to get 50 million 

seedlings into the ground in the next five years. 

 

The forest management license agreements which we’re 

negotiating with the companies, contain provisions in there for 

reforestation. They are paying a fee for reforestation, and we’re 

saying to them, you’re the beneficiary of those threes which 

really are there for the use of all of us in Saskatchewan, so 

you’re going to have to pay to put them back into the ground. 

 

And we’ve got a use it or lose it policy with the companies. I 

think the FMLA (forestry management licensing agreement) 

process has been a good one. Our process is as good as any of 

the other provinces. Having met with the forest ministers 

frequently and examined what we’re doing across the country, I 

think we’re comparing favourably. 

 

As the hon. member knows, we’re one of the small players in 

the forest game in Saskatchewan in terms of export. We export 

about one-half of 1 per cent of what goes out of Canada, so 

we’re not really on a competitive level with, for example, 

British Columbia. But then again, the nature of their industry is 

different from ours. Their climate is different; their soil is 

different. 

 

And if there is one need, in my view, in Saskatchewan, if I may 

make this comment, it’s for increased research, Mr.  

Chairman. And I think we’re doing a reasonable job in 

silviculture. I think we’re doing a reasonable job in 

reforestation. I know we’re doing a reasonable job in forest 

management, and we’ve really improved quite a bit. But the one 

area that has me concerned is research. 

 

There has been some done on cloning different species. But just 

imagine, Mr. Chairman, if we could grow a commercial forest 

in instead of 90 years, which it approximately is now, certainly 

nothing less than 70; if we could cut that time in half, what a 

tremendous boost that would be to our forest economy. And 

that’s the kind of thing that’s being worked on now, but not at a 

speed that would suit me. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, certainly we’re all 

concerned about research and development. And if you look at 

the program and the package that the New Democrats had 

indicated that we would implement if we had formed 

government in 1986 or 1987, I’m sure that the people of the 

province understand certainly what our commitment is. Yours, 

however, may be a little hazy. 

 

You indicate — and you did a couple of weeks ago in this 

House — that it was your government’s intention to plant 50 

million seedlings over the next five years; however, first year 

only seven, which is a major decrease from years previous, and 

what I think, Mr. Minister, we’re looking at here is, is do the 

people out there believe you? 

 

When is this slack going to be picked up? And why, Mr. 

Minister, haven’t you allocated the funds for this year to plant 

the 10 million seedlings that you have committed yourself to, as 

opposed to putting it down the road somewhere. 

 

And as well, Mr. Minister, I would like you to answer: in terms 

of the Canada-Saskatchewan forestry agreement, where you 

committed your government to $14 million spent over five-year 

period starting in 1984, could you indicate — and by the way, 

the funding would be matched, as I understand, by the federal 

government — could you indicate from 1984 to this year how 

many actual dollars your government has spent in that program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have the 

numbers for the previous years, but I can commit to get them 

for you and send them to you, if that’s okay. I’ll tell you what’s 

in this year: provincial share is $2,599,036; the federal share is 

$2,192,090 and we are currently in the process of scatter flying 

and doing site preparation for three planting for next year, and 

we want to catch up that backlog. This year we’re having to do 

the site work; next year we’ll start planting, and we’ll be into 

our program of 50 million seedlings. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, certainly, Mr. Minister, I appreciate 

your offer to give us those figures. I do, however, find it 

awfully strange a program — an investment of $28 million of 

which you fund 50 per cent — I do, however, find it strange 

that your officials wouldn’t know how much your government 

has spent each and every year since 1984 on that program. 

 

And I want to bring you back to the nurseries and some of  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2709 

 

 

the reasons why people are a little hesitant to believe your 

commitments. As I say, I appreciate your offer, and I would like 

you to forward those numbers to me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan 

government has spent 5.6 million; the federal government has 

spent 7.8 million towards agreement-related projects; the total is 

13.4 million. That represents about 48 per cent of the planned 

agreement funding, so we’re just about right on target with the 

agreement. That’s the number you’re looking for. The specific, 

year by year breakdown, yes, we can find that, but I think that 

answers your question in terms of are we spending our share 

and how are we doing with the agreement. We’ve spent 48 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — So you’re telling me then, Mr. Minister, 

since 1984 your government has spent 5.6 million, or have I 

misunderstood you, and that the federal government has spent 

7.8 million? Is that what I’m led to believe? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That’s right, Mr. Chairman, I point out 

that the federal government also has a pretty hefty investment 

put into the Big River nursery. They’ve got something in the 

order of $3 million in there. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — So then over a three-year period, if we 

were to average what your government’s commitment was at 

$2.8 million per year, you have spent 5.6, which falls 

considerably short of that. And given the fact . . . And am I 

right? Do I understand that the federal government was 

matching dollar for dollar what the provincial government 

spent? Is that what I understand? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Some of the programs, Mr. Chairman, 

are provincial direct programs, some are federal direct 

programs, and some are cost shared; dollar for dollar we match 

them. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Okay. Mr. Minister, the FMLA . . . and if you might 

indicate to me where the harvesters get their nursery stock from. 

Does it come from the provincial nurseries? Are they purchased 

elsewhere, or where do those . . . where does that planting stock 

come from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, that all comes from our 

provincial nurseries. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Okay, so then they’re purchased from the 

government as part . . . from the stumpage fees, the fund that 

Weyerhaeuser is administering. Am I to understand that is 

correct, and that they will then purchase from the provincial 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We supply the trees, Mr. Chairman, and 

they use their funds for the planting operation. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — So then the provincial government 

supplies the stock at zero cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, that’s correct. And 

I point out to the hon. member we do that for parks, schools, 

licence holders, and anybody else in the  

province. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Can I ask you, Mr. Chairman . . . you 

surely are aware, I would hope are aware of Weyerhaeuser’s 

plans or any other major harvesting operations in this province. 

Are they going to be requesting enough stock from you in each 

and every year to be planting what they’re harvesting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — What we have in our agreement, Mr. 

Chairman, is on the length of the lease, is a five-year agreement 

that they have to give to us their plan, their silviculture plan, 

reforestation plan, harvesting plan for five years which is 

approved by the officials within the department. We supervise 

what they do from there. Natural reforestation takes care of 

about 20 per cent, the rest this year will probably be in the order 

of some 7 million seedlings that we would be planting 

manually. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, regarding the five-year 

plan, I’m wondering if that plan has already been submitted by 

Weyerhaeuser and if you would be willing to share that 

five-year plan with the people of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, they have a five-year 

plan, and every spring they have to submit to us what they plan 

on doing in that particular year, and it goes through an approval 

process within the department. Part of the approval process is 

that we check within our department, the wildlife branch, the 

fisheries branch, to see if it’s compatible with any other 

integrated resource management plan we have in the forest; plus 

we check with the Department of the Environment. 

 

I’m informed that the whole thing is a very, very thick 

document. It hasn’t been practice, as far as I know in past years, 

to publish anybody’s particular harvesting plan. I can certainly 

take a look at that. It wasn’t suggested before, but sure, we can 

discuss it. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I think, Mr. Minister, you know, rather 

than discuss it, I would certainly like to have a look at that 

agreement. We’re not unfamiliar with large, huge volumes of 

paper from your government. You might be aware, we’ve gone 

through the conditions of the PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 

Company) asset sale to Weyerhaeuser, that thick, and we’re 

more than pleased to do so on behalf of the people of the 

province. And if you would submit that to the members on this 

side of the House for our perusal, we would most certainly 

appreciate it. 

 

In terms, Mr. Minister, of reforestation and the moneys 

collected from the provincial government, I’ve had from some 

private operators harvesting in the North under the FMLA, 

some concerns in that some of the small independent operators 

who are doing selective cutting feel that they are subsidizing the 

clear-cut operations. And the way it was explained to me was, 

as an example, selective cutting along a river edge — some, 

whatever, 300 yards, whatever it might happen to be - that when 

they’re in there selective cutting, they’re paying the same 

stumpage rates as would be a large clear-cut operator who in a 

lot of cases should be selective cutting, but they tell me, aren’t. 

And, you know, that would be left to argument  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2710 

 

 

and debate between us or between some of your officials. 

 

(1630) 

 

But the problem and the concern that they have is because 

they’re selective cutting and still paying the same rate, that 

they’re unfairly subsidizing the larger operators. I’m wondering 

if you might want to comment on that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, I can appreciate the comment the 

hon. member’s making. When we talk about the smaller 

operators or the SCIFI (Saskatchewan Council of Independent 

Forest Industries) members who might think that, well, they’re 

paying the same stumpage for selective trees instead of a 

clear-cut type of operation. But they also, Mr. Chairman, I point 

out, don’t have responsibility to build roads or some of the 

other things that are in the agreement with the companies — 

Simpson, L & M Wood Products, MacMillan Bloedel, 

Weyerhaeuser. They have other obligations that they have to 

meet that the small operators don’t have to meet. 

 

And when we’re doing selective cutting with them, we are 

cognizant of the fact that at one time they got one-half per cent, 

one-half of 1 per cent of the total harvest volume schedule in 

Saskatchewan. They are now closer to 8 per cent of the harvest 

volume schedule in Saskatchewan, and it’s not all scrub timber 

or poor wood or inaccessible wood. We’ve made every effort to 

try and find them good wood and easily accessible wood. 

 

So I think that they may feel that they’re being discriminated 

against because they’ve been asked to pay the same stumpage, 

but they don’t have all the same responsibilities inherent in the 

agreements we have with them. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I think that there might be some 

misunderstanding in terms of what that stumpage rate is going 

for in terms of the small private operators, because I would 

want to share with you, Mr. Minister, that they are concerned, 

and there are some hard feelings out there, some ill feelings, 

that in fact they are subsidizing larger operators. 

 

And I would want to say, Mr. Minister, that in my riding as well 

as in yours, I think you’re aware of the number of employees, 

the number of local people that our small harvesters have 

employed over the years, and let’s hope will continue to employ 

in future years. I know that it’s a big economic boom to the 

people of Prince Albert and area, and certainly we want to see 

those operations economically viable and to continue to operate 

as they have for many years. 

 

And might I suggest that you contact, have your officials 

contact some of the private harvesters who have these feelings 

and who are concerned that in fact they are subsidizing other 

companies. They understand as well that the larger operators are 

responsible for building roads. They also understand, Mr. 

Minister, that the provincial government is responsible for 

building an awful lot of roads for them each and every year 

under this new agreement, which creates some reasons for 

concern for them. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you a few questions, and I 

would like to know if your department has had any problems 

with contractors in the Big River area who supply 

Weyerhaeuser. And I guess I would ask you specifically if you 

have reports of contractors harvesting aspen in unapproved 

stands and continually bulldozing aspen on roads and landings. 

I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if any of those concerns have 

been raised with you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, no, I’m not familiar with 

any of those kind of problems. I haven’t had any expressed to 

me. I was in my constituency this weekend, as a matter of fact, 

and I didn’t have any calls of that nature. If the hon. member’s 

aware of some problems of that nature, sure, we’d like to hear 

about them and do what we can to address them. 

 

I should point out to the hon. member, we do have a resource 

committee of caucus. The chairman is the member for 

Kinistino, and he has been meeting on a very regular basis, as 

you well know, Mr. Chairman, with operators from your 

constituency and others around the province. And we’ve been 

trying to listen to their concerns and see how we can address 

them. 

 

He’s also, with other members of the committee, yourself 

included, have met with SCIFI on numerous occasions, and we 

plan to continue meeting with them and hearing they concerns. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I would want to share with you, Mr. 

Minister, that in fact there is some concern. I’m sure . . . I was 

hoping you may have been aware of it. But I know that there 

are some concerns from people who work within your 

department, in terms of the utilization of aspen and the other 

areas in terms of the cuts and the right of ways. 

 

Is it — if you might be able to share with me, Mr. Minister — is 

it, as part of the harvesting plan that was submitted by 

Weyerhaeuser, is it their plan to salvage aspen and other 

valuable wood from major right of ways, might I ask? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, it’s my understanding 

that Weyerhaeuser has full intention of taking all the usable 

wood that’s there and taking it to the most economic use that 

they can make of it, whether it be the aspect of pump in P.A. or 

wood more suitable to studs which would go to Big River. 

That’s my understanding. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, that that is 

your understanding. I just would like to share with you that that 

is not in all cases what’s been happening. Perhaps, and I hope 

you will check that, perhaps you would want to check that for 

us. I would not want to see any of our valuable timber 

bulldozed into the ground and left sitting. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I would ask in terms of violations of the 

forestry Act, and I think we’ve been over this a bit before, but 

I’d like to know if there have been any violations in the past 

five years of the forestry Act in terms of over-cut or cutting in 

an area where perhaps there shouldn’t have  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2711 

 

 

been, that have gone unpunished? And if so, I would ask you, 

for what reason? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, before I get to that 

question, I’d like to refer to the penultimate. If there are some 

specific examples of a problem going on with either salvage or 

leaving wood in the bush, we committed years ago to cleaning 

that particular aspect of the operation up and not leaving viable 

good wood in the bush at all. 

 

If there are some examples, and I certainly appreciate the hon. 

member bringing them to my attention, I can commit to you 

that we will investigate every one of them. I haven’t had calls in 

my office with complaints. Perhaps some of the members of the 

resource committee have, but we would certainly send our 

foresters out to take a look at the situation and make sure that 

the agreements are being adhered to strictly, because we intend 

to enforce them strictly. 

 

With regards to over-cut, or someone contravening sections of 

The Forest Act, there have been some, but they haven’t been in 

the large companies as I am informed. But some of them have 

been smaller operators, sometimes inadvertently in the wrong 

area, going into the wrong piece, sometimes not so 

inadvertently, and taking out more than their allowable cut. And 

in those cases we’ve had to investigate them and do something 

about it. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I would then ask a little more 

specifically, Mr. Minister. It’s my understanding that there have 

been violations in terms of lack of clean-up in different areas 

that have been harvested. And I can cite some, give you the 

number of cords of wood that have been apparently misused. 

 

In the Steep Bank Lake area, 39.6 cords in 1984-85; Fort a la 

Corne, 235 cords, ’85-86; Hall Lake, ’86-87, 128 cords, 

mismanagement and waste of this nature and, as you say, not 

done by a large major operator. But I would ask: are your 

officials aware of these infractions and has there been anything 

done about them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we’re not aware of any 

particular operator who has been guilty of the particular alleged 

infraction that I heard about just now. We’d certainly be 

prepared to look at them, if we haven’t already had someone at 

the local level. 

 

And it doesn’t necessarily, obviously, always get to my desk. 

Operations that are taking place out in the field level, they’re 

handled at the field level by individual foresters who would 

report to the regional forester. But on the specific examples 

cited by the hon. member, I’ll certainly have those run back 

through the system and see if there were, in fact, any charges 

laid or if there was insistence on clean-up and we’ll check who 

the operators were too. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — I would certainly appreciate, Mr. 

Minister, if you would pass that information on to me. It 

appears that the particular operator — and I didn’t want to name 

him and I won’t — has been in consistent violation of your 

department’s regulations and it’s been going on for a 

considerable period of time. And so I certainly would hope that 

you would indicate to us whether or not  

that situation has been cleaned up. 

 

I ask you as well, Mr. Minister, if you might be able to inform 

the members of this House in respect to timber being utilized at 

the Prince Albert pulp mill. It has been a consistent complaint 

from people that work out there and people who know that 

industry, to me and other members in the area, that in all cases 

the best utilization of our forests is not happening. And the 

example that is brought to me on many, many occasions is that 

there is a lot of saw timber that is being pulped. 

 

I would hope that the new owners, the Weyerhaeuser 

corporation, will be good corporate citizens in this province and 

will utilize that timber to the best of its ability. And I would ask 

you, Mr. Minister: what type of policing arrangements are there 

to ensure that, especially when we have larger operators who do 

clear-cut operation? We understand sometimes that sorting is 

not maybe the most economical situation in terms of the bottom 

line for the corporation, but we who represent the people of this 

province, you and I, have a responsibility to ensure that that 

wood is utilized in the best way possible. 

 

And I would ask, Mr. Minister: have you had any complaints or 

any dialogue with any particular parties in terms of that type of 

a situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we’re not aware of any 

specific complaints, but we do, to use the hon. member’s word, 

do some policing. We do spot checks; we do yard checks where 

the foresters go to the yard and examine what is in the yard; we 

also do checks out in the bush; and we look at the sorting 

operation. 

 

I would say, and I’m sure the hon. member understands this, 

that any company or any individual would want to put whatever 

wood they have to the best economic use. If the dollar is to be 

made by putting it to pulp, that’s where they’d put it; if it is to 

be made by stud, by going to the Big River mill, that’s where 

they’ll put it. And obviously there’s good money in the 

softwood lumber, in the stud business. So I don’t think we’d 

find too many examples of anybody wasting it on pulp. 

 

I am aware of cases in the past where, in the old PAPCO days 

particularly, I remember having complaints sent to me that there 

was wood lying in the yard that should not be there. It was big, 

large dimension timber and it should not be going to pulp, it 

should be going to saw timber. And I think that case is going on 

now, that is the case in fact that they would be taking the large 

dimension to saw timber; it would not be going to pulp. Again, 

it’s the kind of thing that can be checked. But the company 

wouldn’t want to lose any money by putting wood to something 

less than its best economic use. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, whether it be a 

privately owned corporation or a publicly owned corporation, I 

wouldn’t suggest is the debate. The debate will be and should 

be the best utilization of our resource, and I certainly hope that 

your department will ensure that those types of things happen. 

 

Mr. Minister, I know that our officials don’t want to spend for 

ever in this House, they’d like to get back to  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2712 

 

 

doing their jobs, and I’m going to do my part to allow that by 

keeping my questions short. 

 

But I would, Mr. Minister, want to share a letter with you by a 

person in this province who is quite familiar and quite 

concerned about what’s happening in terms of the forest 

industry in the province. And you and I, I suppose, could stand 

here and debate and banter back and forth for hours, but I just 

want to read this in so that you may be able to understand the 

feelings of some of the people associated with the forest 

industry and their concerns about what’s happening in this 

province. I’m going to try and shorten it as best I can. 

 

Concerns about . . . and believe the source of this letter I 

wouldn’t want to table; I think it would be unfair to this 

individual, but some of the concerns are: a valuable wood like 

white birch being sent through for pulp — white birch, a tree 

that sells for many, many dollars a cord down in the southern 

part of the province that a lot of Southerners would very much 

like to have in terms of being able to burn in their fireplaces and 

in their wood fire furnaces. But that white birch is being wasted 

by putting through the pulp mill. 

 

(1645) 

 

And there are areas, and I know areas, that have been bulldozed 

and that’s not proper forest management or utilization of our 

forests. And I’m hoping, it appears to me in my questions 

today, that a lot of questions that have been asked, your officials 

have not made you aware of problems surrounding those 

questions, so I bring them to you today. 

 

In terms of post stands — areas where rails could be harvest 

and utilized and more money garnered to the forest industry — 

that that, too, is going through for pulp wood. And I would 

hope, Mr. Minister, that you will do some studies to determine 

whether or not these kinds of things are happening. And I’m 

hoping, Mr. Minister, that you will allow your officials to be 

working in those forests and to be doing a proper job of 

policing the job that they have started, the job they were hired 

to do; to police the kind of utilization that is going on from our 

forests. 

 

I’ve indicated that it’s . . . it’s been indicated to me that there is 

a lot of problems in terms of good, soft, saw timber being 

chopped up. I think it’s no secret when we look at what’s 

happening to the number of small saw mills in northern 

Saskatchewan that employed local people that live in those 

areas, the number of those mills are rapidly disappearing. I 

would hope, Mr. Minister, that your department will take some 

initiative to ensure small independent saw mills the opportunity 

to operate and to employ local people. I would think, Mr. 

Minister, that that would be a concern of yours as well as all 

members of this House. 

 

It’s been indicated to me, on a number of occasions, that there’s 

no wildlife management, that in a lot of cases economics 

overtake the good of the wildlife that live in our northern 

forests, and that this department is getting less and less attention 

as your government governs and as the years go on. And I 

would hope, Mr. Minister, that the concerns of those people 

who care about wildlife in this  

province wouldn’t be undershadowed by the desire of some 

operators to make the big buck. 

 

I would very much, Mr. Minister, like to see an independent 

study done on harvesting in this province because I think there 

is need for concern, and there is reason for concern. I think that 

we need a utilization study, and I would think, as well, we need 

an investigation into what kind of planning your government is 

doing for wildlife in the future. 

 

I would think, Mr. Minister, as well, you would need to be 

talking to trappers and people who work in northern 

Saskatchewan and who’ve made their livelihoods in those 

forests for decades, many of them, so that you might better 

understand, and your department might better understand, what 

is happening in northern Saskatchewan as we move into that 

area and as we develop the resource. 

 

I say, as well, Mr. Minister, I feel that these studies and these 

concerns should be addressed by an independent body rather 

than an internal body who may be at the whim of a particular 

deputy minister, minister, or whoever it might happen to be, and 

I think it’s important that you look very closely at doing an 

independent study in those areas. 

 

I want to say as well, Mr. Minister, in closing, that this is the 

first chance I’ve had an opportunity to work with you in the 

estimates and to talk about your government’s role in terms of 

forest management and utilization of those forests. 

 

I wish to say to you that I intend to watch closely over the next 

three years, if this is still part of my critic assignment, the way 

you’re developing forestry in the province. And I’m pleased 

today that we’ve got some numbers on record in terms of what 

you planned for reforestation in this province. 

 

And as I said to you, I will be closely studying and closely 

scrutinizing what your department is doing on behalf of the 

people of northern Saskatchewan and the rest of this province 

who depend so heavily on the forest industry, who make their 

livelihoods through that industry. And I intend to work with you 

in the spirit of co-operation and fair play, so that we can do 

together what’s best for the people of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. 

member, I appreciate his sincerity. I know he is sincere, and I 

know from past correspondence he has a sincere interest in 

forest management and what we are doing as a government. 

Naturally we don’t always agree; that’s why we’re on different 

sides of the House. Certainly, I believe we both want what is 

best for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s just how we achieve it, 

maybe done in different ways. But I look forward to working 

and co-operating with the hon. member in the future. 

 

Could I just respond to a couple of things. As far as birch is 

concerned, there is a lot available for fuel wood, so if people 

want fuel wood, we can give them a permit. There is plenty 

available. 

 

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2713 

 

 

In terms of posts, we’re setting aside special areas for post 

operators so they will be accommodated. In terms of the small 

operators and the wood available, as I say, the harvest volume 

schedule has gone from one-half of 1 per cent to some place 

around about seven and a one-half to 8 per cent, now, that is 

available to the small operators. So I think, within the 

constraints of the source, we have been trying to address their 

problems. 

 

In terms of wildlife I should point out to the hon. member that 

out with the boundaries of Saskatchewan it is recognized that 

we have the best wildlife programs, not only in Canada but in 

North America. And this has been pointed out to me many 

times by officials, by elected people from other provinces, and 

from the United States. I can point out the World Wildlife Fund 

people think we lead the country; there’s no question about it. 

That was one of the reasons Prince Philip was here, and why 

Saskatchewan was chosen to spearhead there. 

 

We’re the only province committed to the North American 

Waterfowl Plan, both financially and involved in the day to day 

work. We’re involved in the prairie pothole project, the heritage 

marsh program. We have the only Critical Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act in the whole of North America. Again, that’s 

attracted considerable attention to Saskatchewan. We’re 

recognized as being leaders in that regard, and leaders in 

integrated resource management of the forest and complete 

utilization to the best use of all of the users of the forest, be they 

people, animals, or whatever. 

 

But I do take the hon. member’s advice that we do some 

consulting there. I plan to meet with the trappers’ association in 

January, as a matter of fact. And I think many of his points are 

well made. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — . . . (inaudible) . . . some of the questions 

that my colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake asked. I 

would like to ask the minister questions regarding what has 

happened to some roads in the northern forests. I have been told 

that there are roads that have been there, in some cases, for 70 

or 80 years, that have had ditches dug across them, and that the 

roads have been ripped up. 

 

And the question, Mr. Minister is: where has this been done, 

and what is the purpose of this? And I believe it is your 

department that this has been attributed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, this has been done in 

numerous locations, and I can undertake to provide a listing for 

you if you want to see specific areas. Perhaps we could take it 

in the form of a map and mark them for you. This is part of our 

resource management for wildlife. It is very easy for people 

with four-wheel drives and trucks to drive down these roads, 

step out, and shoot. So some northern roads have been closed. 

 

And we do have game corridors. They’re not new; they’ve been 

around for a number of years, whereby there’s a zone of about 

400 metres either side of the road that foot only, you must walk 

through, no hunting, before hunting starts. And it is a valuable 

tool in resource management in preserving any dwindling 

numbers we may have in moose and elk. 

 

As I say, it’s not new. We’ve been doing more in recent years, 

however. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, you indicate that the purpose 

of it then is for wildlife management and that this restricts the 

traffic due to trucks. However, by doing this it doesn’t restrict 

the traffic to all-terrain vehicles, and the concern of some 

people that I’ve heard from is that it restricts the hunter that has 

been in there over the year s- in many cases perhaps a senior 

who has sort of driven through there leisurely. It also restricts 

access for leisure driving, and also restricts access to people 

who may be wanting to go in there and do berry picking. 

 

My question is then: why did you choose that method to restrict 

access to the wild game instead of just restricting the number of 

licences or the quotas, restricting the quota, so that it would 

apply more evenly to all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we do restrict licences 

on moose. And the hon. .member should hear my phone ring 

some days — the people who aren’t drawn for moose or drawn 

for elk, including the Premier, who hasn’t been drawn for a few 

years either. 

 

We do restrict the quota; we restrict the number. We restrict the 

number of licences. We found it is a good tool in resource 

management. 

 

The hon. member may have a point about senior citizens 

particularly going down those roads. I haven’t heard of that one 

before; this was a new one to me, but we’ll certainly look at it. 

 

As the hon. member will probably be aware, we don’t do 

anything unilaterally or independently. We do consult with the 

wildlife advisory committee, and we have very close contacts 

with the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation; in fact, I attend the 

president’s council meeting, that’s his executive, when they 

meet twice a year. At least two of the meetings I go to, plus the 

annual meeting, so we do listen to those folks. 

 

If the hon. member has no objection, I’d like to welcome some 

guests to the Assembly, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s been 

pointed out to me we have a group of guests here, I believe 

from Lethbridge and surrounding area. We welcome you to 

Saskatchewan; we welcome you to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I trust that you’re having a pleasant stay. I know the weather’s 

certainly co-operating with you. Maybe you brought the 

sunshine for us so we can get our harvest finished up this year. 

Welcome to Regina. Welcome to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — We want to indicate to our visitors, Mr. 

Chairman, that what you’re hearing is not a  

  



 

September 21, 1987 

2714 

 

 

Saskatchewan accent on the other side. But I, too, on behalf of 

the members of the opposition would like to extend a welcome 

to the guests in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

We are now undergoing a debate on estimates where the 

opposition has an opportunity and, indeed, a responsibility of 

asking question of how the money allocated to the 

department - in this case the Department of Parks and 

Renewable Resources . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Recreation and Culture. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — . . . Recreation, we’re dealing with, and it’s 

some forestry. It’s a hodgepodge. But at any rate, we ask the 

questions and the minister . . . to which the minister responds. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 39 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I have one comment with respect, Mr. 

Minister, one comment with respect to what you were just 

saying. And in my contact with the Prince Albert Wildlife 

Federation, I’ve been given to understand that they do favour 

the closing of the new pulp roads once the pulp has been taken 

out of a particular area. They seemed to be somewhat concerned 

about the older roads, the roads that have been there for a long 

time. And I would advise you, through me, that they seem to 

have some objection to that and would have wished to have 

been consulted on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we do try and 

accommodate some of the other user groups. It has been pointed 

out to me, as an example, that there are people who use those 

roads for berry picking. Instead of the road being closed, they 

put a gate on it, and it is opened for them so they do have access 

to it. 

 

The hon. member is probably referring to some very old trails 

that existed somewhere up around the Paddockwood area. And 

I’m informed that one of the reasons for those trails being 

closed was it was a very bad area for night hunting, which apart 

from being illegal, and apart from being a very despicable way 

to hunt animals, is also an extremely dangerous activity at 

night. Blinding an animal with a spotlight, fixing it, and 

shooting it with a high-powered rifle - an extremely dangerous 

activity, as I’m sure all members would agree. And that was the 

main reason for those particular roads. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


