













































July 16, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 July 16, 1987 

 

 

1223 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. the question before the committee is 

estimates for Energy and Mines. Would the minister introduce 

her officials. 

 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Tonight in 

going into Energy and Mines estimates, I have with me some 

officials from the department. And I would like to introduce to 

you and to the members opposite. To my immediate right, Mr. 

Bob Reid, the deputy minister of Energy and Mines; to my 

immediate left is Mr. Bruce Wilson, the executive director of the 

petroleum and natural gas division; and right behind me I have 

Mr. Ray Clayton, the associate deputy minister. With those 

introductions, Mr. Chairman, I will forego any other remarks and 

be open to questions. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don’t intend to 

give up my opportunity to make some opening remarks. And if 

the Deputy Premier just would accommodate us, I’m sure that in 

about three or four weeks, we should be able to get through these 

estimates quite easily. 

 

Madam Minister, we are this side of the House have a keen 

interest in what has happened over the last five or six years in the 

non-renewable resources, and as it pertains to what I have 

described in the budget debate earlier this year as some of your 

inane and unsound policies in regards to non-renewable 

resources. 

 

I stated, Madam Minister, in the budget debate that you are only 

the custodian for the people of this province. The people of this 

province, the residents, they are the owners. And it is your job, 

Madam Minister, your government’s job to see to it that the 

people get the best returns for their non-renewable resource. 

 

And, Madam Minister, it is my contention that not only have you 

failed in not doing your job in this regard, but that you have failed 

miserably. And you certainly don’t deserve, in that area, in the 

non-renewable resources, you don’t deserve to be the 

government. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to this evening dispel two myths — two 

myths that could be classified not as myths, but outright untruths 

that have been perpetrated upon the people by your government, 

and particularly, by one of your former ministers of Energy and 

Mines, the present member from Weyburn. 

 

I want to, Madam Minister, show the people of this province that 

you have got very little in return for your open-for-business 

policy in the energy field. Had you done absolutely nothing when 

you took office in 1982, and left things alone the way they were, 

we would be  

much better off today financially. And Madam Minister, we 

would, in addition to that, probably have another 400 million 

barrels of unrenewable oil in this province, that you people gave 

away. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — The facts bear this out. The facts, Madam 

Minister, bear this out. I will give you these facts over the next 

two or three weeks. I don’t intend to give them to you all tonight. 

 

Madam Minister, your Premier and your ministers of Energy, the 

member from Weyburn and the former member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland, have gone around this province and told the people 

that one of the reasons that we are in a financial mess in this 

province is because of international events. Oil prices have gone 

down, they say, and therefore we can’t expect the oil companies 

to pay any more revenues to the province. That is not only an 

untruth . . . I would say it’s an outright untruth, Mr. Chairman. 

this House will not permit me to use any stronger language than 

that. 

 

But I want to the minister that from 1971 to 1982, we had some 

of the lowest oil prices in the history of this province; that from 

1982 to 1985 you had some of the highest oil prices ever. Those 

are facts that I will present to you, and you have them already. 

You have them already. Oil prices in this province and in this 

country and in North America and the world, only went down in 

November of 1985 because of the intervention of OPEC 

(Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries). That’s when all 

prices went down. But from 1982, 1983,1984, and up till 

November of 1985, you had the advantage of having the average 

price of oil at about $27 a barrel — $27 a barrel. And you know 

what the price of oil was from 1971 to 1982 when we were the 

government, on average? It wasn’t $27 a barrel; it wasn’t $40 a 

barrel, like you like to have the people believe. The price of oil 

was a little over $10 a barrel, on average . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . 

 

I see the member from Lloydminster has all the answers, but I 

would like him to get up in the estimates and tell us why the 

people of this province had to forego approximately $1.5 billion 

dollars because of your unsound policies on all royalties. 

 

Why, Madam Minister? Why, Madam Minister? Tell the people 

of this province. Would you think that all companies who in 1982 

were paying, were paying 59 per cent of the value of oil — 59 per 

cent of the value of oil in 1982 went to the people of this 

province. Why today does it have to be less than 20 per cent? In 

fact, we don’t know exactly what it will be for this year but I 

would venture to guess it will probably be in the range of 15 to 17 

per cent. Why? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Ask the industry. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Oh, the member from Lloydminster gave me the 

answer. He said, ask the industry. Well, Madam Minister, surely, 

surely the industry isn’t going to tell you that they can afford to 

pay 59 per cent. They’re going to  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1224 

 

try and squeeze out everything they can from you and if that is 

where you listen to only the industry, I can well understand, I can 

well understand, Madam Minister, why you are presently at 15 to 

18 per cent. And because you made those policies in regards to 

oil revenue, we have foregone in the neighbourhood of $1.5 

billion dollars — $1.5 billion dollars, Madam Minister — $1.5 

billion dollars that you could have used for that long hospital 

waiting list that we had; $1.5 million, Madam Minister, that you 

could have used to continue the dental plan in this province; $1.5 

million, Madam Minister, that you could have used, that you 

could have used in the drug plan of this province. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to tell you that because of your policies 

the people of this province are the ones, the people of the 

province are the ones that are paying the penalty. They are the 

owners. They have the right, Madam Minister, to expect of you to 

give them the best return for this non-renewable resource that 

they can get, and you have not done that. You have not done that. 

 

Madam Minister, I’m sure that the present Minister of Health 

would have been very pleased if you had implemented a policy 

that would have given us more revenue for this province so that 

he wouldn’t have to have 10,000 people on the waiting list in 

Saskatoon — 10,000 people. 

 

Madam Minister, I’m sure that the present Minister of Education 

would like to have had another $100 million for education. The 

universities of Regina and the universities of Saskatchewan 

certainly could have used an additional 10 or $20 million so that 

they wouldn’t have to cut home economic programs, so that they 

wouldn’t have to put quotas on various colleges so our children in 

this province can’t attend the University of Saskatchewan here. 

And that’s a fact, Madam Minister. They can’t get into the 

university today because of the lack of moneys that are available 

to our universities. 

 

And I say to you, it is irresponsible on your part, irresponsible on 

the part of your government to not implement policies which 

would get from the oil the highest revenues for the people of this 

province. That is unforgivable and you will have to answer to the 

people for this. Your open-for-business policy has been a 

blunder. It has been a failure. There is no other words for it. 

We’ve got some of the lowest investment in this province, all 

across Canada. And those aren’t my statistics; those come out 

from Statistics Canada. We have the greatest outpouring of 

people from this province since the Dirty Thirties, and that’s a 

fact. That’s a fact. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I want to tell you, it was up to you. You 

have a portfolio, Madam Minister, that could change around the 

economy in this province if you implemented the right policies, 

but you wouldn’t do it. And I say to you that you have been 

irresponsible in your duties as Minister of Energy. 

 

Madam Minister, I have indicated to you already that . . . And we 

hear members on that side saying, oh, yes, when the oil prices 

were high in the ‘70s you people didn’t do this, and you didn’t do 

that. I have indicated to you already that for the most part, the 

price of a barrel of oil  

was around $3 and some cents. The figures are recorded in many 

statistics. You can take them out yourself. I’ve got them in my 

box here. And for the most part, from 1982 to 1985, had $27 a 

barrel. And yet you didn’t implement the policies that would reap 

the benefits for the people of this province. 

 

I think, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister — Madam Minister, that 

somewhere along the line in 1982-83 a state of dementia must 

have set in on the Executive Council. No reasonable individual, 

no reasonable Cabinet would have foregone all those moneys that 

you could have received for the people of this province. You 

couldn’t have. I say that your decision and your policies were 

irrational, that they weren’t based on what the companies and the 

multinationals, particularly were able to pay. 

 

Madam Minister, surely you have looked at the records. When 

you look at Imperial Oil and you look at Shell and you look at 

Texaco and Gulf, you can’t say that those people and those 

companies haven’t made sufficient funds. Oh, sure, they cry that 

their profits have gone down by 40 per cent, but look at what 

their profits were. 

 

And what I’m saying to you is that you shouldn’t look at those 

big companies, you should be out there protecting the small 

companies of Saskatchewan, the ones that won’t pull out, the 

ones that won’t pull out when the going gets tough. Those are the 

ones you should be protecting, our own Saskatchewan 

companies, and not the multinationals. 

 

Oh, I have looked at Pacific railway, Minister of Health, and I 

know what they’ve given your party last year for revenues, 

donations to your particular party. And I can understand, I can 

understand why you think you owe some obligation to protect 

their interests. Hundreds of thousands of dollars in donations 

have been given by these multinationals to your party. And I can 

understand why you’re doing that. But you’re not here at 

custodians for those multinationals. You’re here as custodians for 

the people of this province, and don’t you ever forget that. And 

you’re not carrying out your responsibility of seeing to it that you 

get adequate funds from the Energy department so you can 

service the hospitals. That’s your responsibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — That’s your responsibility. 

 

Now I want to tell the Minister of Health, I have a few words to 

say to you when it comes to your estimates, too. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, it has been said, and I think it’s been said by 

your former minister of Energy, that the oil industry and the oil 

companies were to be the engine of growth, for economic growth 

in this province. I want the minister to tell me if she agrees with 

the former minister of Health, the hon. Paul Schoenhals, that the 

oil companies should be the engine of economic growth. And I 

want her to bear out for me, prove to me, that that expression has 

come to fruition. And if she can do that, how do you reconcile 

that with the fact that we have either the worst or the 

second-worst economic growth in the country? 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1225 

 

(1915) 

 

Now you say that, well, we’ve got to make these royalty 

concessions because if we don’t do it, then there will be no 

drilling. No, the companies simply aren’t going to drill. And I 

have to admit, Madam Minister, I know what you’re going to say, 

look at all the oil wells that were drilled, and that is true. One of 

the things you did, however, you changed the spacings on it. And 

when you gave concessions in the royalties, why wouldn’t the oil 

companies be smart enough to say, well if you’re going to let us 

drill a hole on every 40 acres — we know there’s proven oil 

there, for the most part; it’s not always true, but for the most part 

it is — why wouldn’t they drill the wells? 

 

So you can brag all you want about the number of oil wells that 

you drilled. I will say to you that many, many of those were infill 

oil wells. They weren’t new oil that they were drilling. They were 

simply pumping out the oil out of the same wells underneath the 

ground, except they were pumping it out at a faster rate. And you 

were gracious enough to say, well if you do that, I will give you 

royalty concessions. Why wouldn’t they do it? 

 

Now what I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, is that you got rid 

of about 400 million barrels of oil and you’ve got nothing for it. 

You should have received an additional $1.5 billion — half of 

your deficit right now — and the people of this province would 

have benefited. Why, in this last budget, did you think it was 

necessary, Madam Minister, and your other colleagues, to add an 

additional 300 million in taxes to the ordinary people of this 

province and yet give concessions of 300 million to the oil 

companies? Now is that fair? I can’t for the love of me see why 

you would attempt to do something like that. 

 

And yet, Madam Minister, you say that the oil companies are 

going to respond. I want you to tell me how they’ve responded to 

the concessions that you gave them last December 23. And while 

I’m on that, Madam Minister, the tradition in this House usually 

is, when we’re in session and a minister has an announcement to 

make, she at least has the courage to make that announcement in 

the House and give the opposition an opportunity to respond, 

which you didn’t have. You made that announcement at 1 o’clock 

on December 23, knowing full well that we would be sitting in 

this House, and I heard about it from the media after question 

period at 2:30. You didn’t have the courage to come into this 

House and make that announcement. You had to call it at 1 

o’clock and wouldn’t do it this House. 

 

Madam . . . There comes the Minister of Health again. I wish 

you’d take care of the waiting lists in the hospital, Minister of 

Health. There are 10,000 people waiting for surgery in Saskatoon, 

minister. We would really appreciate if you came to grips with 

those things. Madam Minister, I would like you to answer some 

of those questions for me and I’ll give you an opportunity to 

respond. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the energy critic has asked 

for a response to some questions, and I quite frankly  

have to admit, I don’t know where to begin in terms of what was 

said and the various questions that were asked. 

 

Let’s begin, Mr. Chairman, by asking ourselves what an industry 

is for and the various components to it. Now the member from 

Saskatoon says that the right policies — the right policies — if 

you’d only put the right policies in, then something would be 

working. Well, let’s examine; he says, convince him. 

 

My guess is you could lay out every factual figure that you could 

find out of finance and the Department of Energy, and the 

member would still ignore it, given the nature of what they 

perceive the opposition’s role to be. And that’s unfortunate in 

terms of this setting and, in fact, the true role of opposition as it 

pertains to government. 

 

Right policies, the member says. Let’s review. Let’s review, Mr. 

Chairman. What would he like us to put in, in terms of right 

policies? I mean we all have our opinions on how we think the 

world should operate; we all have our opinions on what basic 

economics is. And I can tell you right now that mine are not the 

same as the member opposite, and thank heavens for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, if they were, 

we would be without 5,000 — 5,000, Mr. Member from 

Saskatoon — people working within the industry. He sees the 

industry as the big bad oil company. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we see the industry as people, and it’s people that 

range from the service and supply companies to the waitresses, to 

the hotels in small-town Saskatchewan. That’s what the industry 

is all about. It’s not a cash cow; it’s not the goose that laid the 

golden egg from the NDP policies; it’s nothing like that, Mr. 

Member. It’s people trying to make a living and an honest living 

at that, in a sometimes very risky industry. 

 

Now obviously, Mr. Chairman, there’s other aspects of the 

industry that are of benefit to all people in the province. One of 

them is investment and royalties that come into provincial 

government. What the member seems to have forgotten when he 

wants to talk about the conservative program versus what the 

NDP might have done is that nothing would have happened under 

the NDP. It wouldn’t have been there when the price of oil started 

to go. And we know that. I only have to go back, Mr. Member, to 

1971, to 1974, again in 1978, and again in 1981, when we saw a 

mass exodus of young people, middle-aged people, male, female, 

and children leave this province from the industry. 

 

Now you want to talk about right policies. I suggest that the 

Leader of the Opposition has a differing opinion that the member 

from Saskatoon. Perhaps the two should get their act together. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tell me what they are. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, I’d love to tell you what they are. 

The NDP energy philosophies, energy philosophies for the NDP 

. . . Now what is it? Well, the opposition leader says, we have no 

objection to tax holiday  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1226 

 

incentives for exploration, we have no objection. You have just 

stood there and shot your mouth off that you have objected to 

those kinds of incentives. Now at least be consistent. 

 

What else do they say, Mr. Chairman? Well the NDP leader goes 

on to suggest that perhaps there were some errors made in the 

1970s. Well they believed in incentives, they implemented them, 

but it was also for dry hole. Today he reflects upon that 

experience and he’s not so sure that the dry holes were the way to 

go. 

 

Well I want to tell you, dry holes should not be the way to go 

with my taxpayers’ dollars, or anybody else that lives in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — However, he does believe in generous 

incentives. And that’s generous when you get paid to drill a dry 

hole. Now what did the province get out of that? They got no oil, 

they didn’t increase the reserves, they get no royalty, and there’s 

no spin-off job from having a well produced for several years 

after. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s unfortunate that the member from 

Saskatoon has not done his homework in an appropriate manner, 

and nor has he discussed, perhaps, some of the philosophies with 

his leader. 

 

I would also like to point out to the member opposite that 

apparently the Leader of the NDP provincial party does not agree 

with him also, as he has a few things to say on the NDP 

philosophy on energy that does not add up to the member from 

Saskatoon. 

 

The member has suggested that we have sold out — sold out, Mr. 

Chairman — and he says convince him of otherwise. Well 

perhaps if he’d be so kind as to listen, and maybe he would like to 

take note of the figures. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’ve got that all done. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — He’s done that. Well I don’t know how 

because I haven’t given them to you yet. He’s one up for a 

change. 

 

Mr. Chairman, one of the things that one must be ever mindful of 

is that when you are looking at building an industry, and not just 

for the sake of an industry but for the sake of the spin-offs that 

come with it, and that includes revenues to operate the social side 

of social policy that government must do — issues like health and 

issues like education . . . The member knows that as a 

schoolteacher that the education and health tax collected does not 

pay the total bill for education. He knows that. So the revenues 

must come from somewhere. One of them is the resources and 

one is oil royalties, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Our incentive package that was put into place, including the 

royalty holiday, I want to touch on about four aspects of it 

because it’s not simply a government take. First of all there’s 

increased investment within the province. For the member 

opposite, it was $1.8 billion in 1985. 

 

Jobs. There was 15,000 in 1985, and 4,900 incremental  

jobs. Mr. Chairman, in 1987 — and he says, what has happened 

since December of 1986? — we have 10,300 jobs in 1987. I don’t 

think the member would believe me if I were to tell him that if 

the changes had not been made in December, there would have 

been another 5,000 jobs lost on that 10,000. I don’t think he 

believes it. However, the figures are there. All I ask him to do is 

consult with the industry, and if in fact he does it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, let’s have a look at reserves. Reserves are a telling 

picture. I’m sure the member from Regina Centre may know that. 

I don’t know about the member from Saskatoon. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Which one? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The member from Saskatoon South. 

Interestingly enough, if you take a look at the statistics, Mr. 

Chairman, you will note that over the NDP years the reserves 

were going down. We were pumping oil — I don’t deny that — 

and there were some new wells every year, but there was not a 

growing industry with its own infrastructure under the NDP. That 

went west in about 1974. Some of it came back, but not to the 

point where it created a viable, self-sustaining industry on its 

own. 

 

Along with that, Mr. Chairman, the reserves . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I am looking at the bottom line, to the member 

from Regina Rosemont. He’s interested in the bottom line; is he 

interested in listening? Those reserves, Mr. Chairman, went 

down, down. Now if there are no reserves, what are you going to 

pump to put money into the provincial coffers? Where are you 

going to get it if there’s no reserves? 

 

An Hon. Member: — They’re still there. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — He says they’re still there. What did I just 

say? I said they were deleted, they went down. You were 

pumping oil, but you weren’t drilling more, and you were running 

out of oil. That’s the bottom line. 

 

Mr. Chairman, he’s had a half-day trip to Weyburn, and I believe 

that he needs to take a few more into the field to find out what’s 

going on, if he does not believe a simple statistic like that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to give you some stats on the recoverable 

reserves. In 1972 there were 823.7 million barrels. By 1978, Mr. 

Chairman, there were 683.1 million barrels of remaining 

recoverable reserves. Mr. Chairman, by 1982 that figure had once 

again dropped again to 618.3 million barrels. And Mr. Chairman, 

it wasn’t until 1983 that we began to see an increase of 642 

million barrels, until finally by 1985 we were back up to 704. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, that is a degree of protection in terms of 

revenues for the future, and it is a diversification mechanism that 

allows one more industry into this province to continue to grow. 

That is not easily understood from my colleagues across the way. 

 

Well, what else did the member from Saskatoon touch on? Mr. 

Chairman, he referred to low oil prices from 1971 to ‘74, I 

believe, if I remember right what he said. He may correct me. 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1227 

 

(1930) 

 

Yes, indeed, the price of oil was lower. But let’s talk about what 

else was lower. Input costs were lower, salaries were lower, and 

taxes were lower. That was over a decade ago. I mean, everything 

is relative, but that is never told in the picture that the member 

portrays to paint. And that’s very unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the world oil prices, and 

that obviously has some effect on the kind of activity that’s going 

to take place, we only have to take a look at the major producer in 

this country of ours — which is our western neighbour, the 

province of Alberta — to know what in fact the world price can 

do to a major industry within that province, and certainly one that 

affected the Alberta provincial revenues, to know that you’re not 

isolated. And in fact if anything, the world perhaps is growing 

smaller because of the technology and the communication links 

that are in place. 

 

We know that the policies that we put into place in this province 

cannot ignore what is happening outside of our boundaries. That 

is a simple reality. We don’t have a Berlin Wall, thank heavens, 

and nor will we have in the future if the people on this side of the 

House have anything to say about it. 

 

But to pretend that those policies can be put into place in isolation 

of competition, of other markets, other provinces, and in fact 

other countries, is absolutely lubricious. No wonder we didn’t 

have an industry prior to 1982. No wonder. The facts speak for 

themselves. 

 

Well the member says look at the revenues. Let’s look at the 

revenues. Let’s take a good look at the revenues. And that will 

include things like the export tax. The member from Regina 

Rosemont may not remember it. I’m sure if this one gives some 

thought, he will remember and he will see that in fact their 

revenues did not meet the same level as they did when the 

activity was on the go in ‘83, ‘84, and ‘85. Just take a look with 

an open mind and your eyes open on it, with all factors 

considered as to what constituted the revenue under the NDP, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I’m sure the member from Saskatoon South has 

various other things that he would like to talk to tonight, and 

perhaps has some specific questions. 

 

I want to respond to one further, Mr. Chairman, and that is, the 

member from Saskatoon South has said, why do you only think 

of companies like Shell, Texaco I believe was one of them, and 

the big companies? We don’t, Mr. Speaker — Mr. Chairman, I’m 

sorry. 

 

I think the member will be pleased to know that in fact under our 

term of government, that the majors have declined as a portion of 

our industry since 1982. And that’s a fact. It’s not rhetoric, it’s a 

fact. And if he would like to examine the books, the books are 

open for him to have a look at. However, I suspect he’ll choose to 

use his own figures and to say what he things that he wants them 

to say without looking at the facts. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I believe that answers some of the  

member’s questions, and if he has any more, we’ll take them. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, if I wouldn’t 

have had any more to say than you just finished saying, I 

wouldn’t have made any opening remarks either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, you asked, what is an industry 

for? I’ll tell you what an industry is for. First of all, from an 

industry point of view, it’s to make profits to protect their 

interests. And I don’t blame them for that; that’s the economic 

reality. 

 

You know, I’ve studied a little bit of economics myself, Madam 

Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I agree, I agree that 

there are different economic processes and different economic 

systems. 

 

But I think you should also remember that laissez-faire economic 

theory went out the window a long time ago. In fact, it didn’t 

even outlast Adam Smith, who brought it in. But you — you 

seem to be of the opinion, Madam Minister, that the 

open-for-business policy has to be the laissez-faire policy where 

you don’t protect the interests of the residents of this province, 

but that your job is to protect the oil companies. 

 

And I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, that is not your job. The 

oil companies will take care of themselves. And if they can’t 

make a buck in this province, they won’t be around. 

 

And I can tell you, Madam Minister, that an industry . . . what is 

an industry for? As I said, it’s there to make profits for the 

companies. 

 

But an industry is also there to create jobs in this province. And I 

don’t deny it that you created some jobs in the oilfields. No one 

denies that, I’m simply saying to you, Madam Minister, the 

number of jobs that you created and the revenues that you gave 

up, the price was too high for the people of this province. The 

price was too high. 

 

You aren’t dealing with a non-renewable resource. And that 

resource, if I listen to the people in the industry, and I listen to the 

minister of Alberta — the minister from Alberta believes that 

they’re going to run out of conventional oil by the 1990s. 

 

You’ve got to get your head out of the sand, and also realize that 

the oil in this province is also limited. But if you give it away and 

don’t get your fair share of return, then what’s the benefit of 

drilling all those oil wells? You’ve got to get the maximum that 

you can for the limited oil that we have. 

 

The third thing, Madam Minister, what an industry is for. First, to 

make profits for themselves; secondly, to create jobs; thirdly, is to 

return revenues for the resource that is owned by the people of 

this province. That’s the three things that an industry is for. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I did not say . . . And I think you  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1228 

 

are totally unfair when you say that, that I said that the industry 

was a big, bad industry. I didn’t say that at all. I separated . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I don’t expect the Deputy Premier to 

understand that. It’s much beyond his level of competence so I 

wish he would just stay where he is and keep out of this 

discussion. 

 

But, Madam Minister, I did separate, I did separate the 

multinational corporations from the small oil companies that 

make their living and reside in this province. What I’m saying to 

you is that the multinationals have over the history, not of this 

province, but over their history, have always gone where they can 

maximize their profits. They are not here for our benefits and for 

our good; they are here to maximize the profits for themselves. 

And if you are going to shape your royalty policies so that you 

satisfy the multinationals, then I pity the poor people of this 

province because we’re not going to get very much in return. And 

that is what I think you have done. 

 

The member from Lloydminster is absolutely correct when he 

says you listen to the oil companies. You listened to the oil 

companies, you took their advice, and you made bad policy — 

bad policy for the people of this province. And had you, as I said 

before, done nothing, had the Premier not appointed an Energy 

minister, this province today would be much better off than it is 

now, because you changed the policy. Had you left that policy in 

place we’d be much better off today. 

 

Madam Minster, I recognize that this is a risky business. I used to 

work for an oil company some time ago and I know it’s a risky 

business. And I know that every time you sink an oil well you’re 

not going to strike oil. Madam Minister tried to leave the 

impression that there were dry holes drilled when we were the 

government. Of course there were. 

 

And I want to ask the minister, I want to ask the minister: how 

many dry holes were drilled this year under your policy? I want 

you to answer that for me. How many dry holes were drilled 

under your policy, both natural gas and crude oil . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . No, I’ve got a number of things I want to say to 

Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, you say that under our government there was an 

exodus of people from this province. It’s true. It’s true. I don’t 

deny that. There has been an exodus from this province, of 

people, since the 1930s. 

 

But I remember a certain individual in 1982 saying, let’s bring 

the children back home; let’s give them an opportunity to work in 

this province; we are going to have an open-for-business policy 

and we’re going to bring all those children back home. I’ll tell the 

member from Arm River, who seems to be agreeing, that there 

are more young people leaving this province today than ever 

before. Those are the facts from Statistics Canada. All you have 

to do is go to Statistics Canada and they’ll give you those figures. 

 

More people leaving. We have a net, we had a net out-migration 

last year of 12,000 people — net out-migration of 12,000 people 

— the largest, the largest in the history of this province. Those, 

Madam Minister, are facts. Those are facts. 

Madam Minister, you said that you were only paying for . . . or 

your royalty changes last year were geared for exploration. And if 

you remember, after the press gave me an opportunity to have a 

look at your statement which you didn’t have the courtesy to 

make in this House, I told the press that I agreed with your 

statement on exploration and your concessions to the oil 

companies, to the oil companies residing in this province. The 

small oil companies needed a concession for exploration wells. I 

told you I agreed with that. 

 

Where I disagreed with your policy was to give concession for oil 

companies to reduce the spacings for oil wells to be drilled so that 

you’re simply drilling more wells in known oil wells already. 

That is what was wrong with your policy. You didn’t need to give 

those concessions, but you did. And I don’t know why you did. 

 

Now the minister says that the Leader of the NDP disagrees with 

my statement. And I want to say to the minister that if she 

continues on that line, I will read the statement made to the 

former member of Shaunavon, our present leader of the NDP. 

I’ve got it in my box here. He made the statement to Oilweek. I 

am following what he said and there has been no change in our 

policy on this side. 

 

(1945) 

 

Madam Minister, you say that there has been an increase in 

investment in this province. That again is simply not borne out — 

that is simply not borne out by Statistics Canada. I don’t know 

why you won’t look at those facts. You have one of the lowest 

investment in this province in all of Canada. I think there is only 

one other province, only one other province that has a lower 

investment from outside. And you have one of the slowest, the 

slowest economic growth in all of Canada — the slowest. 

 

And you know who has the fastest? And you know who has the 

fastest economic growth in all of Canada? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who? Who? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Manitoba. Manitoba. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What kind of government is there in 

Manitoba? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Oh that’s an NDP government. You know, those 

people that are so anti-business. But, you know, those businesses 

are coming into Manitoba. And I want to say to the Deputy 

Premier, he should listen to what Jim Chase had to say this 

morning. And I think you know who Jim Chase is. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’s your friend. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — He’s my friend all right. And I know what Jim 

Chase said this morning. He said this morning, with all the cuts 

that are going on and no incentives by the government, he said, 

well the government expects the private enterprise to fill the gap. 

He said, private enterprise has never done that and they won’t do 

it. That was Jim Chase, and I don’t think Jim Chase is a socialist.  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1229 

 

At least he hasn’t been; he wasn’t a socialist when I knew him 

some years ago. 

 

And I’m saying to the Deputy Premier that what we need in this 

province is some sane policies that set up a mixed economy while 

we have the public interest investments going on, and private. 

You don’t have to exclude . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — You don’t have to exclude from your oil royalty 

policies the investment of the public. And I’m saying — I know it 

was above your head and you can only endure so much — but 

I’m saying to the minister is that I believe that you can use the 

public purse and you can use Crown corporations like Saskoil to 

take up some of the slack, which you refuse to do. 

 

What do you do with Saskoil? Instead of using $66 million of 

investment here, you secure jobs in the province of Alberta, make 

sure that those jobs are secure. But in the meantime you fire the 

people from the Government of Saskatchewan, thousands of 

people from the province of Saskatchewan, so that they have to 

go to Alberta for security of jobs because of investment of 

Saskoil in Alberta. 

 

Now that’s the wrong policy. That’s not looking out for the 

interests of the people of this province. That’s looking out for the 

interests of the people of Alberta, who you owe nothing. They 

didn’t elect you. The people of this province elected you, and you 

have the obligation to protect their interest. 

 

Madam Minister, you also said there was no infrastructure here in 

1982. That really escapes me. How could we have, how could we 

have production of between 60 and 780 million barrels of oil — 

how could we have that? And how could we have over $800 

million in revenue, and how could we have the oil companies 

here drilling those wells if there was no infrastructure? That really 

escapes me. 

 

Oh,. did you improve the infrastructure? Certainly you did. There 

is no argument with that. I’m saying to you is the price was too 

high. The price was too high, the jobs were short term, and when 

the industry turned down, the companies pulled out. 

 

And they threatened you last year again — if you don’t give us 

additional oil royalty holidays, we’re going to move out. So what 

do you do? You cave in to their demands. Instead of using the 

public purse to use a public vehicle, you cave in to the oil 

industry. And I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, that that’s the 

wrong policy. 

 

Now you say that we didn’t have the reserves in 1982. I don’t 

know where those reserves of oil came from that you people have 

discovered since that time. Did someone pump them in from 

Alberta? Where did those reserves come from? That oil was 

underneath there, and it wasn’t rotting, it wasn’t spoiling. All I’m 

saying to you is that in matter of time, and even if we had not 

increased our drilling more than 800-and-some barrels a year, that 

oil would have been discovered. 

 

And all I’m saying to you is that the major discoveries, the major 

discoveries by Lasmo and Home and Petro-Canada have 

absolutely nothing — well, I shouldn’t go quite that far, it’s not 

fair — have very little to do with the royalty changes that you 

made last December. Very little. So what I’m saying to you, 

Madam Minister, simply is that you didn’t need to make all those 

concessions. 

 

And I want to . . . The minister says that our revenues in 1982 

weren’t nearly as high, and that there was an export tax that 

accounted for a large portion of that. And I agree with here — it 

was. But who negotiated that export tax with the federal 

government? Oh, it wasn’t simply handed to us by the federal 

Liberal government. It was negotiated by Allan Blakeney, the 

then premier of this province; and that was negotiated with the 

federal government, and those revenues came to this province. So 

I’m saying that the minister is simply unfair when she makes 

those accusations that there wasn’t an infrastructure. 

 

I want to ask the minister now, if she can: what were the 

concessions? If you add up all the concessions . . . You may not 

be able to give me this answer tonight, but within the next week 

or so . . . well, next couple of days. What were all the concessions 

that were made over the last number of years, let’s say the last 

five years, by doing away with the PGRT (petroleum and gas 

revenue tax); by policies implemented, let’s say, by the Alberta 

government; policies implemented by the Saskatchewan 

government; and policies implemented by the federal government 

just recently. 

 

How many billions of dollars, how many billions of dollars . . . 

And I’m not asking, Madam Minister, I’m not asking that you 

give these to me in the closest million dollars. I don’t even ask 

you to give it to me in the closest hundred million dollars. I want 

an approximate figure of the concessions that have been made to 

the oil industries by the federal government, Alberta government, 

and Saskatchewan government. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, would you tell me, Madam Minister, 

what would have been the revenues accrued to this province over 

the last five years if the production of oil had not increased — 

stayed at 9.3 million cubic meters — but the rate of return on that 

production had stayed at the rate in was in 1982? Do I make 

myself clear? I want to know what the revenues would have been 

to the province if there had been no increase in production — no 

increase in the production; would have stayed at 808 wells drilled 

per year — and you would have asked the rate of return that we 

had in 1982. What would have been the revenues to the province 

to date? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the member from 

Saskatoon South has touched on several points: such things as the 

rates, the incentive comparisons, infill wells — he talks about 

Manitoba; maybe we should spend some time talking about that 

— plus the infrastructure. 

 

Let me go back to where he started, and that is with the rates. The 

member from Saskatoon South may find it interesting if he were 

to in fact examine the records on the structure, say, from 1982 to 

1986, and in the three categories that oil is priced at: oil, the new 

oil, and the heavy new oil. Nineteen eighty -two, on the old oil, 

the  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1230 

 

percentage for the royalty was 39.7; 1986, Mr. Chairman, the 

percentage was 40.3 per cent. I don’t think the member from 

Saskatoon South is understanding how the royalty structure in 

fact actually works. 

 

If you go down to heavy oil, which is by far the majority of oil in 

the province of Saskatchewan: 1982 was 27.3, and by 1986 it was 

27.4. I really think that the member . . . I would be glad to sit 

down with him or have some of the Energy officials talk to him 

in fact how the royalty structure works. 

 

Mr. Chairman, on the incentive comparisons, the member also 

talks about Manitoba. And I want to talk about Manitoba as it 

relates to the incentives. Back in November of 1986, the price of 

oil had gone as far down as what I guess everybody was hoping, 

that it couldn’t go any further. It was at that time that all 

producing provinces became concerned about the people that in 

fact were working within the industry, and the revenues as it 

impacted upon the government. Alberta took a look at theirs and 

by far had the most to lose; and took a look at the incentive 

program on the royalty holiday that we had put into place; and 

took that program and developed it to even a greater period of 

time for their own province than what was in Saskatchewan. 

 

We at the time, Mr. chairman, still had our royalty holiday in 

place, but we were having some difficulty with the price of oil 

being low, or wells being shut up, because the sad reality is that if 

the well is not pumping, the province collects nothing from that 

well. Not only does the province not collect it, but the R.M. is not 

going to be collecting anything in terms of taxation, with the 

R.M. that well is in. 

 

Manitoba, Mr. Deputy Chairman, also took a look at incentives, 

and interestingly enough, put in a royalty holiday, did some 

adjustments with their royalty structure, and basically adopted our 

incentives. But, Mr. Member from Saskatoon South, they went 

one step further, and we find that they were much more generous 

than what the Saskatchewan policy is on developmental wells, 

which are the ones that you’ve been talking about. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, I think the member from Saskatoon South 

would find it interesting to know that on infill or developmental 

wells, that we reduce spacings only when there is complete 

evidence that new reserves that would not otherwise be recovered 

will be recovered, and that’s 80 acres to 40. 

 

I think he would also find it interesting to know that those types 

of wells are by far less than 10 per cent of the oil wells within the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

He might also find it interesting to know that Manitoba starts at 

40 acres even, and I find it interesting in listening to his 

criticisms. 

 

Mr. Chairman, when I talked about the infrastructure — and the 

member from Saskatoon South has related to some of it, not 

believing what I said that there wasn’t infrastructure there . . . 

And I’m going to point out that in fact this province did not build 

a good infrastructure in the days when the resource development 

was beginning to  

reach its maximum. and I think he has only to go outside of 

Regina to some of the other communities to in fact find out that it 

takes a period of time to build in sound infrastructure that will 

remain through good times and bad, but it does take a period of 

time. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I will also tell the member that we still don’t 

have, in total, the infrastructure that the industry should have. 

Now he says, how did they do all these things? They brought 

them in from Alberta, Mr. Chairman; it was that simple —- that 

simple. 

 

(2000) 

 

An Hon. Member: — What’s missing? Tell us what’s missing. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, the member says tell him what’s 

missing. I would say about 20-plus members from the opposition 

tonight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member asked me . . . I had never referred that 

we, in this government that there were no dry holes drilled — 

okay? — in our term. I never said that. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You sure did. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No I didn’t. And you go back and you 

check Hansard, okay? What I said was, we did not pay for dry 

holes. 

 

Now I’m going to refresh your memory. You’ve tried to refresh 

mine and I’m bright and awake; let me do the same for you. Your 

policy and incentive program in 1981 was to pay for 75 per cent 

of the actual cost of drilling a well and that included dry holes — 

75 per cent. Now that’s on record; I’m not stretching the truth; 

it’s not an exaggeration. I’m simply telling you, or reminding 

you, what your policy was. 

 

Of course, when the companies go to drill, they know that have a 

risk of hitting no oil. But I don’t know of too many governments 

that have ever agreed to pay for 75 per cent of the cost of drilling 

that dry hole for them. I can’t think of too many, other than the 

NDP government in 1981. 

 

The member from Saskatoon South, Mr. Deputy Chairman, says: 

how much revenue would we have? Well, Mr. Chairman, if no 

changes to the fiscal policy were in place — no changes at all —- 

you would have, my friend, $341 million less — less. 

 

Well, he says, that’s absolute wrong. It isn’t wrong. and I would 

be glad to open the books to him and anyone else in opposition at 

any time. In fact, I would go one step further, and I would say to 

the Leader of the Opposition, let him choose a reputable 

accountant to, in fact, do that if he is going to continue to remain 

unaccountable for his allegations in terms of the oil policy in this 

province. 

 

Quite frankly, the member forgets that if it hadn’t been in place, 

those wells wouldn’t have been drilled. And if the wells aren’t 

there, they don’t pay royalties. And that’s very simple, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1231 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, it is simply . . . I 

just don’t believe that you . . . or your officials would give you 

those figures. It wasn’t that difficult for the officials to figure out. 

I simply asked you this: if the rate of drilling had continued at 

800 wells per year or 9.3 million cubic meters, what would have 

been the revenues accrued to this province if the same royalty 

rates had been in effect for the last five years? Now surely your 

officials are not going to tell me that that’s going to be less. I 

mean, that doesn’t make sense. It obviously . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Figure it out. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I did figure it out; I’ve got it. It doesn’t make 

sense. What I’m saying to the minister is, you’d better do a little 

better calculations than what you did this evening. Now I don’t 

expect you to be able to do it in five minutes. But that simply is 

not true what you’re telling me. 

 

I want to say to Madam Minister, she was the one that said that 

that there was no infrastructure in 1982. Those were her words. 

No infrastructure. That means to me there wasn’t any. Now she 

says, we had to improve the infrastructure that existed in 1982. 

And I’ve already indicated to you that through your royalty 

policies, I will concede that. 

 

But what I’m telling you is that the price was simply too high. 

And that is what we are debating here tonight — the price you 

had to pay to improve that infrastructure. I’m saying to you that 

the vast majority of the benefits were to the oil companies, and 

very little accrued to the people of this province, the owners of 

that non-renewable resource. That’s what I’m saying to you. 

 

And I want to say to the minister that I would have preferred, I 

would have preferred that if you had done nothing from 1982 and 

had left in effect the royalty policies that were in effect when we 

left the government . . . Because I am convinced, I am convinced, 

and the facts bear this out, that the people of this province would 

have received another 1.3 to $1.5 billion, and we would have now 

in reserve an additional 400 million barrels of oil that you gave 

away. 

 

And I’m asking the minister again to please calculate what the 

revenues would have been to this province. If the same oil 

royalties had stayed in effect, and the drilling would have been at 

the same rate of 800-and-some wells per year, what would have 

been the revenues accrued to this province? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Member, based on your figure of 

800 wells drilled, let me tell you that you couldn’t begin to keep 

the production constant, as you suggest. The reserves aren’t there. 

 

So to do a calculation on 800 wells is strictly hypothetical. What 

does it gain you? If you wanted to keep the production, which in 

essence is your reserves, at that level, you would be looking at 

about 1,500 wells a year to maintain the same production of your 

800 wells. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I want an answer. I want an 

answer. If I don’t get it tonight, I’m willing to ask it again 

tomorrow and the next day and the day after, until you and your 

officials answer the questions in this House.  

It is my obligation to ask the questions. It’s your obligation to 

answer them. 

 

And I want some answers. It is not hypothetical. It is not 

hypothetical when I ask you, what would have been the revenues 

accrued to this province if we would have continued to drill wells 

at 800 wells per year at the rate of 54 per cent — or 59 per cent is 

what it was in 1982, the rate of return — what would have been 

revenues accrued to this province over those years? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I realize that he’s here to 

ask questions, and answers, and I would assume that he would 

like some answers that are not hypothetical and that are not based 

on assumptions that are not going to be there. 

 

Number one, the assumption that you make is, in fact, you would 

have continued to drill 800 wells per year. I’m telling you that 

wouldn’t have happened, particularly in 1986 — particularly in 

1986. 

 

But, Mr. Member, we will work it out for you and we will get it 

to you as soon as we can, perhaps tomorrow. We will take the 

price of oil over the years and whatever else you would like built 

into that calculation, but it will be recorded in this House that it’s 

hypothetical and that it is based on certain assumptions, so that 

you do not do the same with that information as you have done 

with it in the past. That’s fair, I believe, and that’s totally open 

with you. We will get you the figures. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Minister, I appreciate — I appreciate the attempt 

that you’re going to make, but it’s not a hypothetical case. There 

have always been oil wells drilled in this province. They vary 

from time to tome, as you know. It’s gone down dramatically 

from 1985 to 1986. They’re recovering a little bit again this year, 

not to the extent that you would like to see it and I would like to 

see it, but there is nothing wrong, there’s nothing wrong in 

estimating what the revenues would have been from at least 1982 

to 1985. 

 

I now want to ask the minister, what was the average price of oil 

from 1982 to 1985 until the intervention of OPEC? 

 

Secondly, and I’m sure your members would have it and I want 

to just verify this, what was the average price of oil — I believe I 

am correct in my figures but I want to have it verified — from 

1971 to 1981, what was the average price for a barrel of oil? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we will be happy to figure 

it out for the member, but I would also like it noted that the 

member was sent, before estimates, the appropriate material. and 

with a simple adding up in there, it’s all there for him, but we’ll 

be glad to do it for him. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I appreciate that you have sent 

me some materials. I want it on record as to what the price of, the 

average price of oil was from ‘82 to ‘85. 

 

I want you to tell the people of this province, in this House, what 

it was from 1982 to 1985 and from 1971 to 1981. Just give us the 

average price. I know you’ve got it  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1232 

 

there. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Member, I . . . Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. Would you allow the 

minister to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 

information that I have with me tonight, and it is what was sent 

the member before estimates, is year by year. I will read that into 

the record, and then if he would still like us to do some 

calculations . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — All I want is the average. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well I don’t have the average; we will 

have to do the calculations. Perhaps you can do it faster than I. If 

so, all the more power to you. 

 

Mr. Chairman, 1972. The average oil price in ‘72 was $2.44. My 

next figure is 1975, which is $6.84; 1977 is $9.41; 1978 is 

$11.33; 1979 is $12.30; 1980 is $14.68; 1981 is $17.65; 1982, 

25.41; 1983, 29.58; 1984, 32.02; 1985, 33.04; 1986, 15.71. Mr. 

Chairman, I want you to note that this is average. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, could you tell me, was that the 

average wellhead price in United States monetary terms? Is that 

what it is? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, this is Canadian dollars I gave to you 

tonight. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Well I have it in American dollars, and so . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s fair enough. Most of the time, I 

want to say to the member from Lloydminster, when oil is 

quoted, it’s usually quoted wellhead price U.S., but I know that 

you wouldn’t understand that, hon. member. 

 

(2015) 

 

Madam Minister, would you tell us this evening the increase in 

production of oil from 1982 to 1987. You may not have all the 

figures available for you, but can you tell me what the production 

was in 1986 and so far in 1987? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the annual production in 

1982 was 51 million barrels; 1983 was 60 million barrels; 1984 

was 68 million barrels; 1985 was 72.9 million barrels; 1986 was 

74.3 million barrels . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Have you got the data for ‘87? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — We are estimating 75.8 for 1987. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — All right. Madam Minister, therefore when we 

look at it from ‘82 through to ‘87, what you are telling me, that in 

each one of those years the production of oil has increased, but 

our revenues have not kept . . . have not increased 

proportionately. Could you tell me why that did not occur? If 

your oil is increased, why would the revenues not increase also? 

What were the reasons why oil companies could function at a 

higher rate of return on  

the revenue to the province in previous years? Why must the rate 

of return of the revenue decrease in each of those years? What’s 

the reason for it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, there’s basically three 

reasons that I can give the member. 

 

First of all, you have less old oil each year and more new, and the 

rate on new oil is less than what it is on the old. And I believe 

that’s fair; the old oil has more than paid for itself. You have a 

reduced average productivity. And thirdly, the enhanced oil 

recovery portion is up, and that also has a lower rate because of 

the cost of the EOR (enhanced oil recovery) process. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Could you give me the number of barrels 

decrease in old oil, and the increase in barrels for enhanced oil 

recovery. Now you’re saying there’s been a decrease in one, an 

increase in the other. Can you tell me either the percentage or the 

barrels. Either one will do. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, over what period of time? 

One year, or . . . 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — If you have them, Madam Minister, from 1982 to 

the present, that would . . . And I’d prefer to have the barrels, if 

you can. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, it’s going to take the 

officials a minute to do that so if you’d like to go on with another 

question . . . Or we can wait; we are at your disposal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 

wanted to ask a couple of questions, not to interrupt the chain of 

questioning by my colleague, the member for Saskatoon South, 

but just to lay the groundwork for some later questions. 

 

And it concerns the NewGrade project. And I would like to ask 

whether or not all agreements between the Government of 

Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada have been arrived 

at, completed, and executed, with reference to the NewGrade 

project. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, it is my understanding that 

all of the agreements, or most, are completed except for the final 

financing agreement and that is expected to be completed by the 

end of August. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, 

you are advising me — am I correct? — that there is no financing 

agreement between the Government of Canada and the 

Government of Saskatchewan with respect to NewGrade. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, yes, most of the 

arrangements are in place. However, there is a finalization on two 

components; one is the loan agreement and the other one is the 

guarantee agreement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, 

what agreements are signed that relate to financing by the 

Government of Canada of this project? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the . . . Two of them 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1233 

 

 — the major project agreement and the other one is the operating 

agreement — are completed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 

take it the minister is referring to agreements between the 

Government of Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan. I 

understand that she is telling us that they are completed and 

signed. I ask the minister whether you have any objection to 

making available to the House, to the committee, the text of the 

agreements between the Government of Canada and the 

Government of Saskatchewan with respect to NewGrade. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, by far the majority of the 

agreements include a third party, as I’m sure that the Leader of 

the Opposition will recall, and that is the co-op refineries. And 

with them as being signatory to the agreements we will not be 

making those available to the leader. They are commercial 

agreements. However, the guaranteed one is between the 

provincial government and the federal government, and those 

may be available upon completion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minster, 

could you estimate, to the nearest $1 million or to the nearest $10 

million, what you believe your government is going to have at 

risk in the upgrader, the NewGrade upgrader project? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to remind the 

Leader of the Opposition that this is a project that normally is 

Crown Management Board. 

 

I will be happy to respond to the question that he has raised. But 

there may very well be some that I do not have the information 

to; I just want you to be aware of that. The total cost is 680 

million. One-fifth is at risk as equity. And the loan guarantees are 

a maximum of 360 million. And we expect this to be about 310 

million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — So we are talking about of the order of 

$400 million in loan guarantees and equity covered by 

agreements which you are telling the committee you will not 

disclose to them. I want to be very clear on what you’re saying, 

Madam Minister. We are not dealing with tiny sums. We’re 

dealing with a project which is a massive project involving a very 

heavy exposure of public funds. 

 

I take it you don’t deny that it would be of the order of 400 

million — I expect it will be quite a bit more than 400 million, 

but let’s leave it at that — pursuant to agreements which you 

want to keep secret. You have suggested that these are 

commercial agreements. Obviously agreements with 

Weyerhaeuser and other companies are commercial agreements, 

but after a very considerable prodding, these have been made 

public. 

 

I want to ask you again, Madam Minister: do you take the 

position that you propose to keep secret the agreements covering 

the construction of an upgrader in which over $400 million of 

taxpayers’ money will be at risk. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have already 

informed the member that the agreements covering the loan 

guarantees will be available when they are  

completed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister, I am talking about the overall project agreement, the 

agreement which describes the obligations of the parties. A 

guarantee agreement, as the minister may well be aware, can be a 

very, very short and simple agreement if it includes references to 

other agreements which are kept secret. 

 

(2030) 

 

I am asking you again: are you proposing to put at risk more than 

$400 million of taxpayers’ money pursuant to project agreements 

which you propose to keep secret? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me repeat myself 

in part. I have already informed the Leader of the Opposition that 

parts of this would be made available for him if he wants to see it, 

and that is the part between the provincial government and the 

federal government. I’ve also explained to him that other parts of 

this agreement, which he understands in total, includes a third 

party, and it is a commercial agreement. And I believe that they 

have the right in signing part of that agreement to ensure that that 

in fact takes place — the confidentiality of the commercial 

agreement, Mr. Chairman. The Leader of the Opposition 

understands that. I informed him, and he’s upped the ante on it. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. I’m having difficulty 

hearing the minister speak, so I’m sure members further removed 

are also. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I also informed him of what 

the figures were. Now they somehow went from 400 million to 

over 400 million when I very clearly told him that we expect it to 

be 310 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 

am sorry I misunderstood you. I thought you told me that 20 per 

cent oft he $600 million project was shares, and a simple 

calculation indicates that that would be $120 million, and that the 

loan portion would be, in your terms, $310 million, and that the 

total therefore would be $430 million. Now I call that over 400 

million. Would you kindly confirm again what the share exposure 

would be and what you predict the loan exposure would be. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And don’t use Gary Lane mathematics. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Or yours. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Right. Or the member from Regina North 

East. Yes, if we . . . Let’s clearly understand one another that 

when you use the figure of over 400, you are using the one-fifth 

which I stated, plus what we expect it to be, which is the 310. 

Yes, then the loans . . . Then we are around 400 million. Mr. 

Leader, we agree on that. I cannot add any more than that, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 

. . . Check the record of what I said. I was talking about the 

amount of the total exposure of the  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1234 

 

Government of Saskatchewan. I hope you don’t now deny that 

it’s over 400 million, and we’re talking about this. Are you 

suggesting, Madam Minister, that it’s less than 400 million, the 

exposure of the Government of Saskatchewan? No? Thank you. 

 

Now if, in fact, the total exposure of the Government of 

Saskatchewan is more than 400 million — and as I’ve said in this 

House before, in cold financial terms, in simple cold financial 

terms, the only people who have money at risk are the 

Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada; I 

concede freely that the co-op has other matters at risk because 

there is a tie-on to their refinery and the like — but if the project, 

if $600 million is spent on that project and it is a failure, will the 

minister agree that all of the $600 million is going to be paid for 

by the taxpayers of Canada or the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, on 

the assumption that the project is a total failure? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, it is true that the 

governments have the most risk on this project. I should also 

inform the Leader of the Opposition that we expect that there in 

fact will be some private risk capital at the start-up of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, 

simply, do you agree, that as the project now stands, in simple 

financial terms, all of the money at risk is government money? 

Did I understand you to say yes to that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, if the other side would be quiet, yes,. 

that’s precisely what you would have understood. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And that is 

the answer I wanted. We have, by your admission, $610 million 

of a project, 100 per cent of which is at risk of taxpayers — about 

400 million of that money of provincial taxpayers’ risk and the 

other of federal taxpayers’ risk. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, in view of the fact that all of the financial 

risk — and I want to underline that the co-op is certainly 

undertaking some obligations and I don’t mean to denigrate their 

contribution — but all of the financial risk is undertaken by 

taxpayers, how can you justify not making available to this House 

the agreements under which taxpayers of Saskatchewan are 

undertaking an obligation of more than $400 million? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m afraid I have to 

repeat myself again. I have indicated that on the information that 

the Leader of the Opposition is looking for, that there in fact is a 

third party involved, and that is Federated Co-ops. It is a 

commercial agreement. And I think that the opposition knows, or 

I would hope has some business sense in knowing that in fact, 

and there are some competitors as it relates to the co-op and as it 

relates to the government in this matter. And Mr. Chairman, I’m 

just going to have to keep saying the same thing if the same 

question keeps arising. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, we 

are talking about an agreement whereby the  

Crown is giving guarantees and lending money to a total of over 

$400 million. 

 

A new doctrine is being presented tonight by the minister. She is 

saying that if the government guarantees to a third party, a 

commercial organization, $100 million, the government needs to 

disclose no facts because a third party is involved. Now that 

surely is nonsense, and all of us would know it’s nonsense. 

Nonsense. 

 

And I am asking the minister again: are you taking the position 

that you will withhold from this committee the agreements 

pursuant to which you have invested, one way or another, and 

loaned or invested $100 million and guaranteed another $300 

million, because you have guaranteed a third party, a commercial 

party? 

 

Is it your position, Madam Minister, that if you guaranteed the 

government of Canada you would tell us the facts, but if you 

guarantee Peter Pocklington you will not tell us the facts? Now I 

know Peter Pocklington is not involved in this, but the principle 

you are enunciating is one whereby if your committee gave a 

guarantee, let us say, to Imperial Oil, you would not tell us the 

facts because Imperial Oil is a commercial company. If your 

colleague gave a guarantee to Peter Pocklington, you wouldn’t 

tell us the facts because Peter Pocklington is carrying on business. 

And the only time you will tell us about a guarantee is when 

you’re guaranteeing another government. 

 

I suggest, Madam Minister, the public are not quite as concerned 

about when you’re guaranteeing another government as when 

you’re guaranteeing the debts of a private party. Now again, 

Madam Minister, I ask you: is it your position that you will not 

disclose the agreements pursuant to which your government is 

putting at risk the taxpayers of this province in an amount in 

excess of $400 million? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I have stated once again 

that we will disclose the agreement between Canada and 

Saskatchewan when it is finalized. The other components are a 

commercial agreement with the third signatory, and Mr. 

Chairman, I am not at liberty to disclose that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Madam Minister, what 

inhibits you from disclosing that information? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, very simply put, it is a 

confidentiality clause within the agreement itself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Madam Minister, you may feel this to be 

a hypothetical question but are you asserting that if you had built 

in a confidentiality clause in the Weyerhaeuser agreement you 

would have been entitled not to disclose them? Is that your 

position? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, he’s right. I feel that 

that’s very hypothetical. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Madam Minister, I propose to pursue 

this at another time because I think that the position taken by the 

government is untenable, and I will ask you again to reconsider 

your position about the disclosure of information, the disclosure 

of information  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1235 

 

involving the risk to the taxpayer in excess of $400 million. I ask 

you to reconsider it, and I ask you to be prepared to confirm or 

else to very your position at a later time in this committee’s 

hearings. That’s one thing I ask. Secondly, I ask you to answer 

this: are you asserting that the co-op — and by that I mean 

Federated Co-op or any of its subsidiaries — are taking the 

position that this information cannot be disclosed? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 

want to very clear. You are asserting that it is the co-op who is 

saying that this information cannot be disclosed, and that it’s your 

government. Am I very clear on that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there are three 

signatories to the agreement and there is a confidentiality clause 

within the agreement that all three of us signed. And it was, quite 

frankly stated, for commercial reasons. I’ve talked about 

competitors, and we agreed and we signed it, that we would not 

release the information, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Madam Minister, are the three parties 

the Government of Canada, the Government of Saskatchewan, 

and the co-op or one of its subsidiaries — Federated Co-ops or 

one of its subsidiaries? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The three parties to the agreement are the 

Government of Canada, the Government of Saskatchewan, and 

the Consumers’ Co-operative Refineries Ltd. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I will 

leave this line of questioning. I ask you to take under 

consideration the comments I have made and ask, again, whether 

you can justify keeping secret agreements involving more than 

$400 million of taxpayers’ risk. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I can only state what I said 

before, that the agreement is in place. There were three 

signatories to it with an agreement that the information would be 

held confidential for commercial reasons. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I can assure you that we will pursue this line of 

questioning in the days ahead, so you’re going to have a long, 

drawn out affair in estimates unless we start getting some 

answers. We’re simply not going to let you get off the hook by 

simply saying something is confidential or, as we saw the other 

day in Environment, the minister refuses to answer, and let’s go 

on to another topic. 

 

This is simply not acceptable and we cannot carry out our 

responsibilities as an opposition if the ministers come before us 

and simply refuse to answer or, secondly, say, well we have 

agreed with a third party that this shall remain confidential and 

therefore we will not answer. That is unacceptable, Madam 

Minister, and I will assure you that we will be back questioning 

you on this particular topic. 

In regards to the Co-op Upgrader, Madam Minister, would you 

tell me what did you estimate the legal fees to be on the Co-op 

Upgrader? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have that 

information available. In fact it is NewGrade Energy that pays the 

legal fees and we would have to consult with them. And I think if 

the member, in fact, wants to pursue it further, he perhaps should 

be more specific. Because don’t forget that there’s . . . The co-op 

will have some of its own legal fees, and NewGrade and on and 

on. But I want you to know, like, we just don’t have that. We 

would have to get it from NewGrade. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I’m not concerned what the 

co-ops spend on legal fees. I want to know what you are 

responsible for in expenditures. What were the legal fees? What 

did you estimate the legal fees to be, for the Government of 

Saskatchewan, on the NewGrade upgrader? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, my officials inform me that 

any legal fees that we — and when I say we: Saskatchewan, our 

government — had was reimbursed by NewGrade. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, could you tell me the law firms 

involved in the legal fees? Which law firms did you people use, 

and how much was paid to each? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think perhaps we 

can give him the law firm, but NewGrade paid them. We would 

still have to get that information from them. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Are you telling me, Madam Minister, that you 

had no legal . . . you have paid no legal fees at all? The 

government has paid no legal fees at all in the negotiations that 

have taken place between Saskatchewan, and the federal 

government, and Federated Co-op. You have paid no legal fees in 

the negotiations that have gone on between Saskatchewan, the 

federal government, and Federated Co-op. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I stated that we had some 

but they have been reimbursed by NewGrade, so NewGrade has 

paid for the entire legal shot for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, you’ve just admitted, you have 

just admitted that you paid some. Tell me what that amount was. 

Obviously if you paid some and you’ve been paid back by 

NewGrade, you should know what the amount is. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I said we can get it but we 

don’t have it with us tonight. We will, in fact, have to get it from 

NewGrade. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, if NewGrade paid the legal fees 

back to you, surely someone in the department must have made a 

request to NewGrade to pay the bill. Now please tell me what that 

amount was that NewGrade paid back to you in legal fees. 

 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1236 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member knows 

full well it was not done through the department but probably 

Crown Management Board, and that’s exactly where it was. But 

we will get them for you, but we don’t have those with us. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, could we have those figures 

tomorrow, please? Could we have those figures tomorrow? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I will do my utmost. I can’t 

guarantee it because I’m not dealing with the department on it. 

I’m dealing with Crown Management Board and perhaps 

NewGrade together. But we will do our best. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I heard the other day exactly the 

same thing. Because it’s now in Crown Management the minister 

absolves herself from all responsibilities of answering in this 

House. We heard the Minister of Environment do exactly the 

same thing the other day. 

 

I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, if you requested a bill to be 

paid by NewGrade, surely you should know what that amount is. 

You don’t have to go now to another agency in government to 

find out what that request was. All I’m asking you is simply give 

me that answer. Now if you can’t give it to me tonight, I’ll ask 

the question again tomorrow. 

 

I want to know, Madam Minister, in regards to the upgrader also: 

what does the differential have to be, the differential between 

light and heavy crude — the differential in price, of course — 

between light and heavy crude to make the upgrader viable? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Seven dollars, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Could you tell me at the present time, is that 

differential below or above the $7? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Based on today’s price, Mr. Chairman, the 

differential would be about $5. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a few questions to 

the minister in regards to statements that she made in response to 

the opening remarks of my friend and colleague from Saskatoon 

South, the critic for this department. 

 

I wonder, Madam Minister, in your statements you drew strong, 

strong parallels between the amount of oil produced in 

Saskatchewan as an index of the health of the industry, and also 

in terms of an index for the health of the Saskatchewan economy 

and the health of the provincial treasury. 

 

I wonder in that regard, Madam Minister, would you provide us 

first of all, the volume of oil produced in 1981-1982, and the 

dollar value accruing to the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund in that 

year; and also the amount of oil produced, an estimated amount 

of oil produced, 1987-1988, and the estimated dollar value 

accruing to the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund in those years? 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that I have already 

given the production figures tonight, and perhaps the member 

was not listening. I don’t know. But I know that they have been 

given to the member from Saskatoon South. It will take us a few 

minutes to look up the dollar figures on the Heritage Fund. 

 

(2100) 

 

The dollar values that the member from Regina Rosemont is 

looking for, Mr. Chairman, are as follows, for the year 1981-’82 

. . . Am I correct, that was the year? The first year? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Right. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the revenue data goes like 

this: $310.1 million on oil royalties, taxes, after holidays; bonus 

bids, 43.8; other oil revenues, 14.8; for a subtotal of $368.7 

million. 

 

Now you also received from the federal government $164 

million, for a total oil revenue of 532.7. You paid out $60.2 

million to the oil companies — that was on your incentive 

expenditure program. And if I take that figure and I look at what 

has happened with the export tax, your net oil revenue was about 

$308 million. 

 

Did you want ‘82-83, where the net oil revenue was $425 

million? You asked . . . let me see, ‘85-86 was $655.6 million. 

There’s no export tax in there. And the 1986-87, the actual is 

212.9. We are estimating in the blue book for 1987-88, $309.3 

million. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Madam Minister, can you repeat the actual for 

‘86-87. Was it $212.9 million? Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, that’s correct, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Madam Chairman, I understand that the $533 

million that you received in what you said was ‘81-82, I have for 

1981. Would I be correct in saying that the province — that the 

total revenue accruing to the Heritage Fund in 1982 was in the 

order, not as you said, $400-and-some million, but isn’t closer to 

$700 million? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No. In fact, I said it was 308. You are 

forgetting that there was an incentive program in place and you 

paid out $60 million in grants. That was the incentive program 

that paid 75 per cent for the actual drilling costs. 

 

Also, if you took the export tax and classified that as actual oil 

revenue, and that is $164 million for the year 1981-82. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Madam Minister, that’s — seems to me 

you’re juggling with the figures a little bit. If we get in fact 

$100-and-some million from the federal government through 

negotiations and through revenues from oil, because that’s where 

they were based on, was revenue of oil, how can you say that it 

was only $300-and-some million? That’s not correct. It was $544 

million. 

 

I asked you for total oil revenues, not the gobbledegook  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1237 

 

you’re giving — the total oil revenues as it appears in Estimates, 

as it appears in the publications of the Government of 

Saskatchewan in regards to the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, I 

don’t know how the member can consider a federal tax provincial 

royalties. That’s simply not true. 

 

One hundred and sixty four million dollars of what was in the 

revenues came from your import tax — export tax. I’m sorry. 

Your export tax, $164 million. Plus you paid out another $60 

million in incentives under the NDP incentive program. 

 

Interestingly enough, you should know that you left another $300 

million liability with 75 per cent of that, or more, supposed to be 

going to the very large oil companies. But I simply don’t 

understand how the Regina Rosemont member considers an 

export tax as part of his provincial royalty. That doesn’t add up. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I didn’t ask you 

about export taxes. I asked you about the amount of revenue 

which accrued to the province, and which appears in the 

publications of the province for the year under question, accruing 

to the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund — accruing to the 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 

 

I think you’re playing with figures. I don’t think you’re telling the 

truth in terms of what you see as oil royalties. And I don’t think 

you’re being straight with the people of Saskatchewan in this 

regard, because it puts to the lie your theory of economics when it 

comes to oil. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! Order. I’ve asked members to 

refrain from using that kind of language. I find it unparliamentary 

and I would ask the members to refrain from the use of those 

words. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, I didn’t call anybody a liar. I was 

not referring to a person. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. There is no debate allowed on the 

chairman’s ruling. Are you challenging the Chair? The debate 

may continue. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Madam Minister, going back to revenue, going 

back to oil revenue. No matter how it comes into the province, no 

matter what particular financial and fiscal arrangements are made 

between the province and the federal government, the fact of the 

matter is that Saskatchewan received as revenue $544 million in 

the year that you’ve outlined. And in the next year, Saskatchewan 

received close . . . over $700 million — not at all the figure that 

you gave. 

 

And we looked and we looked, and we look at the value of oil 

production in this province, and we look at the value of oil 

production, and we see in 1982 where the province had revenue 

of close to over $700 million. The oil production by your own 

figures given tonight was 51 million . . . was 51 million barrels. 

We got $700 million for 51 million barrels. 

 

We look at your estimates. You look at your estimates for  

1987-88, where you have a 50 per cent increasing the amount of 

oil produced in this province — 75.8 million barrels — and what 

do we see? What do we see for revenue? We see $309 million. 

We have a 50 per cent increase in the amount of oil produced, 

and what do we get? What do we get in return for that? We get 

more than a 50 per cent reduction in the amount of oil revenues 

that we get. 

 

How can you stand before the people of this province Madam 

Minister, how can you stand and defend that kind of economic 

logic where the oil companies take twice as much oil out of the 

province and we get less than half as much as we did in 1981-82? 

How can you justify that logic? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, perhaps in one sense 

it comes down to total revenue. But I also suggest to the members 

opposite that in fact it does matter how you get there. 

 

Now he said, our royalties. And I am simply saying to the 

member, and I believe this was probably available to him, that 

$164 million of that allotment in 1981 was not royalties. It was 

export tax coming in from the federal government. It was not 

royalties. 

 

I’m also telling him that in fact there was another 60 million paid 

out in cash — grants. And there was another 300 million liability 

left owing on the books when his party left office in 1982. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you want to compare just royalties, that’s what 

I’ve done. If we want to talk about all revenues, then we can talk 

about that too if the member from Regina Rosemont wants to do 

that. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Madam Minister, the original question was 

the amount of revenues. It wasn’t a question of the financial and 

fiscal arrangements between the province and federal 

governments. It talked about the revenues coming into the 

province, because you and your colleagues in the cabinet like to 

talk about the bottom line, and what the bottom line, and how the 

bottom line should dictate how operations should occur in this 

province. 

 

And when you look at the bottom line as outlined in your own 

publications and in your own estimates and in the budgets from 

the various departments and also in the bottom line in terms of 

revenues, because for the province of Saskatchewan the bottom 

line is the amount of money accruing through oil revenues and 

accruing into the Heritage Fund. That’s the bottom line that all 

people in Saskatchewan are worried about. And they’re worried 

about it, Madam Minister, when in fact we’re pumping out 50 per 

cent more oil and we’re getting less than half for a return. And as 

you yourself said, we have to be concerned with reserves. 

 

Like let me tell you that the people on this side of the House are 

certainly concerned with reserves. And we’re more than 

concerned with the reserves when we see you and your 

government allowing Saskatchewan oil to flow out of this 

province at fire sale prices in terms of the revenue that accrues 

back to the people of Saskatchewan. 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1238 

 

And, Madam Minister, I’m glad that you didn’t try to use price as 

a reason because you know yourself that that argument certainly 

is not going to hold up in this House. It will not hold up in light of 

facts, particularly in the sense that the average price between 

1971 and 1981 averaged $10.59 a barrel, but that the average 

price between 1982 and 1985 was 27.9 cents a barrel. Those are 

the average prices, Madam Minister. 

 

In light of the fact, Madam Minister, that the price of oil was 

more than doubled between 1981 — the average price was 

doubled between 1981 and 1985 — how can you defend a royal 

policy which produces less than half the amount of revenue, 

despite doubling the oil production in this province? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, let me remind the hon. 

member from Regina Rosemont that I, in fact, started out with 

giving him all the information on all revenues — all revenues. 

Now, Mr. Chairman, that included such things as land sales, 

bonus bids, royalties, export tax, plus I gave the figure as to what 

was paid out in cash on the NDP incentive program in 1981-82. I 

gave you all that information. There’s a bottom line there, agreed. 

But be realistic in looking how it got to where it was and what the 

factors are with it. 

 

I would also suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a good reason for 

looking at all those factors, and let’s take a look at tax, export tax, 

and royalties. Now the main difference between the two is that in 

this province, with the royalties, we set the level. We have control 

over that. With the export tax, that is another level of government 

setting that with absolutely no control for the people in this 

province over that. That’s the main difference, my friend, in 

looking at the factors that go into that bottom line, as you call it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What’s that got to do with it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I say, it certainly does, my good 

ex-minister of Finance from 1981. All those factors have 

everything to do with it — and you know. Perhaps . . . You know, 

on one hand the member from Regina Rosemont is pleased that 

I’m not going to raise price. I am. Because he says it’s double . . . 

I believe that was the phrase. If I’m wrong you may correct me. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The price of oil . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, let’s look at what the price of oil is. 

That’s another line of figures that I gave your colleague while 

you were out, along with the production. Now for your benefit 

I’ll read them again: 1972, the price was $2.44 . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Pretty low. 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, it was. But so were salaries and so 

was the cost of living and a lot of other input cost — 1975 it was 

$6.84; 1977 was 9.41 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you’re 

either interested in the truth or you’re not. Okay, 1979, $12.30 — 

12.30; 1980,  

14.68; 1981, $17.65, and in 1982, 25.41. 

 

Now I want you to compare that with the price, the average price 

in 1986 — and we’re talking Canadian dollars — was $15.71. 

Now you tell me how you square that off with what you just told 

me about prices through that time. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, we’ve found out what your 

arithmetic was like a little earlier, and we found out what it was 

like to the Leader of the Opposition. I’ll tell the minister that, yes, 

I’ll compare prices from 1971 to 1981, with 1986. The average 

price from 1971 to 1981 was $10.79 a barrel. Right now it’s $15 

a barrel — 50 per cent increase. 

 

That’s the kind of arithmetic, Madam Minister. And what was it 

in ‘85? The average price from 1982 to 1985 was $27 and some 

cents a barrel — that was the average price. And in each one of 

those, in each one of those years, Madam Minister, you had a 

deficit. You had a golden opportunity to not only have surpluses 

but have increased surpluses over those years. You blew it. You 

had an opportunity, and you don’t deserve to be the Minister of 

Energy right now. 

 

Madam Minister, you had four months to get yourself ready for 

these estimates. And I’ll tell you if I wasn’t any further prepared 

than what you are today, I wouldn’t have appeared before this 

committee. I wouldn’t appear before this committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — And it’s too bad you don’t have the Deputy 

Premier to help you out tonight. But I’ll tell you . . . The Deputy 

Premier says I’m one of the dumbest people around. Well the 

people on television, the people on television will know who the 

dumb people are around here. When you have an accrued deficit 

of $3.4 billion, and when you give a royalty holiday to the oil 

companies of $300 million a year but at the same time you ask 

the people of this province to pay additional taxes of $300 million 

a year, you’ll answer for that, Madam Minister, and so will you, 

Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — We hear the member from Lloydminster speaking 

up, the brain of the Conservative caucus. Well we’ve seen this 

before. They can chat and yell all they want on that side, and 

there’s nothing to prevent them and stopping them. They 

certainly do it on this side. 

 

Madam Minister, I have gone to the estimates over the years, and 

I have gone through what the estimates were and what the actuals 

were for all non-renewable resources — for all non-renewable 

resources. And we have the following, and they’re all in the 

estimates. You can go and have a look yourself. I took the time 

out of the last couple of weeks to look them up. 

 

In 1980-81, the actual, the actual accrued revenues for all 

non-renewable resources to this province were $787,000,583; 

1981-82, they were $758,000,683; 1982-83, they were 

$775,000,791; 1983-84, it went  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1239 

 

down slightly, $758,000,018. And you had a good year in 

1984-85, $865,000,621. And then we went to $768,000,986. 

Madam Minister, in 1986-87 you estimates, you estimated the 

amount to be six hundred and sixty-one dollars and ten . . . six 

hundred and sixty-one and ten dollars. I want to know, Madam 

Minister, what was the actual for all non-renewable resources — 

what was the revenue accrued to the province for all 

non-renewable resources for the year 1986-87? You should have 

that information for me, I hope. I would like to have all the 

revenues, the actual revenues for all non-renewable resources for 

the year ‘86-87. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the actual total for the 

non-renewable is $305 million. That’s actual, and that’s for the 

year ‘86-87. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — And you’re estimating this year it to be 

401,000,330 for all non-renewable resources. Can you tell me, 

are you still on target? Do you believe that you will take in the 

401,000,330? Are you on target? Are you above or below or on 

target? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, we have no reason at this 

point in time to believe that that won’t be met. I could inform the 

member that the end of the third quarter is probably your best 

time to look at a measurement as to whether you are going to 

meet your target or not. At least, at the very minimum it’s going 

to tell you if you’re going to be off or not. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I just want you to turn to the 

year 1986-87, and we have indicated on this side of the House, 

the production of oil is increased over that period of time from 

1982. And yet, and yet . . . 

 

An. Hon. Member: — We drilled more wells. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, you certainly have but, and I want to say to 

the Deputy Premier, yes you did, and certainly you should have 

received more revenues then for the people of this province. But 

instead, what have you done? What have you done? 

 

You talk from your seat over there, but you should have had more 

influence on the policy makings of this government and not ask 

the people of this province to sacrifice $400 and some million. 

$400 and some million. Yes, that’s what they sacrificed. From 

1980-81, we took in $787 million. This year you’re taking in 

$300 and — or last year you took in $305 million. Those are your 

figures, and what I’m saying is that we’ve lost over $400 million. 

Those are your figures. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to turn to another item that you have . . . 

Madam Minister, you have . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. There’s 

members hollering from their seats on both sides of the House 

and it’s very difficult to hear. And I would ask the members to 

allow the debate to go on without any interruptions. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, you have made your statement 

on the export tax, and you don’t consider that  

as part of the revenues for non-renewable resources. I want to 

know the logic of that. 

 

Why would you not consider an agreement made between the 

federal government, negotiated between the federal government 

and the provincial government in return for the ownership of that 

oil? That was the reason we negotiated it with the federal 

government — the provinces were the owners of that oil. We 

insisted, because if we were the owners, that the federal 

government owed us that export tax. Now if that is the case, why 

then will you not consider that as revenues accruing to the 

province because of the policies that we initiated? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t deny that it is 

not revenue — of course it was revenue — I mean you had $164 

million flow back in from the federal government. Am I 

understanding that correctly? 

 

You had $164 million flow back into the province on the export 

tax from the federal government. That’s revenue — you’re right, 

that’s revenue — but that is not royalties based on the production 

that you produced. You, in fact, or they got a tax, a dollar from 

Saskatchewan for us to export our own oil. Now I can’t believe 

that you stand in this House tonight — and I say that with all due 

respect — and say what’s wrong with this because we signed this 

agreement with Ottawa. 

 

Have you so quickly forgotten what you and your leader and your 

party said about the national energy program and what the federal 

government — the Trudeau government — did to western 

Canada with that policy? How quickly, my good friend, that we 

forget, and how quickly, if that in fact is true, that you better start 

remembering. You know what that did to western Canada, and I 

suggest that you refresh your memory on what your leader has 

had to say about the national energy policy and that export tax. 

That was simply a grab by a bigger government, further away, 

had nothing to do with the royalties in this province. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, that is the . . . about as 

ridiculous a statement as I’ve heard from any Energy Minister or 

minister of the Crown coming from across the floor. 

 

Madam Minister, what I want to say to you is simply this: we 

didn’t agree with the NEP and what it did to this province, but I’ll 

tell you one thing, Madam Minister, there is — you may turn 

your back on me and won’t listen — but I’ll tell you, Madam 

Minister, that had you been here, we wouldn’t have even had the 

export tax because you wouldn’t have anything to give away. 

You would have given it all away beforehand in your royalty 

policies. 

 

What we did was, Madam Minister, for the people of this 

province. We said we are the custodians; the government is the 

custodian; the people of Saskatchewan are the owners. And the 

federal government has no business interfering with the royalty 

structures of the provinces who are the owners. But because they 

did intervene, we extracted from the federal government, as by 

your own admission, in that particular year, $164 million — 164 

million. 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1240 

 

My question to you, Madam Minister, was: what was the total 

revenue that accrued to this province — to this province? What 

was the total revenue that accrued to this province on 

non-renewable resources? And the answer, of course, was not 

what you had tried to give. The answer was the ones that I have 

quoted to you. 

 

I don’t care whether it came from the federal government or it 

came from another province, I can tell you this: it was because of 

the hard negotiations that took place between the provincial 

governments, and that included Alberta and Saskatchewan — and 

by the way, the Alberta government also agreed to this, Madam 

Minister. We had no choice. We were put between a hard rock 

and a very difficult place, I can tell you that, by the federal 

government. But we saw to it in the end when we signed the 

agreement that the money was there for the people of this 

province. 

 

And I’m saying to you that we produced 50 per cent less oil in 

those years than you have, but we received considerably more 

moneys for the people, the owners, for a non-renewable resource. 

 

(2130) 

 

What I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, is: you had a golden 

opportunity from ‘82 to ‘85 when the price of oil averaged over 

$27 a barrel. You saw fit to be generous with the oil companies. 

You gave most of it away. In fact by my calculations you should 

have had another 1.5 to $1.7 billion. That’s what you should have 

had. But you gave it away. And now when you are in desperate 

straits because oil prices have gone down, the oil companies 

again are threatening not to produce oil in this province unless 

you reduce the royalties even further. 

 

So we saw last December, as I indicated earlier, the minister 

caving in again, caving in again. And what do we hear her say: 

well, we’re going to have productivity in the oil fields. We have 

this infrastructure all set up, but they’re not producing, so we’re 

going to have to cave in again and reduce the oil revenues even 

more. 

 

I want to ask the minister, from the royalty structure changes that 

you made last Christmas, beginning January of this year, how 

many jobs, first of all, did you create by that? And secondly, how 

many wells are you estimating will be drilled because of that 

policy alone? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we continue to have a 

dispute and a disagreement and, in fact, contradictory information 

on figures and the oil royalties and what it means to this province. 

 

I simply want to state that the accusation that has been there, and 

that the member continues to flag into the public, is wrong. And 

in no manner, if in fact he is to do his homework and use all the 

calculations, can that figure be substantiated in any form or 

manner. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I would go on to say that the royalties and the 

taxes have been both fair and reasonable — fair and reasonable to 

a variety of sectors, government being one of them, in terms of 

revenues and wanting to maintain a  

level of revenue, keep an industry going, to ensure that we 

protected or maintained the minimum within the industry. From 

that aspect, Mr. Speaker, it was successful, and therefore I believe 

it was reasonable, and it was fair. 

 

I also believe that even though, with the changes, we remain 

double the royalty rate that Alberta has, we still remain the 

highest in North America, that it, in fact, was fair and reasonable 

to do at the time, given all the circumstances. Not a chosen few 

circumstances that somebody wishes to use in order to play some 

numbers with, but in fact all the circumstances arising from it, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

The number manipulations — and I must admit I can only guess 

on some of it — that the NDP attempt to use relating to the gross 

oil revenues, including the export tax, are distorted and very 

misleading. We don’t deny, nor have we in the past, that our own 

source, our royalty tax revenue shares have fallen. We stated that 

very clearly. We laid out to the public, to the opposition, as to 

what was going to happen in November of 1986. 

 

The member wants to know how many jobs were created when 

that program . . . when it was announced and how many have 

been created since. I want the member to know that we never said 

at the time that the program was put into place that we were 

going to create on the short term. We said, we are going to 

maintain and save 5,000 jobs. We had already lost 5,000. And I 

would like the member to take that into consideration, with the 

potential of having a total loss of 10,000. So in effect we saved 

5,000 jobs on the short-term, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman, some time ago the member had asked a question, 

and I forget his exact wording on it, but I do have the answers for 

it. I believe you were asking about the percentage of the total 

production and the production for 1982-1986. And it’s into three 

categories. Again, the old oil, new oil . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, I didn’t want that. I want the total. I 

didn’t ask you for that. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Okay, well, the total on production is 51 

million barrels, 1982. The end of 1986, it was 73.5 million 

barrels. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I also asked you how many 

wells you estimated would be drilled because of the 

announcement made last December 23. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Based on the program, Mr. Chairman, and 

the oil prices going up slightly, we were estimating 

approximately a 1,000 wells. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Could you tell me what the price of oil was at that 

time? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we believe, if our memory 

serves us right, that it was approximately $16 U.S. at the time that 

we did the calculations in the announcement. 

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1241 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — What is it today? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Slightly over $20 U.S. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Would you say that that is a slight increase? Is 

that what you expected as a slight increase — a 25 per cent 

increase? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — It is better than we expected. I think we 

were looking at perhaps 18, 18.50, 19. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Therefore, I can then assume that you would 

expect that more than 1,000 wells would be drilled because of 

your program? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, one major factor will depend what 

happens with it, and that will be the price — if it holds, or 

remains at a fairly stable level for a period of time, or if, in fact, it 

goes up. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Well, you know, if you say a 20 per cent increase, 

25 per cent increase in the price of oil, and you had estimated 18. 

I would expect that the $2 differential increase would 

substantially increase the number of wells drilled. Now I want to 

know: would it be 1,200; would it be 1,300; would it be 1,400; 

2,000? What would that sort of $2 increase bring — what 

additional wells? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — If the price holds, Mr. Speaker, and goes 

up slightly, we perhaps will see some more. But there’s another 

factor, and that is how the industry views competing forces. And 

I’ll use Alberta as an example because of the incentive royalty 

program that they in fact did put into place. 

 

As you know full well they have very low royalties that make it 

extremely difficult for Saskatchewan to compete. However, given 

that, I think we’ve done relatively well, especially in light of the 

fact that we do not have the light oil that Alberta has, and have 

some specific problems with heavy oil and our marginal wells. 

 

If that price holds in around that 20 then, yes, I think perhaps 

we’ll be somewhat over the thousand. You must remember there 

is also a federal government incentive program into place that 

will have an impact of its own, over and above that. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, what was the cost of that 

program to the treasury? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Which one? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — The one that you announced December 23. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, I think maybe we were back to this 

question in a different form. However, let’s have another go at it. 

 

We don’t see a cost. I know you do. And given how you think 

about policies . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s got to cost. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, you say it’s got to cost. first of all, 

remember we’re not giving out a cash grant like your incentive 

program. We didn’t do that. So there is no cost, in that manner, to 

the treasury. 

 

Secondly, you have to remember that without some incentives 

and some changes, in today’s environment and the competition 

you would have seen more well shut-ins than what we already 

had. 

 

And I want to remind you, at that time we were looking at 3,000 

wells shut in — price related. That’s a very serious matter for any 

province that has a sizeable sum of oil revenues within their 

provincial treasury. You would have seen more. And I know you 

may find that hard to believe, but that in fact is the reality and the 

nature of the industry. 

 

So the benefits are tenfold, if not a hundredfold — 5,000 jobs that 

were saved; we’re looking at the $100 million in provincial 

revenues, and 1.2 billion in investment. And I’m sure that the 

member from Saskatoon South remembers the spin-offs that 

come from the investment dollars for people and communities of 

the province. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I’m getting a little bit tired of 

your rhetoric with no production or based on facts. If all your 

rhetoric is true — if all that rhetoric is true — why, then, do we 

have about the slowest growing economy in all of Canada — the 

slowest? 

 

If the oil industry responds — responds to those incentive 

programs as you say, then why aren’t we — why isn’t the 

economy moving? Why do our people by the thousands have to 

leave the province? As I indicated before, a net out migration of 

12,000 people last year. And those aren’t my figures, those are 

Statistics Canada. 

 

Now what I’m saying to you, Madam Minister, is I think you’ve 

got your blindfolders on. You are too closely related to those 

multinationals, and your party gets too many political donations. 

And so you’ve got to be easy on those people. You can’t have 

them cut off. 

 

And I say to you, Madam Minister, that the headlines here — it 

says: “Grits, Tories corner the big money despite NDP’s 

popularity surge” — is the real reason why you can’t put in 

policies that are fair and reasonable to the people of this province. 

Those policies that you’ve put in effect . . . yes, I agree, they are 

fair and reasonable to the oil companies. They are not fair and 

reasonable to the owners of that resources, and that is the people 

of the province — they are the owners. 

 

And I say to you, Madam Minister, you’re blowing it again. You 

blew it when you had the former minister in, when you had an 

opportunity to help out the treasury so that you wouldn’t have to 

increase taxes this year by over $300 million. You’re blowing it 

again this year. 

 

And I’ll tell you, Madam Minister, if I was in the oil companies, I 

would do exactly the same thing. I would threaten to pull out. I 

wouldn’t drill because I know that if we hold up long enough you 

will cave in. You will come up with some more policies to reduce 

the royalties so that those people then can take the money and go 

somewhere  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1242 

 

else. 

 

(2145) 

 

I’m telling you, Madam Minister, you have made a shambles of it 

for the last five or six years, and what I’m asking you now is take 

into consideration, once and for all, just once,. the welfare of the 

people of this province. Why don’t you do that instead of always 

looking at the interest and the benefits of the oil companies? They 

can take care of themselves, and they will. They’ve shown it over 

the years. 

 

And even, Madam Minister, when we were the government and 

you people sat on this side and you said, oh, we hated the oil 

companies, and they didn’t like us. Madam Minister, it may be 

true that we didn’t have a love relationship with those 

multinationals, but they came in here, Madam Minister, to make a 

buck, and a buck they made. But I’ll tell you again that the people 

of the province were the ones that were the beneficiaries. And 

you say that my figures are wrong. I have used your own 

estimates. These are not my figures; I’ve gone to the library and 

I’ve Xeroxed your estimates. These aren’t fictional figures, as 

you say; these are facts. And I want to read them again. 

 

Here they are, Madam Minister, so that you can look them up 

yourself. Go back in the estimates. In 1981-82, the actual total 

non-renewable resources was $758 million-and-some. Now, the 

actual for 1982-83 was $775 million; for 1983-84 it was $758 

million, and for 1984-85 it was $865 million. And you gave me 

your figures. These aren’t my figures; these are yours. I’m not 

dealing in the hypothetical. I’m dealing with the facts. 

 

And what I’m saying to you is, Madam Minister, your 

government produced policies which were detrimental to this 

province. It was at least half of the total deficit that we presently 

have of $3.4 billion. That is why your Minister of Finance had to 

increase taxes by $300 million. That is why, Madam Minister, 

you had to cut programs. That is why you had to fire all the civil 

servants. Because you made the wrong decisions, decisions that 

benefited the oil companies, but decisions that would not benefit 

the citizens of this province. 

 

What I’m saying to you is, Madam Minister, you don’t deserve to 

be the Minister of Energy and Mines because you haven’t got the 

welfare of the citizens in mind. You’ve got the welfare of the oil 

companies in mind. And I say to you, the reason for it is because 

of the large political contributions that those companies are 

making to your political party. And if you could forget that, and 

keep the welfare of the people in mind, we all would be better off. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to ask you again: you said last December 

that you would . . . your policy change would create 1,000 new 

wells — 1,000 to 1,100. 

 

Marcel Masse came in in March, I believe, put in a program in 

effect of 350 million, of which you said Saskatchewan would get 

approximately 100 to 150 million. Now either, Madam Minister, 

the federal government threw away $350 million or 150 million 

in this case, or your program wasn’t effective. You can’t  

have it both ways. 

 

Besides that, the oil increased more than what you had 

anticipated, so there is no reason to believe that you should not 

have, in this year alone, at least — at least 2,000 new wells 

drilled. If you don’t do that, then what I’m saying to you is, either 

the federal government threw money away, or your policy change 

simply was not effective. Now which one is it? Would you tell 

us? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the member may be tired of 

having to raise it, but I can assure him that we are just as tired of 

having to listen to him. 

 

You know, you do a lot of rambling, with all due respect, and you 

talk about the economy. Why don’t we talk about 

unemployment? Our economy may be slow to move, but as I 

recall, the unemployment rate in Regina right now is about 5.5 

per cent; that has got to be one of the lowest in all of Canada. 

Now you don’t get that based on no economic activity 

whatsoever. 

 

Let’s have a look, Mr. Speaker; does he really understand what 

the economy of Saskatchewan is built on? Does he understand 

farming? No. If he took a look at the farm situation, he would 

know that the economy is going to be fairly sluggish because 

that’s the foundation of Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

If he even for a moment began to understand the resource sector, 

he would know that that’s going to account in part for some 

slowness on the economy. 

 

I don’t know, Mr. Chairman . . . You know, I hear the member 

talking about love affairs with big oil companies and I wonder 

what this NDP opposition is all about. And I want to remind the 

member of 1975 and Bill 42. Does he recall what land sales were 

that year? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nothing. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, nothing. Zero. Zero dollars for 

Saskatchewan people and programming. And it was zero in 1975. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How about total revenue? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, he’s worried about total 

revenues. He continues to have that narrow socialistic vision that 

all he sees is a dollar and nothing else. No people. Nothing else 

with it but the dollar. Think about it. Think about it. Think about 

it, that’s all I ask. Think about it, what you’ve just said. Okay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the resource situation in Saskatchewan after Bill 42 

had several factors. Granted, one was an imposition of taxation; 

mind you, they signed the agreement with the Trudeau 

government of the day. The Leader of the Opposition . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — So did Lougheed. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, perhaps he did. Lougheed will tell you 

he perhaps didn’t have much choice. And I know that the Leader 

of the Opposition feels the same way. But tonight you stood in 

your seat and you say, look, we got  

  



 

July 16, 1987 

1243 

 

this for Saskatchewan — $164 million. Nobody else was happy 

with it but you. 

 

Well what happened then, Mr. Chairman . . . And I want you to 

think about it as it relates to the big oil companies. That was 

when the incentive program was put into place for you to pay, the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan actually paid the oil companies to 

drill, did they not? Seventy-five per cent of the actual cost of 

drilling. It didn’t matter if they found oil or not; you didn’t care; 

you simply sent it out. 

 

Now somebody may live with that saying that was needed at the 

time to spur the activity. I don’t know. That could very well be 

true. But what I do now, and what is wrong, is the $300 million 

liability that you left owing to the big oil companies . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . You say crap. Maybe we should just 

take time and let’s account for our statements. Okay? If you can 

account for yours, I will be pleased to account for mine. 

 

And better yet, I’d like to open the books to you and you sit down 

and you have a look at them with the officials out of the 

Department of Energy. But Mr. Chairman, my guess is that he 

won’t take that opportunity that’s been offered in this Assembly 

with these people hearing. It’s on the record and the public, and 

he won’t take the opportunity to do it because he knows he’s 

wrong and he’s so far-based from the truth of the matter that he 

will not take the challenge that I have thrown out. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there’s much more that could be said on it. I 

would like to tell the member that if he, in fact, thinks that there 

should be 2,000 wells based on what he knows of the resource 

sector this year, I have to tell him that he doesn’t understand. 

There is not enough cash flow out there to drill 2,000 wells. 

Okay? We estimated a thousand wells. And I believe it was 

stated, you may be looking at another 500 if — if the oil prices 

remain stable, and if the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, let 

me finish. I sat and listened to you. Okay? Just let me finish. 

 

If the oil prices remain stable . . . If the oil prices remain stable, 

Mr. Chairman . . . And obviously he isn’t interested in anything 

more than that. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Sittings 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the 

Assembly, I move, seconded by the Minister of Health: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 3 of the Rules and Procedures of 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan this Assembly 

shall on Thursday, July 30, 1987 meet from 10 a.m. until 1 

p.m. And that, when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, 

July 30, 1987, it do stand adjourned until Tuesday, August 

4, 1987. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 


